















































Hansard: March 21, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 7 
 March 21, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 
today to stand on behalf of the citizens of Cypress Hills who 
through these petitions are giving voice to their concerns raised 
by recommendations in the EMS (emergency medical services) 
development project report. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present these petitions from citizens of Eastend, Gull Lake, 
and Tompkins. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to rise on behalf of 
concerned people in southwest Saskatchewan who have as a 
priority the hospital facilities in the cities of Swift Current. 
 
And I’ll read the prayer, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 
Chaplin, Swift Current, Kindersley, Waldeck, Frontier, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the good people of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency who are concerned about he report of the 
EMS services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present on behalf of the good people of Minton, Radville, 
and Ceylon. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Friday next move reading of a Bill, The Charitable 
Fundraising Act. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m sure 
you’ll get used to that as the days go on. 
 
I am very pleased today to be able to introduce a group of 
people from the public service. And we have here people who 
are on a public servant tour from the Department of Justice, 
Municipal Affairs, Culture and Housing, Agriculture and Food, 
Health, Environment and Resource Management, 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
And I just want to say, Mr. Speaker that while government can 
set the broad-breast directions, it’s the people in the public 
service who make the quality services that people depend on 
and that make government work for people. 
 
So we thank you very much today, and hope that you enjoy 
your tour. I know you have a session in the Legislative Library 
on the system of government as well as a session on cabinet. 
And thank you very much for joining us today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
afternoon I had the pleasure of meeting in the Assembly, men 
and women who for the past 25 years have been assembling 
information for the crop insurance reports that we have of the 
crop report. And we were honoured to pay tribute in 
recognizing eight individuals who have been crop reporters 
with the program from its start. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these eight individuals, along with approximately 
300 crop reporters across the province, are all volunteers who 
provide their duties out of a sense of responsibility and for the 
good of their community and the province. 
 
These crop reporters year after year provide our producers and 
the government with valuable information that enables us to 
monitor and evaluate each year’s crop. As well, Mr. Speaker, 
hundreds of private organizations and business depend on the 
work of our volunteers as they gather the information for us. 
 
I would ask the individuals and their spouses to stand, their 
partners to stand, when I announce their names: James and 
Eileen Ewert, Frank and June Blake, George Stevens, William 
and Luba Bindig, Ron and Theresa Whitfield — were not able 
to be with us here today — Ron and Wanda Oliver, Harold and 
Irene Jackle, and Mike and Celphie Shawaga. 
 
I’d ask the members of the Assembly to join with me in 
recognizing the valuable work that our volunteers do for us. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 



8 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

join with the Minister of Agriculture as the Saskatchewan Party 
Ag critic in support of the weather and crop reporters that are 
here today. It’s certainly a valuable work that you people are 
doing. I’ve always admired your dedication at recording the 
information on a daily basis and perhaps even more than on one 
occasion throughout the day. It provides us with a great deal of 
historical information about the weather patterns here in 
Saskatchewan and helps us in our forecasting of events to come. 
 
So we certainly want to join with the Minister of Agriculture in 
support of your work, and congratulate you for the efforts that 
you’ve made on behalf of Saskatchewan agriculture over the 
years. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and today in 
your gallery I’m honoured to introduce several people visiting 
the legislature on March 21 — the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racism. 
 
These people have recently organized a very successful 
community consultation. They’re taking that information 
forward to the world conference against racism this fall, and 
this community consultation was only one of its kind in Canada 
that was organized by the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people should be honoured because they’re 
not only identifying problems, but finding solutions. And I just 
want to say that we have today with us: Wade Luzny, Yars 
Lazochuk, Rowena Roduta, Martha Mettle, Heather Robison — 
and unable to attend I do believe, although if you are here, stand 
up — Germaine Coates, there, and Wes Fine Day. 
 
So thank you very much for your good work and I ask the 
members to join me in thanking you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome the group on the elimination of racism. In the year 
2001, racism is just not acceptable. So we’d like to thank you 
for the work that you do and hope you enjoy the proceedings 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and to all members of the legislature two of 
my constituents, Gary and Jessie Carlson, who are great 
contributors to our province in so many ways. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to introduce to you and to this House, two regular 
visitors here, young men who have participated in youth 
parliament and have keen eye on what’s happening in this 
province, contribute to the edification of many of our citizens 
through articles to the newspaper. I’d like to introduce Tanner 
Morrison and Kelsey Rose. They’re in the gallery opposite. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to welcome today two 
people in the gallery, constituents from Regina Elphinstone 
that’s played a pivotal role in my being here today and not only 
that, but on the face of the earth — my mother and father, Doug 
and Carolyn McCall. Please welcome them warmly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is obviously 
a day for introducing very important people, people who’ve 
played pivotal roles in our lives and the lives of this province. 
 
And I would like to introduce to you someone whom we will all 
remember was young and spry and athletic when first he joined 
this Legislative Assembly in 1991; and over the years through 
his contribution to service for the people of Saskatchewan he 
now uses a cane, which he tells me that he could also have used 
in a different way with the opposition parties. 
 
So I would like members of this Assembly to please welcome 
Mr. Walter Jess, past MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for Redberry. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, or should I say, Otuyumiw, 
in Cree. I would like to as well welcome our guests to the 
legislature. In the context of multiculturalism and the fight 
against racism and the respect, you know, that should be 
allotted with all peoples, I would say this to the guests, tawaw 
— it means simply you’re welcome. Everybody is welcome in 
this legislature. Haw egosi. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

International Day to End Racial Discrimination 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise before you 
today, March 21, to speak about the International Day for the 
Elimination of Racial Discrimination. Yesterday in the Throne 
Speech Her Honour stated that: 
 

My government is removing barriers that prevent too many 
people from sharing the benefits and meeting the 
obligations of full citizenship. 

 
One such barrier, Mr. Speaker, is racism. 
 
Since 1966, March 21 has been recognized by the United 
Nations as the International Day for the Elimination of Racial 
Discrimination. Canada was one of the first countries to support 
the UN (United Nations) declaration, and in 1989 the 
Department of Canadian Heritage launched its annual March 21 
campaign. 
 
This campaign was initiated in response to the need to heighten 
awareness of the harmful effects of racism on a national scale. 
For more than 10 years this campaign has mobilized Canadian 
youth to rise up and to take a stand against racism. This year 
youth across the country formed teams and came up with 
interactive ways to teach people that racism has no place in our 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 9 

 

society. 
 
Youth are the heart of this annual campaign because they have 
the energy, commitments, and creativity to advance the struggle 
against racism. They are the voice of the present and the future. 
 
In the words of the Governor General of Canada, Adrienne 
Clarkson, racial discrimination is a social ill whose existence 
and impact must be recognized and confronted by every 
member of society. 
 
The March 21 campaign engages . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Your time has expired. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
would like to rise in this Assembly today in recognition of the 
United Nations declaration that today, March 21, is the 
International Day to Eliminate Racial Discrimination. The 
declaration affirmed the fundamental equality of all people — 
regardless of their race, colour, or ethnic origin. With that, Mr. 
Speaker, respect, equality, and diversity are the three 
fundamental values that we should all adhere to. 
 
(1345) 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we look back in history, many horrendous acts 
have been committed in the name of racial intolerance. We 
must never forget the atrocities of the Holocaust and we must 
never forget the loss of human dignity through slavery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that we as Canadians have taken many 
positive steps towards the elimination of racism but there is 
much more that needs to be done. We must all be aware of our 
actions and our words and what we teach our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that all of us in the Legislative Assembly 
have an important role to play in educating the people of 
Saskatchewan to celebrate our diversity and embrace our 
differences. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Signs of Spring 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 
yesterday’s Throne Speech it was said, springtime in 
Saskatchewan is just around the corner. Actually, according to 
the calendar, spring began yesterday and, Mr. Speaker, the 
symbolism of that convergence is wonderfully appropriate. The 
uncertainty and bleakness of our long winter is over. We have a 
new leader and a new team . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — . . . and properly elected positions. 
Hope and optimism are abounding in Saskatchewan as a new 

day and a new season dawns. Spring has sprung, Mr. Speaker, 
and with it some visible signs. 
 
The ice ruts in our streets now extend down to the pavement; 
the mighty Wascana is getting ready to refresh our air with its 
sulphuric fumes; and we can now go to work and return home 
both in the daylight, regardless of the time zone. 
 
The 14th century English poet, Chaucer, said that in spring 
people long to go on pilgrimages. Well here we are again at the 
shrine that is the people’s legislature, come to do the people’s 
business with, I trust, the sense of renewal and energy that 
comes with the spring. 
 
In keeping with the season, Mr. Speaker, I welcome you to your 
new chair, and to all members best wishes for a fruitful and 
bountiful session. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Congratulations to Saskatchewan’s Brier Representatives 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to stand today to congratulate and to commend the 
Doug Harcourt curling team on their very fine showing as 
Saskatchewan’s representatives at the Canadian curling 
championships, the Brier competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Humboldt-Quill Lake foursome is comprised 
of skip Doug Harcourt, third Kevin Kaltoff, second Greg 
Harcourt, and lead Brian Wempe. And they came within one 
victory of earning a tiebreaker spot at the Nokia Brier. And 
although the rink had a slow start, the foursome rebounded, 
moving ahead into contention for a playoff spot. 
 
On the last draw the Harcourt rink needed a victory over 
northern Ontario’s Al Hackner in order to force a tie-breaker 
with Manitoba’s Kerry Burtnyk. However, this did not happen 
as Al Hackner put a stop to the Harcourt rink. 
 
In the round robin, Mr. Speaker . . . in the round robin portion 
of the tournament, Saskatchewan defeated the Alberta team; the 
team that went on to win the Nokia Brier. 
 
So over all, the Harcourt team finished with six wins and five 
losses — a very admirable record — and I stand today to 
commend them once again, and to wish them all the very best in 
their future endeavours in the curling arena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fueling Change Conference at Weyburn 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s great opportunities for farmers in the land of living 
skies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, coming to Weyburn tomorrow is a conference that 
explores the possibility of value-added ventures in rural 
Saskatchewan. This conference is called Fueling Change. It will 
focus on the areas of pork enterprises, value-added processing 



10 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

of cereals, and production of ethanol. 
 
Ten farms and agribusiness leaders will share their success 
stories including Jeff Passmore from Iogen, the Ottawa-based 
ethanol manufacturer which is currently searching for a location 
for a $200 million plant which would make ethanol from wheat, 
oat, and barley straw. 
 
This conference is being touted as a common meeting place for 
farm and business leaders’ network. Saskatchewan has great 
resources, competitive advantages which could have a great 
impact on farmers and upon rural communities. We have the 
right people to provide participants with an opportunity to learn 
what others are doing, and information on building and 
attracting value-added agribusinesses in rural communities. 
 
This conference will be beneficial to all, from farmers to 
bankers. The key to success is diversification and value-added 
ventures. Together with a united front between farmers, 
business, and government, we will be able to bring the rural 
farmer out of crisis. Working together is paramount to the 
success of any team, corporation, or local business. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opening of New Arena at Whitewood 
 

Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Sunday I had the pleasure of participating with the community 
of Whitewood and area residents in the official opening of their 
new arena. The official ceremony took place following the 
annual ice carnival and a large crowd was in attendance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the significance of this event was the fact that a 
little over a year ago in October of 1999, the old arena burned 
to the ground. After the initial shock, disbelief, and sense of 
despair, the vitality and resilience of rural residents came to the 
forefront. Within a few weeks of the fire, a building committee 
was put in place to oversee the rebuilding project. And they 
were certainly enhanced in their efforts by the foresight of a 
town council, which two years earlier had looked at their 
insurance policies and decided they just didn’t carry enough 
insurance, and as a result they upped the insurance coverage, 
which has resulted, Mr. Speaker, in a brand new facility for the 
community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was in that community and certainly observed 
some hockey games, one of the significant factors that was 
pointed out was a year to the date of the fire, there were 
children skating on that arena ice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the community of 
Whitewood and their residents for their hard work and diligence 
in the reconstruction of this arena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Z99 Annual Fundraiser 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Z99’s morning 
crew has been at it again, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday and 

Friday, March 15 and 16, for 36 hours without sleep CC and 
Lorie and Buzz entertained us, they educated us, and they 
cajoled us out of a good deal of money — $130,061 to be exact 
— and all for a great cause. The neonatal intensive care unit at 
the Regina General Hospital benefits. They gain a critical care 
station. Newborn babies and babies in trouble will benefit from 
the Z’s community partnership. 
 
CC, Lorie and Buzz built on a foundation of previous years’ 
fundraising, Mr. Speaker, and as such they connect us with the 
future. Babies and their parents benefit from the critical care 
station, and we all benefit from improvements to the health 
system. 
 
But CC and Lorie have shared more than that. They share hope 
and action with their listeners for a brighter future. We can sum 
up Z99, CC, and Lorie and their listening audience as connected 
to the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close by thanking Z99, Lorie and CC 
and Buzz, and of course, the generous listeners for making it a 
reality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Creation 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, it is now painfully 
clear this government has no plan for growing Saskatchewan. 
Yesterday I congratulated the Premier on his new job, but 
unfortunately that’s about the only new job that the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) have created in the past year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last 12 months, Saskatchewan lost an 
astounding 13,000 jobs. That’s a direct result of the failing 
economic policies of the NDP — 13,000 jobs gone, vanished, in 
one year. And yesterday’s Throne Speech contained no plan for 
reversing that trend. 
 
Mr. Premier, why has the NDP driven 13,000 jobs out of 
Saskatchewan, and what are you doing to reverse your dismal 
economic record? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I anticipated a question or 
two today and look forward to the debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member talks about the numbers of jobs in our 
province. He will know that a year ago, we reached an all-time 
record high for employment in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — All-time record high. He will also know 
that we have suffered . . . he should know, Mr. Speaker, that 
this year our farm community, our agricultural producers have 
suffered as a result of low commodity prices, international 
subsidy wars, and so on. 
 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 11 

 

He will know that the significant hurt on our job front in this 
year is a result of loss in agricultural jobs in our province, 
which I would point out to the Leader of the Opposition, we 
have seen a larger loss of jobs in the agricultural sector in the 
province of Alberta, while their segment is much smaller. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thirteen 
thousand jobs gone in one year and the Premier is proud of his 
record. I’m shocked. 
 
Mr. Premier, every other province in Canada is creating new 
jobs. Alberta, 43,000; Manitoba, 7,000 new jobs; BC (British 
Columbia) is creating jobs; Ontario is creating jobs. And I 
might point out that agricultural-based Prince Edward Island is 
creating jobs. 
 
There’s only one government in Canada that’s losing jobs, and 
it’s your government. Mr. Premier, how do you explain that? 
Why is every other province in Canada creating jobs while your 
government is killing them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the Leader of the 
Opposition well knows, every other sector of Saskatchewan’s 
economy is growing and producing jobs, with the exception of 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition, I’m sure, 
would find interesting the report that was on the news at noon 
today, Mr. Speaker, noon today, headline: “Conference Board 
predicts strong Regina economy”. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Conference Board of Canada 
predicts that Regina’s economy will grow by 2.5 per cent and 
the workforce will expand by 2 per cent. That’s true in Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s true across the province in every sector 
except, as we say, in the agricultural sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was actually at that 
presentation. I didn’t see the Premier there. 
 
He said that based on the dismal numbers of the current year, 
there might be a small increase but very, very small, certainly 
compared to other provinces. 
 
But Mr. Speaker, these are real people that we’re talking about 
and the tragedy is that many of these people are choosing to 
leave Saskatchewan, and they’re building their future and 
they’re raising their families outside of this province. They, I 
believe, would prefer to stay, but they are being driven out, Mr. 
Premier, by your failed economic policies. 
 
Last year, Saskatchewan suffered a net out-migration of nearly 
6,700 people. These are the facts, Mr. Premier. It was the worst 
year for people leaving the province since 1992. 
 

Mr. Premier, how can you just shrug your shoulders and say 
your policies are working when you continue to drive people 
and jobs and families — real people — out of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday Her Honour in 
this Chamber talked about our intentions to build this economy, 
to build on the strong foundation that exists. 
 
We talk about providing jobs for our young people. This is a 
government, Mr. Speaker, who believes in Saskatchewan, who 
believes in our future and approaches that future with optimism, 
and we are connecting to that future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you what’s different about Saskatchewan than other 
provinces. It’s a loyal opposition who does nothing but, nothing 
but bring this province down. Nothing but bring this province 
down. 
 
Join us in supporting Saskatchewan. Join us in promoting 
Saskatchewan and a little less of the Chamber of Commerce for 
Calgary, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
I’m surprised, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier continues to 
defend his dismal record — 13,000 jobs lost, a fact; 6,700 
people lost, a fact. That’s the NDP record that he’s so proud of. 
 
Mr. Premier, your job creation record is an absolute disaster. I 
know it. You know it. And do you know who else knows it? 
Somebody that used to be on your side of the House, Mr. 
Dwain Lingenfelter knows it. He had to move to Alberta when 
he couldn’t get the job that he wanted with your government. 
 
Mr. Premier, I admit that we weren’t upset, terribly, to see 
Dwain Lingenfelter leave. But we are very, very upset about the 
thousands of other Saskatchewan people who are leaving our 
province and taking with them their families, their hopes, and 
their dreams. 
 
Mr. Premier, other than Dwain Lingenfelter, what are you going 
to do to stop this exodus? What are you going to do to create 
the jobs that you promised in 1999? 
 
(1400) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I understand where the 
Leader of the Opposition comes from, and he’ll want to be 
negative about the province, negative about the government, 
and negative about myself and others. But, you know, other 
people in this province have had an opportunity in the last 
month to pass judgment on this government. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the member from 
Cypress Hills said to The Leader-Post that we’re glad that 
myself is running in the Riversdale by-election because this 
would be a judgment on government. That’s what the member 
from Cypress Hills said: this would be a judgment on 



12 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had that judgment. We’ve won two 
by-elections in three weeks. That’s the confidence of the 
people. That’s the judgment we accept. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Declining Student Population 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s for the 
Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Minister, your own Education department is predicting 
disaster. According to your own staff, K to 12 enrolment in 
Saskatchewan is going to shrink by almost 30,000 students over 
the next eight years — 30,000 students gone from our schools, 
30,000 students gone from our communities. And that means 
their parents — young, working parents — are leaving the 
province. Mr. Speaker, that’s the aftermath of 10 years of NDP 
government — driving young people out of this province. 
 
Mr. Minister, why is your government driving students and 
young families out of this province? And more importantly, 
what are you doing to stop it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as per usual, the 
members opposite haven’t quite got their facts right. 
 
Certainly, Mr. Speaker, we recognize that all across Canada 
there are decreasing enrolments. This is not unique to 
Saskatchewan. The facts are that people are having smaller 
families. This was a trend that began about the time of the 
Devine sweep in 1982 and the trend has continued. 
 
The rates of family size have decreased. The number of 
enrolments have decreased. But you know what? You know 
what, Mr. Speaker? The amount of money that this government 
has been putting into the K to 12 system has been increasing 
despite the decline on enrolments, and we are very proud of our 
record with regard to K to 12 education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — To the Minister of Education. I’ve been 
reading from your own department’s report on enrolment 
projections, and if you haven’t seen it, you should pick it up and 
read it, it’s got some very disturbing reading . . . (inaudible) . . . 
Mr. Minister, the report says your government is projecting a 
massive drop of 30,000 students over the next eight years, but 
yesterday’s Throne Speech promised to build new schools. 
 
Mr. Minister, given the fact that your government is planning to 
drive 30,000 students out of the province in the next eight years, 
where are you going to build the schools? Thanks to the NDP 
government, if you’re going to build those schools where the 
Saskatchewan school students are, you’re going to have to build 
them in Alberta, Mr. Minister. 
 
Will you table your plans today on telling us how you’re going 
to keep the students in this province in Saskatchewan? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly 
we recognize the demographic trends; we also recognize that 
we have an increasing Aboriginal population. And recognizing 
that those students will be coming into the K to 12 education 
system we are working on expanding our community schools, 
we are working on expanding Aboriginal education programs 
within our K to 12 education system. 
 
And we will be making those announcements within a very 
short time on budget day, Mr. Speaker. So I would say to the 
members opposite that they do stay tuned. 
 
And to just set the facts straight we do . . . we have seen a 
decline of approximately 10,000 students in the past decade in 
the province of Saskatchewan. But I remind the members 
opposite that we have increased funding and the pupil/educator 
ratios in this province have dropped — have dropped — Mr. 
Speaker, in the last five years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Commission’s Population Projections 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s yet another Saskatchewan report which focuses on 
population forecasts in the province. Just yesterday the Health 
Services Utilization and Research Commission, HSURC, 
released a report called Planning for Saskatchewan’s Future. 
 
They project Saskatchewan population will increase by less 
than 7,000 people in the next 15 years. That’s a growth of less 
than 500 people per year. What does that tell you, Mr. Speaker? 
 
It should tell you that people are giving up. It tells you that even 
provincial health organizations hold out no hope that this 
government has any plan to increase our population base; they 
are planning for no growth. They expect trends to continue and 
our population to remain the same. 
 
To the Minister of Health, do you agree with your health 
commission’s study that this province is going nowhere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We often 
wonder what happens across the hall in the room as the 
opposition is getting ready for question period, but it’s quite 
clear that they’re over there, sitting, sucking lemons. All they 
can do is think about the negative things about our province. 
What we want to do is build this province to . . . so that it’s the 
best province in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We are working with the people who — 
in the health system — so that we can get the best information 
that we can about the long-term health needs of this province, 
and we will continue to do that so that we can build on the best 
health system that we have in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 13 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this government is sucking the 
life out of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, that same study predicts that 
by the year 2015 the population of people between the age of 20 
and 49 will drop by 40,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are our youth. They are the working 
families. They are the working people that raise their families 
and do business. They are the people that make the health care 
system work. The loss of this group of people is going to be 
dramatic to this province. It affects our schools; it affects our 
health system; it affects our tax base. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you get out from behind the one-liners and 
say what you’re going to do and your government’s going to do 
to keep this province afloat. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think the thing 
that we are going to do to make sure that this province has a 
future is to make sure that the people on that side never have a 
chance to run this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Future of the Province 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Please let the Leader of the 
Opposition put his question. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is again for the Premier. Mr. Premier, it’s now clear 
that your government has no plan, no vision for the future. 
 
We in fact are doing our homework. We’re reading your 
documents — maybe your ministers aren’t — and your own 
numbers on your side paint a very bleak picture for the province 
in the next few years: a shrinking population, three . . . 30,000 
fewer students, 40,000 fewer people between the ages of 20 and 
49. That’s the NDP’s vision for the future; your vision for the 
future. 
 
And what do we get out of yesterday’s Throne Speech? A 
mishmash of recycled promises, clumsy attempts to take credit 
for federal programs. It’s like you’ve given up over there — 
you’re not even going to try any more 
 
Mr. Premier, why is your government accepting defeat? Why 
do you have no plan — no plan — to keep young Saskatchewan 
families here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this province has enjoyed, 
in the last year, record potash sales and exports, record oil 
production. Last year, record employment. This province, Mr. 
Speaker . . . this province, Mr. Speaker, is strong. This province 

is strong and it has a great potential and a great future, 
irregardless of what members of the Saskatchewan Party say 
and do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And the Leader of the Opposition should 
understand about defeat. He suffered two in the last three 
weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Agricultural Producers 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, one reason the 
Saskatchewan economy is suffering is because of the ongoing 
farm crisis. And yesterday’s Throne Speech did absolutely 
nothing to address this problem. 
 
I understand that today your government is going to make up or 
attempt to make up for this mistake by calling for an additional 
$1 billion in farm aid. 
 
Mr. Premier, the Saskatchewan Party supports that proposal, but 
you must do more. Where is the long-term safety net your 
government has promised since 1992? Where is the long-term 
vision for the future of agriculture in this province? 
 
We agree Ottawa must do more, but it’s time we move beyond 
ad hoc programs that provide only temporary relief for our farm 
families. Mr. Premier, where is your long-term safety net that 
you and your government and your party has promised since 
1992? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate the fact that 
the member has raised. It’s a very important issue and later this 
afternoon we’ve invited the opposition to join in a debate in this 
House on these very, very issues. And we haven’t heard much 
from this opposition party about this very significant issue over 
the last few weeks or months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you will know and members will know that our 
Minister of Agriculture has joined with ministers of Agriculture 
from the five large producing provinces in Canada. They have 
been working together. They have been in Ottawa. They have 
talked about the need for an immediate assistance package from 
the federal government of $1 billion — not the 500 million. 
They’ve talked about the need to build the long-term safety 
programs. They’ve talked about the need for opportunities for 
farm families to make the kind of transitions that some farm 
families want to do. 
 
I appreciate the fact now that our opposition colleagues in the 
House are coming onside with us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, we will 
support your call for a billion dollars this afternoon. 
Unfortunately though, every effort that has been made in 



14 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

Ottawa at this point has failed. 
 
Mr. Premier, the farm crisis is affecting every single area of our 
economy in Saskatchewan and we must make this case as 
loudly and as clearly as we possibly can in Ottawa. We cannot 
allow Saskatchewan to be ignored any longer. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you support us today in our call, the 
Saskatchewan Party call, on calling on the legislature to take the 
unprecedented step of sending every single MLA from this 
Assembly to Ottawa, to make the case before Ottawa, every 
single member of this legislature, every single MLA, 
government and opposition, rural and urban, every single MLA 
representing every constituency in this province, speaking 
together in one voice, making the case very clear? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Speaking together in one voice, Mr. Premier. Mr. 
Premier, are you prepared to work with us this afternoon in that 
call? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, for weeks and months, we 
haven’t heard a word from the opposition party about the crisis 
facing our farm families. 
 
Now that I hear this opposition party talking about — some 
weeks ago, they operated on the steps of the legislature saying 
that we should be electing senators. That’s what they were 
interested in — electing senators. Not the crisis facing our 
family farms. Today they suggest they all want a trip to Ottawa. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a year ago, a year ago we put together a 
large delegation of government members, opposition members, 
producer organizations, producers from Saskatchewan, went to 
Ottawa. What happened? We went with a joint position. When 
we got there, when we came home, they abandoned the 
common position of Saskatchewan producers. 
 
What we need, Mr. Speaker, what we need is a good debate 
today, a unanimous resolution. 
 
I have communicated with the Prime Minister. Our Minister of 
Agriculture is meeting with the Ministers of Agriculture from 
each of the large producing provinces and we will be making 
the case in Ottawa. You can rest assured about that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, the only 
thing that’s been absent in this province is any kind of cohesive 
agriculture strategy coming from you and your deputy 
premier’s office . . . (inaudible) . . . that’s what’s happening in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1415) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, think of what kind of 
a powerful signal this would send to Ottawa. All of the people 

of this province represented by their MLA, lobbying on behalf 
of Saskatchewan farm families in Ottawa, making the case, 
everybody represented. 
 
There are a number of people in this country today who are 
saying, we want out. Well, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Premier, we 
should be saying to Ottawa, we want in. That’s what we should 
be saying to them in Ottawa these days. Our economy is being 
crippled by a farm crisis. It’s time Ottawa paid attention; it’s 
time you and your department paid attention, working side by 
side with us this afternoon. 
 
Will you, Mr. Premier, call on every MLA in this legislature to 
join with you in going to Ottawa to lobby on behalf of farm 
families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m calling on every MLA 
in this Assembly to participate in the debate this afternoon 
that’s . . . (inaudible) . . . resolution. And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, they seem prepared to ask questions but not to hear 
answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want every MLA to participate in this debate, to 
share in this unanimous resolution, but I do not want to have 
happen this year what happened last year. When we went with 
common voice to the nation’s capital, who went south, who 
went south on us? Members of the Saskatchewan Party. Not the 
farm producers, not the farm organizations. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Premier will proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we all well remember last 
year how this opposition party pushed and prodded, and pulled 
until we forced . . . they forced us all into that AIDA 
(Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance) program. Well we 
know how that AIDA program worked out for Saskatchewan 
producers; we know how that worked out for grain and oilseed 
producers in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say to the members of the opposition — let us 
form that common front; we don’t all need a free trip to Ottawa. 
We need to get our voice, in common voice, to Ottawa with 
farm producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Premier, when 
AIDA was being drawn up here in Canada, the only person that 
went south was Eric Upshall, went down to Mexico to sun 
himself. That’s the only thing that happened then. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — What more powerful of a message could we 
possibly send to Ottawa than sending every elected MLA in this 
legislature down there, working side by side, going to Ottawa to 
deliver this message. 
 
We should also ask the legislatures of Manitoba and Alberta to 
join with us in this unprecedented call for assistance for our 
farm families. It’s time, Mr. Premier, to send a message to 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 15 

 

Ottawa that they cannot ignore. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, will you support this initiative? Will 
you send a delegation of all the representatives of this 
legislature and ask Manitoba and Alberta to join with us in this 
unprecedented call for assistance for our farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the 
member that the five large agricultural producing provinces in 
this nation are represented by a variety of political parties in 
their government benches — including, if I may say, 
Conservative Alberta and Conservative Ontario. 
 
To date we have been able to work together, Mr. Speaker — 
work together. We have been working not only as governments 
and political organizations; we work with farming 
organizations, producer organizations in this province and 
across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the kind of voice that will be heard and will 
carry weight in Ottawa — not a group of men and women who 
. . . yes, who a year ago, who a year ago committed to make that 
trip to Ottawa, went with us, and then abandoned the united 
front that we brought to Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let us have the beginning today of a solid debate 
in this House. Let us send to the federal government a 
unanimous resolution, and let us make it very clear that the 
legislature of Saskatchewan is not happy — is not happy with 
the 500 million committed by the federal government nor with 
the process. We will join with Canadians coast-to-coast in 
calling for a billion dollars in immediate assistance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Hon. members 
before I call orders of the day, pursuant to rule 27, it is your 
duty at this time to elect a Deputy Speaker and Chair of the 
Committee of the Whole. The procedures for the election are 
the same as those used to elect the Speaker. 
 
I have been informed by the Clerk that only one candidate has 
declared his intention to stand for election as Deputy Speaker. 
 
Pursuant to rule 27(4) and 26(3), it is my pleasure to announce 
that the member for Regina Sherwood, Mr. Lindy Kasperski is 
declared elected as your Deputy Speaker and Chair of the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to make a brief 
statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you, 
fellow members of the Assembly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d first of all like to take this opportunity to offer 
you congratulations on your election as Speaker yesterday. I 
haven’t had a chance to do so yet, and congratulations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, through you to all the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, I wish to say it’s a great honour that 
you’ve put on me today to be . . . to serve you as Deputy 
Speaker and Chairman of the Committee of the Whole. I look 
forward to working with you, Mr. Speaker, and working with 
all members of the Assembly in this very important function. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
make a few comments on the election of Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to also 
take the opportunity, as my colleague from Regina Sherwood 
did, to congratulate you on your election as Speaker. 
 
Also I’d like to congratulate the member from Regina 
Sherwood on his election as Deputy Speaker. We in the official 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, look forward to working closely with 
both of you and we’re sure that this will be a well-run House 
with yourselves and the member from Regina Sherwood in the 
Chair. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make 
motions concerning change of committees’ membership, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Name on Special Nominating Committee 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Saltcoats: 
 

That the name of Mr. Don McMorris be substituted for that 
of Mr. Bob Bjornerud on the Nominating Committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Name on Standing Committee 
on Constitutional Affairs 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Mr. Ben Heppner be substituted for that 
of Mr. Brad Wall on the Standing Committee on 
Constitutional Affairs. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 



16 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

Substitution of Name on Standing Committee 
on Crown Corporations 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you. I move, seconded by the 
member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Mr. Yogi Huyghebaert be substituted for 
that of Mr. Wayne Elhard on the Standing Committee on 
Crown Corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That the name of Mr. Brad Wall be substituted for that of 
Mr. Ben Heppner on the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask for 
leave of the Assembly to move several routine motions with 
respect to referrals to committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Referral of Report of Saskatchewan Legislative Library to 

the Standing Committee on Communications 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. By leave of the Assembly I’d like to move, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the report of the Saskatchewan Legislative Library is 
tabled in the present session and be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Communications. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Referral of the Retention and Disposal Schedules approved 

under The Archives Act to the Standing Committee on 
Communications 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker I would like to as well 
move, by leave of the Assembly: 
 

That the Retention and Disposal Schedules approved under 
The Archives Act by the Public Documents Committee as 
tabled in the present session be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Communications. 
 

This is seconded again by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of Bylaws of the Professional Associations and 
Amendments thereto as tabled in the present session to the 

Special Committee on Regulations 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, I’d 
like to move: 
 

That the Bylaws of the Professional Associations and 
amendments thereto be tabled in the present session and 
that they be referred to the Special Committee on 
Regulations. 

 
This is seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana, as 
well. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Referral of the various Reports of the Provincial Auditor 
as tabled intersessionally and in the present session to the 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to move as well seconded by the member for Saskatoon 
Nutana: 
 

That the various reports of the Provincial Auditor as tabled 
intersessionally and in the present session, be referred to 
the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(1430) 
 

Referral of the Public Accounts 
of the Province of Saskatchewan 

to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 
finally I would like to move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana again: 
 

That the Public Accounts of the province of Saskatchewan 
as tabled intersessionally and in the present session be 
referred to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to start by 
thanking the newly elected Premier for giving me the honour of 
moving the motion in support of the Speech from the Throne. 
I’m awed at this privilege and responsibility given me. I 
recognize the tradition of this moment. As of now, I’m a part of 
parliamentary tradition for which I have great respect. 
 
I’m honoured to follow in the eloquent paths of the previous 
members who stood before you in such an important traditional 
role. My colleagues who have preceded me have set high 
standards and I hope today to approach their excellence. 
 
It is once again a great honour to bring greetings to this 
Assembly on behalf of the residents of Saskatoon Meewasin. It 
is indeed a great privilege to represent them. 
 
I would like to commend the Lieutenant Governor on a fine 
delivery of the Speech from the Throne, and the new Premier, 
the member from Saskatoon Riversdale, for clearly establishing 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 17 

 

a new face for government in our province. With this new face 
on the future of our province, I can honestly say I’m very, very 
excited. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — I would also like to commend the Premier on a 
well-fought victory in Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Despite the heated attacks from the opposition, 
you have shown your dedication to this province and its people. 
With you at the helm, our government looks very, very good. 
You truly represent the spirit of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — I’m looking forward to working with you and 
with all other hon. members this session and into the future. 
 
A congratulation to you as well, Mr. Speaker, on your newly 
elected position. Your knowledge, experience, and grace will no 
doubt be an asset to this Assembly. I know that you will 
conserve the image of this institution and that you will ensure 
that we, your sometimes recalcitrant children, will adhere to its 
rules — not an easy task, Mr. Speaker, but one I’m sure you’ll 
be able to perform with delicate severity. 
 
Saskatoon Meewasin, according to the report of the Chief 
Electoral Officer, boasts the largest number of electors of any 
constituency in the province at 13,587 eligible voters, and that 
was in 1999. And of course we all know that it has grown 
rapidly since then. 
 
This is a very diverse community, Mr. Speaker. My constituents 
have the joy of residing on the shore of the mighty 
Saskatchewan River. A river that moves forward regardless of 
sun, sleet, or snow — much like our government. The marvel 
that is Innovation Place and the Meewasin Valley Authority are 
both highlighted nicely by the great river. Also contained within 
the boundaries is the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. 
 
Saskatoon is a good example of what Saskatchewan is capable 
of — a strong economy, many new opportunities, and a visible 
beauty that is second to none. For example, the Canadian Light 
Source synchrotron building officially opened on February 25. 
The building was built on time and on budget, consistent with 
the workings of our government. 
 
A synchrotron is a facility the size of a football field that 
produces light, principally X-rays, with special qualities such as 
extreme brightness and short-wave lengths that permit qualities 
. . . permit unprecedented scientific, and technological research. 
Like a giant microscope, this brilliant light source allows for 
matter to be seen at the atomic scale. With a fine intense beam 
that’s only the width of a human hair, scientists can analyze 
molecules, biological samples, and materials with higher 
accuracy and precision than has been possible before. 
 
Synchrotron light is an indispensable tool in pure and applied 
research in a great variety of areas, offering new and exciting 
opportunity for state-of-the-art investigations in material 

sciences, medicine, biology, chemistry, physics, and the 
environmental sciences. 
 
An independent economic impact study estimates the Canadian 
Light Source synchrotron would add almost a 122 million to 
Canada’s GDP (gross domestic product) during construction 
and 12 million per year once the facility becomes operational. 
Provide a $66 million boost to Saskatchewan’s economy during 
construction and about 8 million a year afterward. Create 2,000 
person-years of employment during construction, create 200 
permanent jobs once in operation, and potentially attract 35 
million annually to Canada in commercial research and 
development spending. 
 
This facility will be one of the four most powerful synchrotrons 
in the world and the only one that will partner private industry. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan and its affiliated organizations 
may have the largest impact on the Saskatoon labour force and 
its economy. The university complex which includes federated 
colleges, Royal University Hospital, federal research agencies, 
Innovation Place, and Wanuskewin Heritage Park, generated 20 
per cent of the city’s gross income in ’98, ’99 — greater than 
the economic impact of any other organization in the city. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — 17,650 local full-time jobs were generated, or 18 
per cent of the city’s total employees; 137 million was paid out 
in salaries and wages by the university; 216 million was paid 
out in salaries and purchases by associate organizations. 
 
Perhaps the greatest contribution to the whole is Innovation 
Place. Innovation Place has had a very stabilizing effect on the 
Saskatoon economy. It has a total direct economic impact of 
$157.9 million on the city of Saskatoon, and a total economic 
impact of 197.3 million on the province. It also has a total 
employment of 3,240 in Saskatoon, 3,762 within the province. 
Innovation Place continues to be a generator of 
professional-level employment, and I’m proud of our 
government’s investment in this area. 
 
There’s also a boom in construction at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) and Innovation Place. As well, Mr. Speaker, per 
capita, Saskatoon led western Canadian cities in value on 
industrial building permits with a 56.5 per cent growth in 
permits issued during 2000. 
 
The Saskatoon Regional Economic Development Authority 
contracted 835 firms and agencies last year, working in 
biotechnology, food processing, information technology and 
telecommunications, manufacturing, mining; and multimedia, 
transportation, and warehousing. 
 
On the arts side of this wonderful city of Saskatoon, there were 
five feature films shot, totalling $16 million. Saskatoon’s film 
and television industry is now worth a projected 18.5 to 25 
million according to SaskFILM. Meanwhile, Saskatoon 
Regional Economic Development Authority estimates about 70 
per cent of the film investment stays in the city. 
 
It is my honour to move the motion for approval of Her 
Honour’s speech. It is an honour because the programs, themes, 



18 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

and policies are practical, effective, and they make sense — 
something the opposition seems to have difficulty with. 
 
The Speech from the Throne illustrates three main priorities — 
the thriving economy; healthy citizens, families and 
communities; and finally, a responsible and effective 
government. 
 
I’ll get back to these points in just a minute. But now I’d like to 
address the new and improved substance of this coalition 
government. Mr. Speaker, the winter of our discontent is behind 
us. The sun is shining, the snow is melting, and an exciting new 
spring is emerging . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — . . . emerging just as the new coalition 
government. I see right here and all throughout our government, 
new faces, youth, and commitment. On that note, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to be one of the first to welcome the new member 
from Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — You will find, I think, that the proceedings in 
this House are spirited, informed, and unashamedly partisan, 
which is the nature of our system. Our newest member will be 
the third MLA from Regina Elphinstone to sit with you, Mr. 
Speaker. He follows two distinguished fellows, a Mr. Dwain 
Lingenfelter, and of course Premier Allan Blakeney. I’m sure 
he will represent his constituents and our government with 
honour and with pride. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — I also see many familiar faces — maturity, 
experience, and continuity. With this combination of youth and 
experience, our government will maintain the momentum 
gained from the leadership and the two by-election victories. 
We are going to make our presence felt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government is on the move. It is the job of this government 
to take a stand on issues and concerns of the Saskatchewan 
people. It is also our job to bring these messages to the forefront 
of government. 
 
I and all members of my party am willing and able to utilize my 
position to be a responsible advocate of government and of the 
NDP to all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I mentioned a moment ago some themes from the 
Speech from the Throne and spoke of our individual and 
collective job to be responsible advocates, to improve the 
quality of life for all people in all parts of Saskatchewan. 
 
We announced in the Throne Speech changes to The Labour 
Standards Act to increase maternity and parental leave 
provisions. And we announced a labour-business round table to 
address issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a start. I want to assure my friends in the 
labour movement, and indeed all people who trade their labour 
for wages, that I will continue to press for more and better 

changes. All workers regardless of the type of industry or the 
location of that industry deserve the minimum protection 
afforded by labour standards. 
 
All workers deserve to benefit from free and fair collective 
bargaining. All workers deserve to have their health and safety 
protected while they’re at work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded of a song from my youth that spoke 
about little boxes on the hillside and how they were all made 
out of ticky-tacky and they all looked just the same. Well on 
this side of the House, we’re not made out of ticky-tacky and 
we don’t all look just the same. We represent all people in this 
province and I have no fear in my caucus of using my position 
in government to advance causes that I believe in. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — We have the ability to have to spread the good 
news of the province and to counteract the mean-spirited attacks 
trodded by the opposition. I am here to spread the word — to 
spread the word, Mr. Speaker — that our government has a 
strong vision to lead Saskatchewan into the future. The renewal 
of the NDP is continuing and we have the best team to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Renewing our vision, our message, and our party 
will only strengthen our government making it more 
accountable to the people. The combination of our people and 
our resources make us a dynamic team. Strength, perseverance 
. . . demonstrating strength, perseverance, and good 
government, it is our responsibility to govern this province and 
govern it well and that we will do. 
 
Addressing the themes outlined in the Throne Speech, I would 
like to speak about our priorities as social democrats: to 
maintain a high level of physical and mental health care; to 
create opportunities for the people through economic 
development; to improve the quality of life for people in all 
parts of Saskatchewan; to celebrate our diversity, to view it as a 
strength; and to increase the role of Aboriginal people, both 
socially and economically. These are just a few of the priorities 
of this government. 
 
Did you notice anything mentioned about privatizing our 
Crown corporations and selling off the assets to pay for tax 
cuts? That’s what our opposition proposes. It seems they wish 
to resort back to the buy now, pay later tactics of the 1980s. 
 
(1445) 
 
Saskatchewan is a pretty darn good place to live, Mr. Speaker, 
regardless of what the characters across the floor tell us. We 
have our finances in order, giving us stable ground upon which 
to build our future. 
 
Regarding our finances, Saskatchewan was seen as the star of 
the ’90s according to The Globe and Mail, illustrating that our 
economy — yes, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan economy — 
outperformed all other provinces in the decade. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Good news. 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 19 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Good news. Also, according to StatsCan survey 
of financial security, the median net worth of Saskatchewan 
families in 1999 was $97,250 — the second highest in all the 
provinces followed . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — More good news. 
 
Ms. Jones: — More good news. The median net worth for all 
10 provinces was $81,000, about 17 per cent lower than 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The survey also found that Canadians had on average an 
estimated $16 in debt for every $100 in assets. For 
Saskatchewan families, the figures were $11 in debt for every 
100 in assets — the lowest rate in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this proves the strength of our province. 
Saskatchewan and its people are economically strong, making 
our transition into the future one of ease. 
 
I also want to take a moment to mention that in November of 
1997 the United Nations General Assembly proclaimed 2001 as 
the International Year of Volunteers. And I want to say that in 
Saskatchewan we have the highest rate of volunteerism in 
Canada. And I would like to thank our Saskatchewan residents 
and formally recognize the great contribution that they make to 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Employment is up, Mr. Speaker. Unemployment 
is low and our mining sectors are flourishing, especially oil. 
 
As you have heard, our summer student program, available to 
those students returning to studies in the fall, will create 10,000 
jobs over the next five years, further increasing the employment 
level. 
 
Our unemployment rate is low at 6.2 per cent, 1.3 per cent 
below the national average. 
 
An increase of disposable income over the last few years has 
resulted in increased business resulting in benefits for everyone 
in Saskatchewan. Debt has fallen substantially, both in absolute 
terms and as a percentage of gross domestic product. 
Consequently, interest payments have fallen from 881 million 
in ’94 and ’95 to 677 million this year, providing over $200 
million in annual savings. Just imagine how far this money can 
go towards debt reduction, tax cuts, and improved public 
services. 
 
In the words of our Finance minister, and I quote, “no 
responsible government can promote the well-being of its 
people unless it cares about its bottom line.” And anyone who 
cannot understand that simple principle of public administration 
is not fit to govern. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — The Saskatchewan Party and their belief in 
laissez-faire, free-market economics is not what this province 

needs, as so proved by their past governing experiences. We 
need a government that is strong, able, and willing to stand for 
what it believes in. We have that government, Mr. Speaker, 
right here, right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Our economy is growing and creating exciting 
new opportunities for Saskatchewan’s people because of the 
following. Taxes have come down significantly from 1995 and 
under tax reform they will continue to come down. Tax reform 
will bring new levels of fairness and responsibility to the tax 
system while making the economy more competitive. And our 
continued attention to sound financial management will ensure 
our ability to meet our long-term tax reduction and spending 
commitments. 
 
The future of Saskatchewan looks promising from this side of 
the floor, Mr. Speaker. With solidifying our finances comes the 
opportunity for effective and responsible policies in 
government. The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is that our 
government cares about this province and all those who call 
Saskatchewan home. With our feet solidly planted due to our 
strong financial plan, it will make concerns and issues of the 
people that much easier to address. 
 
Diversity, for example, is a pivotal point of action for the 
Saskatchewan people, and therefore this government. 
Addressing the practical needs of Metis and off-nations . . . 
off-reserve First Nation people in regards to education, 
employment, and economic development, individual and 
community well-being are issues this government takes 
seriously. We have a framework in place that will guide 12 
provincial departments to work in partnership with Aboriginal 
organizations and institutions, federal and municipal 
governments, Crown corporations, the business sector, and 
others in addressing the community priorities. 
 
Comprehensive work represents the first integrated approach to 
addressing the practical issues affecting Metis and off-reserve 
First Nation people in Saskatchewan. Initiatives to support 
implementations of the framework will be addressed by each 
sponsoring department in the 2001-2002 budget. 
 
Agriculture — maybe the most visible issue in our province — 
is in need of our attention. The situation on the farm is not 
good, Mr. Speaker. Grain prices should strengthen this year but 
they’ll still be below the five-year average. 
 
Ottawa continues to play games with our government and our 
farmers. The latest announcement of 500 million by Mr. 
Vanclief was made with no consultation and it’s simply is not 
enough. After cutting farm support following their 1993 
election, the Liberals are leaving our farmers out to dry. 
 
We are a small province with a small but solid treasury but we 
will not abandon our farmers as the Liberals have. We will be 
making a contribution. At the same time it must be noted that 
we will be focusing on long-term rural economic development 
in Saskatchewan, not on short-term solutions. 
 
There is no such thing as an instant solution to any problem as 
the opposition would like think. The Saskatchewan Party is 



20 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

looking for the instant win, and therefore turning their backs on 
the people they claim to represent. We face both our strengths 
and weaknesses with all the confidence in the world, resulting 
again, Mr. Speaker, in a united and strong Saskatchewan. 
 
The rural and farm communities must be successful for this 
province to be successful. We must work together with our 
communities in a way that is mutually beneficial to both 
business and individual issues and desires. We must always 
challenge and question each other in a way that leads to real 
solutions and positive change both for a government and for the 
people it represents. 
 
We must also lead the way, not only in building a brighter 
future but also in being the champions of this province. This is 
our government, this is our place, these are our people, it is our 
duty — we can take Saskatchewan into the future and we will. 
 
In our minds the glass is always half-full not half-empty. Both 
are potentially correct but it’s the attitude that’s different. Our 
collective attitude is one of confidence, accountability, and 
good government, and that is why our government will succeed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — To think and to act, to remember our priorities, 
to help each other adjust to change. These are the things we 
must keep close in our minds as we move into the course of 
action outlined in the Throne Speech. 
 
I’m proud to serve with you, Mr. Speaker, and with all the hon. 
members of this legislature because I’m a proud member of this 
Assembly, because I’m a joyful member of this government. 
And because I believe in the policies of this government as 
outlined in the Speech from the Throne, I’m delighted to move, 
seconded by the member from Regina Elphinstone, again: 
 

To Her Honour the Honourable Lynda Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor of the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
May it please Your Honour: 
 
We, Her Majesty’s dutiful and loyal subjects, the 
Legislative Assembly of the province of Saskatchewan in 
session assembled, humbly thank Your Honour for the 
gracious speech which Your Honour has been pleased to 
address to us at the opening of this present session. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — If they keep clapping, Mr. Speaker, I may be 
not speaking much. 
 
Anyway, Mr. Speaker, in the archaic language of a time 
thankfully gone, I want to address the first words of my maiden 
speech to the people of the Regina Elphinstone constituency. 
 
On February 26 of this year, they placed their trust in me by 
giving me the privilege of serving as their MLA. I promise now, 
as I did in the campaign on more than 3,000 freezing doorsteps 
to work for them and with them, and to do this with all the 

intelligence and energy that I can muster. 
 
It has been said that all politics is local. And I’m about as local 
as you can get. I was born and raised in Elphinstone. I was 
educated in Elphinstone at Kitchener Community School. I 
work there, and my wife, Kelly and I, and our two cats live 
there at home in Elphinstone. My roots are deep and my 
commitment is clear. And I’ll have more to say about 
Elphinstone in a moment. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, as one of the grizzled veterans of this 
Assembly, at least by comparison with the new member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale, I want to congratulate the Premier on his 
victory Monday and welcome him back to this place. 
 
He was a beacon of thoughtfulness and integrity as a member of 
the Romanow government, and he has already shown himself to 
be a leader with his own unique signature. And it is an honour 
to serve with him. 
 
Speaking of honour — or more exactly a lack of honour — I 
would like to point out that the Premier won his seat despite a 
campaign by the Sask Party that deliberately misrepresented the 
facts because they had nothing positive to support their own 
case. I am speaking particularly, of course, of the Sask Party 
claim that the government would close St. Paul’s Hospital. It 
was nothing more than slander. 
 
But this wasn’t the first time — nor will it be the last — that the 
truth got in the way of a good Sask Party story. The Sask 
Party’s enthusiasm for rolling around in the gutter had a lot to 
do with why they lost in Riversdale and why they lost in 
Elphinstone. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Don’t be fooled, said one of that party’s 
leaflets in Elphinstone. And they weren’t. The people were not 
fooled. They could see the Sask Party coming from miles away. 
 
The people took the measure and they cast their votes for a 
revitalized party that listens and that has a positive, realistic, 
doable plan. And that has everything to do with why the 
percentage of popular vote went up for the NDP in Regina 
Elphinstone and Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — And that is why we are here on this lovely 
spring day to debate a new Throne Speech on a new day for this 
New Democratic government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — The Premier is not the only member in a new 
chair. I am pleased to see you, Mr. Speaker, elevated above the 
rest of us, both literally and symbolically. We have entrusted 
you with the keys of decorum and proper procedure in this 
Assembly and I am sure that we could not have found a more 
appropriate representative. 
 
(1500) 
 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 21 

 

I suspect you will miss your former activities as a more partisan 
member, and your desk as I borrow it, as I will miss the 
opportunity of being whipped into shape by you. But your 
experience and your keen awareness of the partisan nature of 
this place will ensure that you maintain order and fairness, and 
we can ask for no more. 
 
I want to say to all members, colleagues and opposition alike, 
that I look forward to working with you as we carry out the 
people’s business. As a new member I have much to learn and I 
know my teachers are not just on this side of this House. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the Premier for giving me 
the honour of seconding Her Honour’s Speech from the Throne 
with which we began these proceedings. It is a rare occasion, I 
suspect, for a member to be sworn in one morning, and then to 
address his peers in the next afternoon. 
 
I do have the excellent example of the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin to follow. I congratulate her for her fine speech. She 
had much to say that was pertinent and eloquent and I’m sure 
she won’t mind as I borrow most of it. 
 
The member spoke about her constituency, and I would like to 
say a bit about mine, or rather about the people of Elphinstone. 
Elphinstone is a diverse community. It is a living example of 
our province’s motto “from many peoples, strength”. First 
Nations, Metis, Vietnamese, Chinese, Italian, Greek, Scottish, 
Chilean, Indian, Ukrainian, English, German, Irish, and on — 
Elphinstone holds within it a rich mosaic. And growing up 
there, living there, has instilled within me the knowledge that 
culture . . . that the culture and heritage of others is something 
that is best approached not just in an attitude of tolerance but 
with respect and celebration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Elphinstone contains many seniors like my 
grandmother, Olive McCall, who moved into Elphinstone off 
the farm in the 1950s and who still lives in her own home. And 
I am thankful for seniors like my grandma because I know that 
there is so much to be learned from our elders. 
 
Elphinstone is also home to many hard-working families. They 
provide for their children. They contribute to the economy. 
They make our community a better place to live in by taking 
part in the rec leagues, in the community associations, in 
organizations like Neighbourhood Watch, in their churches and 
temples, and by simply being good neighbours. 
 
The people of Elphinstone are down to earth, generous, 
energetic, hard-working, caring, and sharing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Ours is a community that faces many 
challenges to be sure — housing, public safety, poverty, the 
need for decent, well-paying jobs with good standards, good 
pay and benefit packages; the need to reach out to youth at risk; 
the need to bring healing to troubled families; the need for 
respect and friendship across the colour line. These are 
challenges of particular importance to my friends and 
neighbours in Elphinstone and they will certainly be of 

particular importance to me as their MLA. 
 
As it is said in Cree, Mamawi weechi hitotan. Let us work 
together to take on these challenges and to build on the promise 
that has been made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — I spoke earlier of my personal history in 
Elphinstone. There’s something else I wanted to mention. I was 
born in 1972, the year that Pierre Trudeau said that the land was 
strong — a slogan which won him a minority government. It 
was the year of the Watergate break-in and the year that Paul 
Henderson scored the goal. 
 
It was also the second year of the first term of the Allan 
Blakeney NDP government. Allan Blakeney, as you know, was 
the first MLA for the constituency of Regina Elphinstone, 
which was created in the election of 1975. Allan Blakeney 
served the people of Regina and Saskatchewan for 28 years, 
winning his seat in eight consecutive elections. 
 
During his time as Premier, Saskatchewan came of age, 
diversifying its economy, expanding its social programs — 
achievements, sadly, that were sabotaged by the Devine 
government. 
 
Blakeney created ownership of Saskatchewan resources by 
Saskatchewan people for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 
Devine gave away SaskOil and the Potash Corporation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Blakeney gave us the children’s dental plan. Devine fired all the 
dental technicians and killed the program, ripping it out of 
schools like Kitchener, where I was a student. 
 
Allan Blakeney gave us a sense of provincial pride and 
self-respect, and Devine sold it for a mess of potage. 
 
I am proud to represent the same people that Allan Blakeney 
represented so well for so many years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — As I continued on to six years of age, Mr. 
Speaker, the next MLA from Regina Elphinstone was elected 
for the first time, at first from another constituency. I am proud 
as well to follow in the steps of Dwain Lingenfelter, the 
minister who presided over Saskatchewan’s miraculous 
economic recovery in the 1990s and who led the fight last year, 
both in Ottawa and here, against the people that would stab him 
in the back breaking the common front to force Ottawa to 
recognize the plight of our farm community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am the third MLA for Regina Elphinstone— the 
third NDP MLA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — I know I’ve got big shoes to fill, but I’ve got 
young, energetic feet that have already walked many a mile in 
the streets and alleys of Regina Elphinstone. 
 



22 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

The member from Saskatoon Meewasin mentioned the fact that 
we are governments and a caucus in transition. Some veteran 
faces, some new faces — some veterans with new faces? No — 
in new positions. 
 
As an example of this transition I want to make one more 
personal reference. In one sense I regret missing the chance to 
serve in the Romanow government. But I am proud to say that 
my first vote was cast in a provincial election in 1991. I voted 
for Dwain Lingenfelter and the Romanow NDP government. As 
I voter, I played my part then in restoring financial sanity and 
political integrity to this province, and I am now humbled to be 
playing my part as an MLA in continuing the crusade begun in 
’91 and ’44 and ’32 . . . and the fight, the fight goes on. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, at home I have a souvenir from the 1991 
election, which I’d show you but for the rule against props, 
which I’m sure the member from Swift Current is aware of. It’s 
an election card called Let’s Do It The Saskatchewan Way. It’s 
a card that lists four commitments of that campaign — 
commitments that have been and still are being kept. 
 
Commitment number one says, first things first, common sense 
financial management, including among other things a promise 
to balance the budget within the first term. We kept that 
commitment in 1995 and in every budget since. And we all look 
forward to the Minister of Finance’s new budget in the next few 
days and we know that he will keep the string unbroken. 
 
Commitment two: new directions, new priorities in jobs, fair 
taxes, and in quality of life. Our economy grew steadily. Our 
taxes are coming down. Four hundred and eighty-five thousand 
people were working in the year 2000, and we have instituted 
major reforms, major successful reforms, in health and social 
services. We are the only jurisdiction in Canada to experience a 
drop in child poverty. 
 
Commitment three: open, honest . . . You might want to pay 
attention; you’d learn something. Okay, commitment three . . . I 
guess he’s beyond learning, Mr. Speaker. Okay. 
 
Open, honest, and accountable government. If you read the 
front page of yesterday’s Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, you will be 
able to draw your own conclusion, one that will clearly show 
our promise is being kept, drawn in bold relief with that which 
went before. 
 
Number four — and let’s mention them all without editing — 
fighting for agriculture and rural communities. Granted, it’s a 
tough one because the problems facing our agricultural sector 
are global and long-term in nature, but we’re still working at 
them. And I’ll say a bit more about that in a moment. 
 
Four commitments made; four commitments kept. Much has 
been done; much remains to be accomplished. The faces at the 
table have changed somewhat but the energy and the dedication 
to keep the promises are the same. As other members have said 
before me, methods change, principles do not. 
 
The government is led by a new premier with a new team. The 
mission is the same. A compassionate, caring, growing, secure 
society in which the principles of equality and mutual assistance 
are blended with economic and educational opportunity for all. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — I’d like now to return to agriculture, Mr. 
Speaker, and say a few more words about agriculture, about the 
government in agriculture, and about the opposition in 
agriculture. 
 
Now I grant that I am an inner city, urban kid with no great 
amount of direct farm experience. But like many of the people 
of this province, you don’t have to scratch me too deeply to hit 
country. With many of my cousins still on the land, I’ve got 
more than just a passing interest in the well-being of our farm 
families. 
 
As I said a moment ago, everyone knows that one of the major 
problems facing our grain farmers are the subsidies paid by the 
US (United States) and European governments to their farmers. 
In Europe, 58 cents of every dollar of a farmer’s wheat sales is 
government subsidy. In the States, it’s 46 cents. In Canada, it’s 
only 11 cents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you think these are our numbers alone, I would 
invite you to read a front page article of the December 24 
edition of The New York Times — that famous NDP house 
organ, of course. It is about a county in Montana where some 
farmers were paid $616,000 last year by the government, and 
the top 10 per cent which were paid an average of $308,000. 
These payments did not depend on yield or market value. They 
were simply a device whereby American farmers farmed the 
government. Bumper crop. 
 
The Saskatchewan treasury cannot and should not compete with 
that. It is the federal government’s responsibility to first 
negotiate an end to that kind of obscene trade distortion. And 
secondly, until it does so, to devise a plan which gives similar 
help to Canadian farmers. 
 
This has been our consistent message to Ottawa at least since 
the special session of the fall and early winter of 1999. A 
session I remember in which Premier Romanow and 
Agriculture Minister Lingenfelter forged a coalition of all 
parties of all prairie governments to take this message to 
Ottawa. Sound familiar? We were willing to co-operate as long 
as the feds took their rightful leadership role. 
 
And what happened, Mr. Speaker? The friends of the farmer 
over there broke the coalition at the first expedient opportunity. 
And here they come again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Okay. Mr. Speaker, I’m having trouble speaking over the party 
of one, over yonder. But I’ll carry on. 
 
So what happened to the common front, Mr. Speaker? It was 
broken by the opposition party as soon as they got back to play 
political games. They threw their constituents to the wolves 
while this government fought for a fair and reasonable program. 
 
That side said we should open up our treasury before the federal 
government had done anything — a signal to the feds that we 
were not united, as we claimed. It was a shameful performance, 
Mr. Speaker, but not a surprising one. 
 
And since the opposition had such a great time selling out 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 23 

 

Saskatchewan last year, they’re now up to the same thing again. 
The Leader of the Opposition wants the provincial government 
to sign on to another flawed federal program, a program that 
will not give Saskatchewan farmers the help they need to get a 
crop in the ground. 
 
(1515) 
 
He told the SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) convention last week that he thinks the province 
should sign on to the Canadian Farm Income Program, a 
program — here we go again — a program roundly condemned 
by farm groups, our Minister of Agriculture and his colleagues 
from Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario and Quebec. Everyone out of 
step except for the Leader of the Opposition. With friends like 
this, Mr. Speaker, who needs opposition . . . enemies, pardon 
me. 
 
But the Leader of the Opposition is not the only one to play 
politics with the lives of our farm families. His Agriculture 
critic, the member from Kindersley, in the January 18, Western 
Producer said, and I quote: 
 

Propping up small operations won’t help. 
 
What’s a small operation anyway, eh? To continue with the 
quote: 
 

Anybody who has any forward look at agriculture today, 
knows that those kind of things simply won’t work. 
Anybody who thinks they’re economic has no idea of 
modern agriculture. 
 

Would you believe, Mr. Speaker, the rural newspapers were full 
of letters the next week, questioning his sincerity as well as his 
sanity. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, I’m a city boy, not fully up to speed on 
all aspects of the farm economy. But I believe that I am like 
many of the people of our province; a community whose 
members pull together to make a better life for us all, regardless 
of where we lay our heads at night. 
 
I know that we are interdependent, and I know that it benefits 
no one if our House is divided. And I know that the current 
Premier and that the Deputy Premier and Agriculture minister 
are working as diligently as the previous ones to assist rural 
Saskatchewan through the period . . . through this current period 
of instability. The measures our government are taking were 
outlined in yesterday’s newspapers by the Minister of 
Agriculture. They are positive, not divisive, and we will hear 
much more during the session. 
 
I want to say a few words about health. As Her Honour said in 
her speech yesterday, we are waiting for the Fyke report next 
month. But even before that, one thing is clear, Mr. Speaker. 
Our health system is not in crisis, despite the best wishes of the 
members opposite. It is functioning and it is functioning well, 
attended by teams of excellent medical professionals and 
support staff at all levels, in all facilities. That is a fact. 
 
In our health system . . . is our health system stretched to the 
limit? It is. Does it face challenges? It does. Must we be ever 

vigilant as we seek to improve, refine, and innovate? Always. 
Does it have to adapt to the changing realities of medical 
techniques and the fluctuating facts of our social structures? 
Yes. Do we need to hire more doctors and nurses? You bet. 
 
Those are the eternal facts of every health system in the world, 
and they will never change. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, here are some more . . . other facts. Our 
publicly funded — publicly funded, the members opposite may 
want to meditate on that concept for a moment — publicly 
funded system paid for 4,761,800 visits . . . pardon me, 
4,761,800 visits to family physicians and 920,000 visits to 
specialists last year — one year. 
 
We fund approximately 9,000 nursing home residents in special 
care homes, hospitals, and health centres; 29,100 people receive 
home care services. There were 650,000 emergency room or 
clinic visits. Patients spent over 800,000 days in hospital care; 
266,000 radiology services were provided; 125,000 ultrasounds; 
53,631 CT (computerized tomography) scans; and 10,833 MRIs 
(magnetic resonance imaging). 
 
What was it that the fellow had said about MRIs in Saskatoon 
Riversdale? 
 
An Hon. Member: — They should be private. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Privatized. Privatized, I believe that was what 
he said. I believe that was the Sask Party. 
 
There is more of course, Mr. Speaker, but it is obvious that the 
vast majority of our people are receiving the health care they 
need in their time of need. In a system run by humans, for 
humans, you can obviously find a case where something goes 
wrong — something the opposition specializes in. But overall, 
we’re not doing too badly in health care. And we will do better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a few days we will have a new budget and that 
will be the time to talk about spending and taxes. 
 
But since the opposition claims the taxes are the issue this 
session, let me just remind them for the moment that we have 
the lowest sales tax of any province in Canada, except of course 
for our neighbours, which the members opposite worship, to the 
west of us. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Who have the medicare premium. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Who have the medicare premium. 
 
We have lowered the income tax four times in the last seven 
years and have announced that they will come down again in 
2002-2003. In every budget since 1992, there have been 
targeted, sustainable tax adjustments for varying sectors of the 
economy to stimulate growth and they have worked. And they 
have added up. 
 
Just to complete this part of my speech, Mr. Speaker, we have 
done all of this while balancing the budget, paying down the 
debt of the government the opposition claims to have never 
heard of. Who was the former premier before Romanow? Ring 
any bells? Okay. I see you’re thinking about it, yes. 



24 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

Okay, moving on, Mr. Speaker. As the representative of a 
constituency with a number of First Nations and Metis voters, I 
am very pleased — very pleased — that the Throne Speech 
announced the Metis and off-reserve First Nations strategy. 
 
I know that this strategy has been under development for a 
while, and I look forward to the deals of the plan to be 
announced during this session. And I am pleased that the 
Premier has recognized the importance of this strategy by 
appointing a very capable minister to focus their attention on 
this strategy. There will be much more to say on this issue in 
the days to come. 
 
I want to conclude my first . . . I’m getting a little dry. I’m 
thinking about you, your . . . Okay, I’m just taking on a little 
water there. 
 
I want to conclude my first address in this Assembly by 
commenting briefly on something that others have said in and 
out of the legislature. We have it seems two competing visions 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
One says, as a recent Globe and Mail article pointed out, that 
Saskatchewan is the star of the ’90s and is continuing to grow, 
diversify, and prosper. Good things are happening here and any 
number of independent third parties will point that out. A recent 
survey in The Leader-Post and StarPhoenix said that most 
Saskatchewan people are relatively satisfied with their lives — 
contrary to the picture of destruction and desolation painted 
opposite. 
 
A recent editorial in the Eston Press Review mentions the other 
vision. It begins by saying, in true Saskatchewan fashion, I’ve 
noticed a lot of doom and gloom around recently and far too 
many people running down the province and our town. The 
editorial goes on to point out that there were many, quote, 
“great stories” in and around Eston of businesses providing 
jobs, of regional park use growing, of a local feedlot doubling 
its capacity, and so on — stories similar to that which is 
occurring throughout the province. 
 
Great stories and doom and gloom side by side — why is this, 
Mr. Speaker? Is it because the opposition wants Saskatchewan 
people to believe they live in the most godforsaken place on the 
face of this earth? Is it to their benefit, as the article says, to run 
down the province and our town? 
 
As we all know, we have problems to face in Saskatchewan. 
We have challenges to meet. And it appears we also have an 
attitude to correct. 
 
Fortunately, Mr. Speaker, we have the people to solve those 
problems, to meet those challenges, to dispel the gloom and 
doom. After all, Saskatchewan people have been doing just that 
since pioneers like my great-grandparents homesteaded near 
Montmartre, Saskatchewan in 1883. They pioneered and won 
over an often hostile and imposing environment. They and their 
children struggled against a distant and uncaring central 
government to establish the institutions which define our 
province — our credit unions, our co-ops, our pools, our 
schools and yes, Mr. Speaker, our uniquely Saskatchewan brand 
of government by which ordinary people have worked together 
to achieve the extraordinary. 

This co-operative spirit of government . . . governance was 
there right from the start in 1905 when the Scott government 
began to create the first of our Crown corporations. And we do 
know, Mr. Speaker, that some good things happened before the 
Douglas government, but well, not much to be sure. 
 
Today as we approach our first centennial, Mr. Speaker, we 
have new challenges, new opportunities, and new problems. 
The hostile environment doesn’t just consist of grasshoppers 
and hailstorms. Today we are facing global warming and global 
trade, environmental hazards and energy shortages. Different 
mix, but we face it with the same spirit. It calls for new methods 
but we stand with the same principles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t have the time to wallow in doom and 
gloom. We don’t have the luxury to be pessimistic for narrow, 
partisan purposes. We have a province that roared back to life in 
the last decade of this century . . . of the last century. And in 
this the first decade of the 21st century, we are a people ready to 
build upon the promise of today as we connect to the brighter 
future of tomorrow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — And I am proud to say that we have the 
Premier and this government to work for and with the people of 
this province as we bring this about. The Throne Speech 
announced the direction we will be taking during this session. It 
is a good, optimistic blueprint, and I am very proud to second 
the motion of the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course 
yesterday we had opportunity to extend our congratulations to 
the new members in the legislature — the Premier and the 
member for Elphinstone. And we had opportunity to 
congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, on your election to the Chair of 
the Assembly. 
 
Now there is a further congratulation that needs to be extended, 
and I will take the liberty to do that immediately and extend my 
congratulations to the Deputy Speaker, the member for Regina 
Sherwood; and we trust that he will give you the able support 
that you need, Mr. Speaker, in the Chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are now in the Throne Speech debate, and it 
has been an unusually long period between Throne Speech 
debates — it’s been 15 months since we last met in this 
Assembly to debate the vision and the future of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You’d think after 15 months, Mr. Speaker, the government 
would have some time to consider the error of its ways, would 
have time to consider the . . . and take the pulse of the people of 
Saskatchewan. You’d think they’d have enough time to 
generate some new ideas, to get a grip on things in this 
province, but unfortunately, there’s very, very little new in the 
Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The faces on the front benches may have changed, but 
everything else has stayed the same. Mr. Speaker, there’s the 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 25 

 

same lack of leadership over on the other side. There’s the same 
lack of vision for the province of Saskatchewan. We see as we 
look in this document, very, very little in the way of vision, 
very little in the way of solutions for our province. 
 
Now normally throne speeches are a little light on the details. 
They’re supposed to be broadly based, they’re supposed to be 
more visionary, but oftentimes they do lack, lack substance and 
at the most, offer platitudes. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, as far as this Throne Speech is 
concerned, new standards of lack of performance and 
achievement have been set. Not only does this document not set 
out a clear direction for the government in the coming year, it 
also reverses — I emphasize that — reverses many of the plans 
and promises that we saw in the last Speech from the Throne. 
 
In this speech the government has set out three priorities, and 
these are the three areas that have been giving the government 
. . . that have been part of the government’s greatest failures. 
 
A thriving economy — as we know there is no thriving 
economy in Saskatchewan. Talk about a strong health care 
system, as we all know, health care has never been in worse 
shape in Saskatchewan. 
 
(1530) 
 
And, thirdly, they talk about a responsive and effective 
government. And never in my lifetime have I seen a 
government more out of touch and less responsive to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for good measure, for good measure, they 
throw in rural Saskatchewan and they identify agriculture as a 
priority area. Even though, Mr. Speaker, this government has 
ignored agriculture and everything outside of the cities of this 
province for a full decade. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, tomorrow I intend to speak on all of the 
aspects of the document that we are debating right now. But 
today I want to focus primarily on the issue of agriculture 
because I know that later in the day we will be moving into that 
area. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are new members in the House and I 
would just like to refresh everyone’s memory about the 
CCF-NDP’s (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party) history with rural Saskatchewan and 
particularly with agriculture. 
 
How would you have guessed, Mr. Speaker, how could you 
guess that a party that arose out of rural Saskatchewan, that was 
called a farmers’ party, how could you ever guess that it would 
so resolutely and so completely turn its back on rural 
Saskatchewan? How could you have ever guessed, back in 
1944, that the government today, the NDP-CCF government of 
today, would forget — would forget — that there is an industry 
called agriculture in Saskatchewan that’s very important and, 
Mr. Speaker, that they would forget that there’s an important 
rural component to our province? 
 
Let’s look at history. But first of all, Mr. Speaker, there was a 

move by farmers and many in the agricultural industry to 
change the payment of the Crow benefit from the railroads to 
the producers. These guys said it was heresy; it was awful. So 
what happened? The Crow was lost and farmers received no 
benefit whatsoever, except from a small pittance from the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, this party, the NDP, refused to 
support reforms to the Canadian Wheat Board, and now we see 
that the Canadian Wheat Board has become more of an 
impediment to agriculture than a body that would assist 
agriculture. 
 
Those two errors alone, those two errors in judgment, serious 
errors in judgment, have caused our province not to have the 
incentives to add value to our agriculture products. 
 
So what have we seen over the last 50 years? We’ve seen 
depopulation of rural Saskatchewan. We’ve seen lack of 
value-added production in our province. We’ve seen small 
towns close down. We’ve seen elevators close down. We’ve 
seen branch lines close down. Simply because their priorities 
are wrong. 
 
History tells us that they never really did understand the key to 
developing agriculture in Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll roll the clock up to 1992 — 1992 — a new Romanow 
government in place. And what did they do, Mr. Speaker? They 
cancelled GRIP (gross revenue insurance program). Now it’s 
okay. Other provinces cancelled GRIP; I recognize that. But 
they did two things that are unforgivable when they cancelled 
the GRIP. 
 
First of all, they broke a contract. They broke faith with the 
farmers of Saskatchewan. They signed their name to the GRIP 
agreement. They said, this is our commitment; this is our 
300-and-some million dollars; there’s the federal commitment 
to the GRIP program. And then they ripped it up after they 
signed it and said no — no, we were just kidding you. We don’t 
really mean what we said; you can’t trust us. And farmers 
throughout this province today know that you cannot trust the 
NDP government. 
 
And then secondly, Mr. Speaker, they promised to replace 
GRIP. They said, yes, we’re going to cancel GRIP. Yes, maybe 
we did it in kind of a shady way. Maybe we really weren’t 
upfront with farmers. But don’t worry. We’ll replace it. We’ll 
put something in its place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we waited 1993, ’94, ’95, ’96, ’97. Nothing 
happened. Things started to get really bad by about 1997. We 
were back into some real serious difficulties. All those years, 
Mr. Speaker, and they forgot their promise. They forgot rural 
Saskatchewan. They forgot agriculture. They turned their back 
on the industry. And we’re into a crisis situation again. 
 
So as a result in 1999, my colleague from Indian 
Head-Milestone reminds me, didn’t win any rural seats in 
Saskatchewan. I wonder why not. I wonder why not. Well after 
you turn your back on people for long enough, they lose respect 
for you. And rural Saskatchewan has lost respect. Agriculture as 
an industry has lost respect for the NDP government. 
 



26 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, finally the federal government had to step 
in. Can you imagine that? Those eastern guys had to step in 
because this government wouldn’t do anything. And they 
started to develop a new farm safety net. After being promised a 
replacement for GRIP for years and years and nothing 
happened, the feds finally decided that they were going to put in 
a new program. It turned out to be AIDA. 
 
Well where was the Minister of Agriculture for Saskatchewan 
when AIDA was developed? Where was Eric Upshall? Well 
Eric Upshall said, oh no, we don’t need a program; we don’t 
want a program. He said there is no crisis. Do you remember 
that? There is no farm crisis. There is no problem in agriculture. 
 
I saw him say it on TV. I turned my TV on. I was in a farm 
house in Biggar, Saskatchewan, and Eric Upshall got on there 
and said there is no farm crisis. We just about fell off our chairs. 
We just about fell off our chairs. Where is this guy? Wake up. 
Wake up. Don’t you hear rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Eric Upshall not only said there was no 
crisis; when the AIDA program was being put together, he went 
off to Mexico on a holiday. Somebody said about going south, 
the Agriculture minister went south. He went south on a 
holiday. And so Vanclief and the Liberals and the 
I-don’t-know-who all, the bureaucrats down in Ottawa, put 
together the farm safety net program that the folks across there 
forgot about. And it doesn’t work very well in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I thought I heard some mumblings about it being the 
responsibility of the Saskatchewan Party that their Agriculture 
minister went to Mexico on a holiday that they said that there 
was no farm crisis when we were raising the issue right in this 
very Assembly. Mr. Speaker, you have to wonder about the 
intelligence of the members on the other side when they have 
such a short memory and can’t remember some very, very 
straightforward facts. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we got this program called AIDA, and when 
it pays out its payments, the lowest per capita payments in all of 
Canada are in which province? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Right here in Saskatchewan. Doesn’t 
work here. I wonder why it doesn’t work here? Because they 
were asleep. They were asleep at the switch. And the lowest 
payouts? The lowest payouts? They’re right here in 
Saskatchewan. I wonder why? Well because Eric Upshall 
wasn’t there leaning on Lyle Vanclief’s arm and telling him 
how to do it right. 
 
Well now we’ve gone on from AIDA and we’ve got this CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program) program. And I’m not going 
to spend a lot of time. We know that CFIP isn’t what it should 
be. We would have expected that Mr. Lingenfelter would have 
made it better. He was the deputy premier, very powerful man 
in the NDP team over there. We thought he was going to do 
something. We said we’ll certainly support you if you can 
improve the AIDA program, if you can improve the CFIP 
program. What did that Agriculture minister do? Where is that 
Agriculture minister? 
 

An Hon. Member: — Calgary. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Calgary. He left, he deserted 
Saskatchewan. He left. He pulled the pin and went to Calgary, 
Mr. Speaker. So we got one Agriculture minister that goofed off 
to Mexico and we got another Agriculture minister that takes 
off to Calgary. What’s going on over there? What’s going on? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we’re looking at a Speech 
from the Throne. What’s the NDP going to do? Well they say in 
this document . . . well I don’t see anything about a farm input 
monitoring program. I think that was in this Throne Speech 
from last year. Did we get that by the way? Did we get that 
monitoring program? No, I didn’t see it and it’s not in this . . . 
it’s not in this Speech from the Throne. So I guess that’s 
another broken promise — another broken promise. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I looked in this document, I looked hard and 
fast to see if there was a commitment to provide good long-term 
safety nets for this province. I didn’t see it in this document. 
You know, I think they talked about it before but now they 
don’t even talk about it. They’re not even playing games when 
it comes to a farm safety net program. They’ve thrown in the 
towel. They’ve given up, Mr. Speaker, they’ve given up on 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But there is something interesting in the document. They made 
government bigger. You know, when this NDP Party sees little 
problems, when they see little problems, they make government 
a little bit bigger. When the problems get a little bigger, then 
they make government even bigger yet. And then when they got 
big problems, then they really try to make big government. 
 
So we’ve got problems in rural Saskatchewan. We’ve got 
problems in agriculture. What do they do? Do they lower taxes? 
Do they fix farm input costs? Do they get the ear of Lyle 
Vanclief? Do they get the ear of the federal Agriculture 
minister? No, not at all. 
 
What do they do? They create a new office, an office of Rural 
Revitalization. They demote a minister; they take a minister that 
struggled in health care, that was creating huge problems in our 
health care system, and they said, well she’s making a mess of 
health care; we might as well put her in Rural Revitalization. 
That’s a hopeless case. She can mess that up too. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, rural Saskatchewan doesn’t intend to allow 
itself to be messed up; doesn’t intend to let itself be messed up 
by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has always been clear in 
its support for agriculture. The Agriculture critic, the member 
for Kindersley . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — . . . the member for Kindersley has been 
consistent in his support for agriculture. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
have tried on this side to pry this party, this NDP Party that 
governs Saskatchewan, into a position on agriculture. We’ve 
come at it from this side; we’ve come at it from that side. We 
cannot get them to take a stand. We cannot get them to make a 
commitment. 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 27 

 

Mr. Speaker, they have not designed a farm safety net program. 
They haven’t made a deal with Ottawa. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there’s this CFIP program. Mr. Speaker, we 
signed some memorandum that agreed we were going to into 
the program. And then the former Agriculture minister I guess 
didn’t sign the final agreement. Now we’ve got this new 
Agriculture minister. He’s the Deputy Premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Well he’s been distracted lately. He’s had his mind on other 
things. Agriculture has not been the top priority for the 
Agriculture minister. He has worries about getting his guy 
elected as the Leader of the NDP Party. And then he’s worried 
about keeping this coalition together that’s kind of falling and 
crumbling around him. And, Mr. Speaker, he’s worried about 
making sure he gets into the Deputy Premier’s chair. He’s 
trying to look after everything except agriculture. And as a 
result, he forgot, he forgot to sign the agreement. And if he 
didn’t like the agreement, he forgot to go down and tell Lyle 
Vanclief what was wrong with it and how it should be fixed. So 
we haven’t even signed this deal. 
 
So when people are now calling and saying, you know, will I 
qualify for the CFIP program, the Government of Canada says, 
well, you haven’t signed on; we haven’t heard from your 
Minister of Agriculture. He’s gone AWOL (absent without 
leave) on us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, any time anybody wants a constructive 
discussion on agriculture, we will be at the table. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, somebody said that if you 
scratch, Mr. Speaker, somebody said if you scratched a little bit, 
you’d find a little bit of, you’d find a little bit of rural 
Saskatchewan, a little bit of agriculture in all of us. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I still am a farmer. You don’t have to scratch at all. 
 
Many of my colleagues still actively involved or have family, 
sons and daughters that are actively involved in agriculture. 
This industry is extremely important to us. We know how 
important it is to the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to be irresponsible. And I 
said this to the newspaper the other day. We’re not calling for 
80 or $100 an acre. Some would say we need 4 or $5 billion 
payout. Saskatchewan Party has never said that. 
 
Now perhaps some over there would. If they care to make that 
kind of commitment for agriculture, the Finance minister is 
going to have to get out his cheque book and help a whole lot. 
But if they want to go 80 or $100 an acre, you know, we’ll have 
a look at it. I don’t think it’s going to work, but we’ll certainly 
have a look at it. It’s not our position. 
 
But we’ve always consistently called for interim funding until 
we get the long-term fundamentals in place. 
 
Now somebody on the other side, Mr. Speaker, somebody on 
the other side had the nerve to say, somebody on the other side 
. . . 

The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Someone on the 
other side had the nerve to say that the Saskatchewan Party had 
been silent on the issue of agriculture. As soon as the federal 
government announced $500 million of funding for agriculture, 
the Saskatchewan Party Agriculture critic, the hon. member for 
Kindersley, said right away to the media — it’s on record; the 
news release is there — that’s not enough, we need to do more. 
We’re on the record. Folks, everyone knows we’re on the 
record. 
 
(1545) 
 
You know, the last member that spoke said that we had 
somehow misled agriculture because we had somehow used the 
opportunity to break out of some coalition — I didn’t know we 
were ever in a coalition on agriculture — but we were trying to 
work constructively. 
 
But you know what the member forgot to say, what the member 
didn’t observe, was that after we recognized that this 
government had no clue how to fix agriculture and after they 
basically asked us not to sit on the new acre committee — I 
mean it wasn’t our decision not to sit there, it was their decision 
— after all that happened there are two words that I’d like those 
members to think about. 
 
Those two words are: Wood River — Wood River — where 
you guys got blown out of the water by the rural agriculture 
sector of Saskatchewan. You know, these members think that 
the people of rural Saskatchewan are not intelligent. They think, 
Mr. Speaker, that we don’t understand rural Saskatchewan. I 
tell each one of them go to Wood River. Go to Wood River. 
The people of Wood River, the people in Saskatchewan know 
who stands up for them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to see long-term solution for agriculture. 
Mr. Speaker, if the other side would just calm down a bit I want 
to talk about something very constructively. They’re always 
saying we’re being negative and I want to be constructive. I 
hope they listen. I hope they’re quiet over there for just a 
minute or two, it won’t take me long. 
 
You know what, if we just look at short-term solutions, and if 
Saskatchewan refuses to take leadership when it comes to 
agricultural issues, even if we get a billion dollars or two billion 
dollars this year, yes we’ll be fine but next year we’ll be right 
back in the same mess unless we get the fundamentals right. 
Now we need the short-term help but we need to get the 
fundamentals right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need the long-term safety net. Mr. Speaker, we 
need the lower taxes, we’ve got to have lower taxes, lower input 
costs for agriculture. Mr. Speaker, we need marketing freedom 
in Saskatchewan. There’s the fundamentals that we need that 
these guys are opposed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And until they pull their heads out of the 
sand, it’s going to be a billion dollars next year, it’s going to be 
two billion dollars next . . . and there is going to be no industry 



28 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

left in this province. Mr. Speaker, we’ve got to get the 
fundamentals right. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m speaking on the Speech from the 
Throne, there’s a lot more I could say just on agriculture alone. 
But I want to discuss the other issues as well. I think, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to have a more focused debate on 
agriculture which I look forward to listening to. And therefore 
at this time I would move to adjourn the debate. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I’d like to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity 
under rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — What is the nature of the motion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as was in question period 
today and as we listened to both of the speakers during the 
Throne Speech debate, and as we listened to Saskatchewan 
people across the province and Canadian farmers across 
Canada, we hear about the plight that they are currently 
experiencing, which is the need for greater financial assistance 
to assist them in getting this year’s crop in as well as 
maintaining their families on the farm. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I would like to do this afternoon is to 
introduce the motion: 
 

That this Assembly call on the federal government that they 
provide a billion dollars to farm families immediately. 

 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Agricultural Crisis for Saskatchewan Farmers 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I also want to thank the members opposite for their 
agreement to enter into this very important debate in the 
Legislative Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first I want to start out by saying that in Canada 
today our Canadian farmers are not asking for a handout. Our 
Canadian farmers have never asked for a handout. What our 
Canadian farmers have been asking for is an opportunity to be 
on a level playing field with the rest of the world in which food 
is produced. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that when we talk about 
agriculture in Saskatchewan, as the Leader of the Opposition 
talked about earlier today and as my colleague from Regina 
Elphinstone talked about, there is no question that agriculture in 
our province is clearly a very important and integral part of our 
Saskatchewan community. Nobody makes any notion or bone 
that it’s not important to us. 
 
Forty per cent of the jobs that we have in our province today, 
directly or indirectly, are affected by agriculture. And there isn’t 

a soul that sits in this House today, either on that side or on this 
side, that isn’t affected by agriculture in some sort of way by 
either coming from the agriculture community and living in 
urban Saskatchewan today and making a living in some related 
way, even maybe as it relates to agriculture. 
 
Many members of this House will stand up and say that they 
have family members that . . . whom they’re related to. The 
member from Elphinstone talked about his cousins today who 
live on the farm. So there isn’t anyone here today, in this 
Assembly, who hasn’t had some association or tie to what’s 
happening in the agriculture community. 
 
And what we should do, Mr. Speaker, is we should talk about 
the value of this industry to our province. But we don’t take 
enough time to do that in this Assembly. We’re too busy taking 
credit for who has ownership of it, or who should have 
ownership of it, as opposed to working together to try to build 
an industry that’s important to our Saskatchewan community. 
 
And I want to share with you for a minute the things that are 
happening in this province today over the last 10 or 15 years 
that have made a difference to our Saskatchewan community. 
 
When we take a look, Mr. Speaker, at specialized crops, and 
just the dried pea acreage, it’s gone from 2.3 million acres in 
2000 compared to just only 35 . . . 350,000 acres in 1992. We 
look at the lentil acreage in our province today which is 1.7 
billion in the year 2000. It was only 475,000 in 1992. We look 
at the mustard acreage in this province which is today 470,000 
acres, which was only 240,000 acres in 1992. And canary seed 
today is 375,000 acres, which was only 215,000 in ’92. And the 
list on the speciality crop goes on and on and on. 
 
And we take a look, Mr. Speaker, and what’s happened in the 
organics, where we see today 500 organic growers, including 50 
organic livestock producers and 20 organic processors in our 
province. That’s grown by 20 per cent just in the last 10 years. 
And that we don’t talk a lot about that in this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about the poultry industry, where our 
poultry industry here is doubling our chicken production quota 
over the next four years. And that continues to grow. And lots 
of opportunities for our poultry industry. 
 
And the sheep industry in Saskatchewan, 45,000 rams and 
2,000 ewes — up 18 per cent just in the last three years. And 
our bison industry and our elk industry and our deer industry, 
the specialized livestock in this province, is doing very, very 
well and continuing to grow. 
 
And we look at our beef industry and the importance of our 
beef industry to Saskatchewan, and we see the beef industry 
making significant gains in our province. And there’s more that 
we can do. 
 
But I say, Mr. Speaker, that we have a huge problem today in 
our grains and oilseeds sector — a huge problem in our grains 
and oilseeds sector, Mr. Speaker. And the big issue that we 
have in the grains and oilseed sector today is that we have 
disparity with our friends who are providing food in the US and 
in Europe. We should make no mistake about this. 
 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 29 

 

I hear the member opposite from . . . the Leader of the 
Opposition say that we need to make some fundamental 
changes. But there’s a fundamental problem today and the 
fundamental problem is in the marketing boards, or in fact, he 
says, that we need to reduce the operating costs for farmers. 
 
It’s true. We need to reduce the operating costs for farmers and 
we have reduced the operating cost for farmers on this side of 
the House. Tax reductions on property, removing the fuel tax on 
fuels, providing additional dollars today for the . . . when we’re 
processing, providing today an incentive for people who are 
wanting on building materials. 
 
We provided a range of opportunities for agricultural producers 
in Saskatchewan, and it’s helped a little bit but it hasn’t made 
the major difference where it’s required. It hasn’t made the 
difference where it’s required in the areas of what I produce and 
sell. 
 
And I want to say that just a couple of weeks ago I was in 
Washington with all of my Canadian Agriculture ministers. And 
at that meeting were a number of people, a number of ministers 
— they call them commissioners and secretaries — from the 
mid-States and the northern States of the United States. And 
they’re currently working on an American national farm Bill. 
 
And the national American farm Bill, Mr. Speaker, is to look at 
whether or not they can reduce the subsidies. And I can tell you 
that the farmers of whom these ministers represent are not 
prepared to reduce the subsidies for their American farmers — 
are not prepared to do that. 
 
And so today as a Canadian farmer and as a Saskatchewan 
farmer, I don’t have two sources of revenue. I don’t have two 
sources of revenue. I only have one source of revenue, and 
that’s what I get from the marketplace. And that’s the difference 
of what’s happening today as a Saskatchewan farmer, Canadian 
farmer versus my American farmer — I don’t get a cheque in 
the mailbox. But American farmers get a cheque in the mailbox 
of 36 cents on the commodities they produce. And the European 
farmer gets a cheque in the mail for 56 cents, of which our 
Canadian farmers don’t produce. 
 
But yet, Mr. Speaker, we’re competing in that marketplace. 
We’re competing for the share of the market. And we grow 
some of the highest quality grains and oilseeds in the world, 
right here in Saskatchewan. But we don’t get for it what we 
require, because the marketplace is distorted and it’s distorted at 
the international level. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, who in fact should be working at trying to fix 
this? 
 
And I heard the member opposite talk about the fact that I’ve 
been distracted. And the reality is, Mr. Speaker, I have been 
distracted. I’ve been distracted trying to find a solution for what 
we can do for Saskatchewan Canadian farmers. And we started 
that process way back in September when we saw our crop 
coming off and saw what Saskatchewan producers are going to 
receive for their grains and oilseeds. 
 
And I was worried about what our Saskatchewan producers 
were going to get, because when I looked at the price and 

looked at the quality of what we grow in Saskatchewan today, I 
could see that they’re going to have less cash in their jeans at 
the end of the year. 
 
And so what did we do? We didn’t attack the Canadian Wheat 
Board because the grains and oilseeds aren’t marketed through 
the Canadian Wheat Board. So what we did is we went and got 
. . . I went and got our agricultural producers together and I said 
to them, what should we do in this province? 
 
And they said, there’s a couple of things that we need to do. 
One is that we need to start telling our Ottawa friends that we 
need more cash. And so that’s what I did. In October I wrote the 
minister, the hon. minister of . . . Mr. Vanclief, and said, we got 
a problem in Saskatchewan — in October. And then I phoned 
the minister and said, we got a problem in Saskatchewan and 
we need to be cognizant of what’s happening here. 
 
And we requested that Mr. Vanclief and his government 
prepare to put a cash injection to deal with the distortion in the 
grain prices, because that’s what our disaster is about. Our 
disaster in Saskatchewan today is about a distorted price — 
that’s what this is about. 
 
And then we had an election in November, of which I called for 
more assistance from my friends in Ottawa. And I didn’t hear a 
huge uprising here from anybody else — other than the 
producers. But I’m distracted now by trying to farm . . . I’m 
now distracted, Mr. Speaker, by trying to find money for 
farmers. 
 
And what happens is that we have the Canadian Alliance 
leadership landing in Regina and at the steps of his airplane 
from which he speaks to farmers — because he doesn’t come 
into the Saskatchewan community and talk to the farmers — he 
says there’s enough money in the safety net system for farmers. 
There’s enough money for Canadian farmers. We don’t need 
any more money. 
 
So here we are in Saskatchewan and other provincial ministers 
calling for more money, and our official opposition in Ottawa 
saying there’s no need for more money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we then went on . . . we then went on, Mr. 
Speaker, and called a meeting here in Regina. Called a meeting 
in Regina of all the provincial Ag ministers, of which five 
attended. The big five, who will produce 90 per cent of the 
agricultural commodity in Canada, were here. And we had the 
discussion about what we should do. And collectively we 
advanced the notion that we should have in Canada today $1.5 
billion for Canadian farmers was the position that we put 
forward. 
 
(1600) 
 
And then we met with the Canadian Federation of Agriculture 
and I met with my producers in Saskatchewan again to say what 
is it that we should do. Can we get by with $1.5 billion? And 
the various different farm organizations said no, we need to 
have $3 billion for Saskatchewan farmers. And one other 
organization said we need to have $2 billion. And some said we 
need 800 million. 
 



30 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

But collectively we put our heads together and said we should 
try and get for Canadian farmers $1.5 billion, of which the 
federal government should put a billion dollars in to deal with 
the price distortion. And that’s the resolution, Mr. Speaker, that 
came out of Regina. And that came out of Regina because this 
minister was distracted by working for farmers. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we then met by telephone 
conference, or had a discussion by telephone conference, with 
Mr. Vanclief — all of the Canadian agriculture ministers — and 
said to him that we have a crisis in Saskatchewan and we have a 
crisis in Canada. And our crisis is that we have Canadian 
farmers trying to work in and feed their families in a distorted 
environment. And you, sir, Mr. Vanclief, have a responsibility 
because you negotiate the trade agreements for our Canadian 
farmers — you do that. We don’t here in this Assembly — you 
negotiate that. 
 
And we’re tired as Canadian agricultural ministers to hear you 
say that we’re going to be working at reducing the subsidies 
because we just heard three weeks before that that they’re not 
reducing the subsidies. And so it’s your responsibility in Ottawa 
to put the money in to help the Canadian farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we went on then to Ottawa . . . or to Quebec City 
as a united group of agricultural ministers, and said, Mr. 
Speaker, that we need $1.5 billion for Canadian farmers. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we came away from Ottawa with Mr. Vanclief 
saying to us that you now have $500 million and that is the final 
amount of dollars of which the federal government is prepared 
to invest in one-time emergency aid. 
 
The five big provincial . . . or the five largest producing 
provinces in agriculture, along with the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture and the Quebec Union of Farm Producers held a 
press conference. And we said in a united fashion, we need to 
see $1.5 billion for Canadian farmers and the federal 
government needs to contribute its share, which is a billion 
dollars for farmers today. And that’s the process, Mr. Speaker, 
that we continue to work on. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that there is a need to do several 
things in agriculture, without any question. We need to have an 
envelope that addresses itself to emergency aid until such time 
as the subsidies are reduced, until such time as the subsidies are 
reduced. And there is the national responsibility here for the 
federal government to participate as every other world country 
participates for their agricultural producers. We need to have in 
that envelope a guarantee from our friends in Ottawa. 
 
And secondly we need to fix the safety nets. There’s no 
argument in this Assembly that we shouldn’t be working at 
fixing the safety nets, and some people here will say that GRIP 
worked. GRIP worked for some people, it’s true. We haven’t 
got GRIP anywhere in Canada today, it’s gone. Not only in 
Saskatchewan, but all of the provinces have removed it. 
 
And we have now, and had, AIDA. There isn’t anybody on this 
side of the House who wanted AIDA. We argued against 
AIDA. And it’s true, people on that side of the House said that 
there were some things that we needed to do and AIDA was one 
of the messages that they provided for us and said, you need to 
get into AIDA 150 . . . or $170 million, you should get in. Some 

won’t remember it because they weren’t part of the party who 
were talking about it. They won’t remember it because they 
weren’t there. But that’s the debate that was had. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we got into AIDA and then everybody says 
AIDA doesn’t work. Well what a surprise. We knew AIDA 
wouldn’t work. And so we’re getting out of AIDA, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what happened in this country, the agricultural ministers 
got together, and their officials, it doesn’t matter, pick the party 
— Conservative Ontario and Conservative Alberta and NDP 
Saskatchewan and Conservative PEI (Prince Edward Island) 
and NDP British Columbia — all got together and said, we 
think we need to devise and we’ll work at devising a new plan 
called CFIP, called CFIP. 
 
And we said, in Saskatchewan, we don’t think this is a very 
good plan because it does not address that disparity with the 
grains and oilseeds’ people. And it does not. And it’s the same 
situation that we’re stuck in today as we were with AIDA, that 
we have a grain industry that’s going like this today and we 
have a CFIP program that can’t respond to it. And we say we 
shouldn’t be in it. We say we shouldn’t be in CFIP. 
 
And I listened to my colleague from Kindersley when he and I 
had a discussion with Sheila Coles a week and a half ago. And I 
appreciate what my colleague from Kindersley said. Because he 
said he didn’t think that the CFIP program worked either. And 
then, lo and behold, I pick up the newspaper three days later 
and I read the front page, and there’s the Leader of the 
Opposition saying we should be in CFIP. 
 
How does this work? This is the same old picture that we saw 
two and a half years ago. Like why is it, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have the member from Kindersley who I think understands the 
farm issues in Saskatchewan as well as most anybody does, and 
he knows that the Canadian Farm Income Program is not the 
right place for us to be. 
 
And he also knows that we shouldn’t be investing today, over 
the next three years, $240 million in a program that’s not going 
to address the issues with our oilseeds and grains people. 
 
But that’s not what the Leader of the Opposition says. He said, 
you take your money and you stuff it into CFIP. And I say, 
what’s the wisdom in that? What’s the wisdom in that? No 
question that we need to readdress the safety net structure. No 
question. And the commitment from Canadian Agriculture 
ministers today, the commitment today from Canadian 
Agriculture ministers in each of the provinces is that we’re 
going to try and fix the Canadian Farm Income Program and the 
safety net piece. 
 
And I can tell you today that that’s going to be led over the next 
couple of weeks. That whole review and reopening of the safety 
net is going to be led by Alberta. And I know that my members 
opposite will be happy to hear that Alberta is going to lead. 
They’re happy about that. Because what they say . . . I mean 
Alberta is where they get most of their inspiration from. Not 
from Saskatchewan, but from Alberta. 
 
So I can say, Mr. Speaker, that over the next several weeks 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 31 

 

we’re going to open up that piece of the safety net and we’re 
going to take a look at how we can help Canadian agricultural 
producers on the grains and oilseeds piece, without any 
question. 
 
So when the members opposite or the Leader of the Opposition 
says that this minister and this government have been 
distracted, he is absolutely right. We have been distracted. 
Since September this government and this ministry and this 
administration has been busy trying to find solutions for 
Saskatchewan and Canadian grain farmers, is what we’ve been 
doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’ve been doing that, Mr. Speaker, last year. The member 
from Saltcoats is chirping from his chair. Because the member 
from Saltcoats last year, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that the 
member from Saltcoats last year, Mr. Speaker, he went to 
Ottawa with us and he tried to work a way with us in the 
government to try and get the $300 million that we brought 
back. 
 
And the premier of the day, and the deputy premier of the day, 
and farm organizations, we went to Ottawa. Of which the 
member from Saltcoats was also there. 
 
But we weren’t home 2 minutes, 2 minutes we weren’t home 
off the plane, and the member from Saltcoats is out there saying 
this is a sham; this is a sham. And that’s the kind of partnership 
and co-operation, and whom that member from Saltcoats works 
for. Not a chance, Mr. Speaker. The member from Saltcoats is 
about himself, and we should not be fooled by his approach — 
should not be fooled. It’s about himself. 
 
When we talk about co-operation and participation and working 
together, Mr. Speaker, it’s about the provincial governments. 
The provincial ministers from across the country are saying 
today, Mr. Speaker, we have some solutions. And we need to 
find those solutions in the safety net side. And we will find 
those solutions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the members opposite, this solution can’t be 
resolved without co-operation and participation from each 
other. It can’t be. And we need to fix this as a national issue. 
We need to fix this as a national issue. And we need to have 
every provincial government on the same page. 
 
And right now, I can say to this Assembly, I can say to this 
Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, that I have all of the provincial 
ministers on the same page. I have that. I’ve got that 
commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And today, Mr. Speaker, I have all of the 
provincial Ag ministers asking their treasuries and their 
leadership that in fact that we should have one billion brand 
new dollars from Ottawa. 
 
And I am extremely pleased, Mr. Speaker, today that the 
opposition is joining us because that, in my view, is the spirit of 
co-operation for Canadian farmers. In joining us, in helping us 
to cement the additional money that we need for our 
Saskatchewan Canadian farmers. 

And I’m going to conclude. At the end of my comments, Mr. 
Speaker, I make the motion, Mr. Speaker, moved by the 
member from Yorkton and seconded by the member for 
Kindersley, by leave of this Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly call on the federal government to 
provide $1 billion to Canadian farm families immediately. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very pleased to 
enter the debate and take part and second the motion put 
forward by the hon. member, the Agriculture minister of this 
province. We certainly do support the initiative that he has put 
forward here this afternoon. I think it is important to recognize 
that it is a very, very first step however in what needs to happen 
in terms of addressing the problems that agriculture is faced 
with here in this province today. 
 
And that’s why we feel that not only should we be doing this, 
but there are other things we should be doing as well to help in 
this regard. Yes absolutely, we have to call on the federal 
government to initiate and go forward in terms of putting a 
strategy in place for agriculture right now. But we also have 
other problems that we have to address in this problem as well. 
 
We have the whole area of safety nets and what are we going to 
do in those areas. We have the whole problem of an 
international trade war that is ongoing and we must continue to 
participate in terms of the debate surrounding that and how we 
are going to frame that discussion with the federal government 
and with nations throughout the world that are involved into 
that kind of discussion. 
 
In addition to that we feel, and we put forward to the Premier in 
question period here this afternoon, that we need clearly to raise 
the debate even one more level. Raise the bar for the federal 
government even one further level by calling on and doing what 
we suggested this afternoon: asking every member of this 
legislature, every single member, rural and urban, rural and 
urban because it’s a problem for all of Saskatchewan — it’s just 
not a problem for rural members — rural and urban, to go 
forward, take the message to Ottawa on behalf of all of 
Saskatchewan; on behalf of Elphinstone, on behalf of the 
northern constituencies, on behalf of Kindersley, and Watrous, 
and all of the other constituencies because we are all affected. 
 
(1615) 
 
Whether we are a farmer or not, we are all affected by this 
problem in Saskatchewan because we are literally seeing our 
province collapse in terms of economic activity and a large 
measure of that collapse is as a result of the shortfall in 
agriculture in terms of income these days. 
 
And that’s why we are calling on that unprecedented step by 
this legislature. I do not know of, ever before in the history of 
Canada, where an entire legislative body representing every 
single person in a province has gone to Ottawa to make their 
case. And I would say to you, members opposite, that you 
should be thinking about that before you just simply discard it. 



32 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

For example, do you think for one moment if the legislature in 
Quebec City en masse went to Ottawa, they wouldn’t be 
listened to? And they should be listened to. If the Ontario 
legislature went en masse to Ottawa, they would be listened to 
and they should be listened to. And I see no reason why that if 
the entire legislature of Saskatchewan — and hopefully the 
legislatures of Manitoba and Alberta went along with it as well 
— they, I believe, would or at very least should be listened to 
by the government in Ottawa. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And I want to speak for a moment not just to the 
rural people of this province, because I think they understand 
the magnitude of the problem. But we also want to speak to the 
urban people of Saskatchewan to try and give them or hopefully 
provide them with an understanding of the magnitude of the 
problem here, in Saskatchewan. 
 
It affects the car dealership owner in Swift Current the same 
way it affects the bookstore owner or the sales clerk in Regina 
or Saskatoon. And I think they understand that, frankly. I think 
they understand that there is a problem here and yes it’s been 
ongoing for a number of years. And we’ll get into the reasons 
why it’s been ongoing for a number of years and I suspect that 
the Minister of Agriculture may not like that part of what we’re 
going to say. 
 
But nevertheless, it affects us all, whether we are a sales clerk in 
Regina or whether we are a car salesman in Swift Current or 
whether we actually do — and I do and many of my colleagues 
do — actually make our living from the farm in this province. 
 
I think it’s important to recognize how we got to this state in 
agriculture here, in this province, what problems we have been 
faced with for a long, long time. And I think it’s also significant 
that we give an understanding to rural . . . or to urban people as 
to what kind of problem we are faced with. 
 
As you know, we are faced with an international trade war. Just 
think for an example — for example, if we were faced with this 
similar situation in the automobile industry, just think for a 
moment what would happen. If the car dealership owner in 
Regina, Saskatchewan, all of a sudden faced an international 
trade war, where other countries said we are going to subsidize 
the purchase of our cars to the point of 50 per cent. What would 
happen, do you think, to the car dealership sales in Regina, 
Saskatchewan? They would plummet like a rock. And that’s 
what’s happened in agriculture prices as a result of international 
trade activity by other countries. 
 
And they have their reasons for doing it and they’re varied and 
many, and I don’t suppose we need to get into the discussion 
about why they do it. But what they have done as a result of that 
is they have put tremendous pressure on the incomes of our 
farmers here in Saskatchewan, and indeed Western Canada, and 
perhaps all of Canada. They’ve put tremendous pressure on 
those prices. 
 
And anybody that’s associated with agriculture understands that 
kind of pressure. They’ve seen their commodity prices literally 
cut in half and they’ve seen their cost of production just heading 
straight up, practically. 

And if any of you are following the prices of things like 
fertilizer these days, as a result of the increases in natural gas 
prices, you will know that that kind of pressure is very, very 
real. You could buy nitrogen last year for a couple of hundred 
bucks a tonne. It’s going to cost you probably 300-plus this 
year. That is a tremendous price increase in that alone. 
 
Fuel prices are headed the same way; chemical prices. Virtually 
every input that we have has just gone up and up and up, and 
it’s put a cash crunch on the farm families of this province like 
never before. 
 
And as a result of that, we’re seeing incomes just plummeting, 
just absolutely plummeting for our Saskatchewan farm families. 
And we are called to respond. 
 
As a legislature I say to you, each and every one of you, we are 
called to respond and we have a responsibility to respond. And 
before you just simply say that idea won’t work, of going down 
to Ottawa as a complete legislature, I think you should think 
about it a little bit. I think you should think about it a little bit. 
 
I understand, and it’s very disappointing, I understand that the 
Premier just dismissed the idea and said no; they wouldn’t be 
participating in it. But think of the impact that it would have. 
Think of the impact if we closed this legislature down for a day 
or two and all of us en masse go to Ottawa and say, this is the 
problem we are faced with, and you must understand it. 
 
I think and I believe that the Prime Minister of this country 
would respond. I think he would be at significant political peril 
if he didn’t respond. And I think that we would also find that if 
Saskatchewan raises the bar to that level, I think it would put a 
tremendous amount of pressure on the other provinces to 
respond in like manner. I think you’d probably see Manitoba 
and Alberta fall into line in this thing. 
 
We need that kind of pressure on Ottawa these days. We need 
this as well . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And yes, absolutely, 
if the Ontario legislature were supportive, absolutely we would 
want them to be a part of that initiative. Without question we’d 
want them to be a part of that initiative and any other province 
that wanted to do that. 
 
But let’s at least, Mr. Minister, let’s at least, Mr. Minister, Mr. 
Agriculture Minister, let’s take the first step. Let’s take the first 
step and say yes . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Let’s take the first step. Let’s put something out 
front there so that farm families in this province and all our 
economy here in Saskatchewan can be provided with some 
small measure of hope. We owe that to them. And the members 
whining about what are the various federal parties doing? I 
don’t know what the CA (Canadian Alliance) is doing 
necessarily on this issue. I don’t know what the NDP is doing 
on the issue as well. But one thing is for certain, we have an 
obligation and I would say you, sir, have an obligation as well 
to support this initiative. And I hope that you will. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 33 

 

Mr. Boyd: — This problem has been with us for some time. 
And let’s just review history for a moment here and think about 
where we are and how we got to where we are. 
 
In 1992 you people said to the farm people of this province that 
the safety net that was in place at that time was inadequate, 
didn’t serve the need, it didn’t do what was necessary, was too 
costly, all of those kinds of things. That was your argument. 
 
And so you took the unilateral step, unprecedented probably 
before in the history of this country or at least in our province, 
of ripping up a contract. The one thing that farmers always — 
and I think most people — always look to their government for 
is at least some direction. What should or should not you be 
doing? 
 
And one of the things I don’t think you should be doing is just 
simply tearing up responsibilities, ripping them up before 
people and saying, too bad. We don’t like this thing. It wasn’t 
an NDP initiative so we don’t want it. 
 
And then on top of that what have you done every year since? 
Every single Throne Speech that you have put forward with the 
exception of the one yesterday, every single one of them you 
said we’re going to put in place a long-term safety net. We’re 
going to do that. We’re going to get this done. 
 
You’ve been working on it for 10 years now and what has 
resulted? Have you put forward a single, solitary idea or any 
kind of initiative at all? No, what you people opposite have 
done right from the very start, right since 1992, is you’ve let 
everybody else drive the agenda in this country and you have 
done nothing in agriculture at all. Absolutely nothing. Every 
time there’s an initiative come forward, what can we expect 
from our government here in Saskatchewan? Did they put 
forward any ideas at all? No, nothing whatsoever. No ideas at 
all. All you do is sit on the sidelines and carp that it isn’t good 
enough. Carp that . . . Shout like a wounded dog that it isn’t 
good enough. 
 
Have you put forward a single, solitary idea, Mr. Minister? 
Have you talked about; have you talked about some of the 
initiatives that are out there? Have you talked about a 
cost-of-production formula? We want to talk about that and I’ll 
move to that in a few moments. We want to talk about that one. 
 
Have you talked about anything in terms of some of the other 
initiatives that are out there? Focus on sabbaticals out there. 
Have you talked about that? No, we haven’t heard a peep from 
you on that one. 
 
Have you talked about Farm Corp International? Have you 
discussed that in any manner? Have you put forward one single, 
solitary idea in terms of safety nets? I don’t recall one. You put 
in place, you put in place a Farm Safety Net Board. You 
appointed a few NDPs most recently and reappointed them 
again here in the last few days. Has there been a report from 
that committee? Has there been a report from that committee? 
 
Have you put forward any ideas? What, what do you support in 
terms of a long-term safety net? Do you support the initiative, 
do you support the idea of a revenue insurance program? Do 
you or don’t you? 

Do you support cost of production? Do you or don’t you? Do 
you support sabbatical? Do you or don’t you? What do you 
support? 
 
We’ll tell you what we support. Absolutely we’ll tell you what 
we support, absolutely. We want to know . . . I think the farm 
families of this province are owed an explanation. Yes, we’ll 
tell you what we support and we’ll get to that in a minute but 
I’d like to know what you support. And you have an obligation 
to tell us what you support. 
 
You after all, you after all do have responsibility in this area. 
What do you support . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay, let’s 
talk about cost of production for a little while. I’ll be happy to 
talk about cost of production. 
 
There is a program in Quebec right now that is a modified cost 
of production. We’re looking at it. We’ve sought some 
information in recent days on it. We’re interested in it. We 
don’t know whether we like it or don’t like it because we just 
haven’t made a decision on that. But let’s think about that for 
. . . Let’s think about that for a moment. Let’s think about that 
for a moment. 
 
In Quebec, in Quebec they have relatively small numbers of 
farms, relatively small numbers of farms. There’s a thin strip of 
agriculture land along the St. Lawrence. They have a very, very 
large tax base because they have millions and millions of 
people. And they have a very small agriculture sector that 
exports virtually nothing. It’s almost all used domestically. So 
in that kind of situation similar to, similar to supply-managed 
industries in Saskatchewan that type of program will work in 
those kinds of situations in that province. And we understand 
that. 
 
But in a province like Saskatchewan where you have about 80 
per cent of our production exported, it is very, very difficult to 
put that kind of program in place because in addition to having 
a cost-to-production formula, you also have to have control 
over whether you export or not and you have to have a quota 
system to gauge the amount of production that you’re putting 
forward. And so that presents some very, very obvious 
challenges in terms of putting a program like that together for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to that, whose cost to production do you use? Whose 
cost to production do you use? You use the farmer . . . and this 
isn’t a criticism. This is just a reality. Do you use the example 
of a farmer down in Maple Creek, half and half, half 
summerfallow-half crop, generally speaking. Do you do the 
math on his farm? 
 
Well I’ll tell you, they’re primarily growing wheat and durum 
in those regions. Very, very low cost to production because they 
have to do it that way. Limited rainfall to work with. As a result 
of that, very, very small use of fertilizers and chemicals. And as 
a result of that, a very, very low cost structure. And they have 
done that for very, very obvious reasons — that’s how you 
make a living down there at Maple Creek. And that’s not a 
criticism. That’s just a reality of how they operate in that area. 
 
Compare that to the Nipawin region or the Melfort region or 
something like that in Saskatchewan, where they’re on a 



34 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

continuous crop basis, sure crop country, where they get rain on 
a consistent base. And as a result of that, they have very, very 
high costs. It’s not unusual for them to put $50 an acre plus into 
fertilizer alone. And on top of that, they put in significant costs 
in terms of chemical weed control and as a result of that their 
costs just go up and up and up. So let’s . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well, we’re getting to that if you just listen for 
a moment. We’re getting to that if you just listen for a moment. 
We’re getting to that. 
 
So let’s look at that kind of cost-to-production-type formula. If 
you put in place an average — and some of the folks that I’ve 
been talking to recently are saying well, just give an average — 
well let’s say for argument sake we have an average 
cost-to-production formula and we’ll say it’s going to be $50 an 
acre. Well I can tell you that the farmer down at Maple Creek is 
going to love it. He’s going to say my cash cost to production is 
about 30 bucks, maybe even less than that. And they think to 
themselves well, there’s a $20 margin in there; that works pretty 
good for me. 
 
(1630) 
 
The farmer up at Melfort is thinking to himself, $50 an acre, 
that’s how much I put into fertilizer alone. What about my 
chemical? What about my cost to production in a whole range 
of areas? And they’re going to say this doesn’t work for us. 
 
So then you have to . . . from there you have to take it one step 
further if you’re going to still go down this road. 
 
Are you going to start dividing it up into regions and saying; in 
that southwest corner it’s 50 bucks an acre, part way up the 
province it’s 60 bucks an acre, 70, 80, 90, $100 an acre, all of 
those kinds of things. How’re you going to do that? 
 
Crop insurance does it in terms of yield. It doesn’t do it in terms 
of cost of production. They make that determination in terms of 
yield. They have historical records to go back to Maple Creek 
and say that the average yield history in Maple Creek is 20 
bushel, 25, 30 bushel to the acre, perhaps even better on my 
good friend’s farm. But nevertheless, that . . . those numbers are 
in place, yes. But is there any numbers in place as to what his 
cost of production is? No, I don’t know of any. 
 
Are you getting it? Is this something that you’re looking at, Mr. 
Minister. I think it’s time that you started outlining the things 
. . . options that you are looking at. Is this an idea that you are 
looking at? Because if you are looking at that as an option, I 
think it’s time that after ten years . . . after ten years of doing 
nothing in terms of a long-term safety net, I think it’s time you 
said what options you are looking at. 
 
Are you looking at cost of production? You seem to indicate, 
Mr. Minister, that that might be something you’re looking at. 
Well, we would be very interested, as a party and as the 
opposition, in sitting down with you and saying, okay, let’s look 
at this thing, let’s try and figure it out, let’s see whether we can 
make it work or not. 
 
Have we received any kind of an invitation from you folks at all 
to discuss anything? Over ten years, not a single, solitary word 
has come forward from your department saying that you want 

the input of the people who actually represent rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Well, Mr. Minister, it’s time that you said to the 
farm families what they . . . what you have in mind for them. I 
don’t think it’s good enough to sit back and when AIDA comes 
forward, all you do is criticize it, because you don’t like it. 
When CFIP comes forward, all you do is criticize it, because 
you don’t like it. When the whole idea of going to Ottawa 
comes forward, criticize it, because it isn’t your idea and you 
don’t like it. What ideas do you have? 
 
What ideas do you have — what ideas do you have? Your 
solution to this . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well, just hang 
tight, just hang on there. Well, just hang on and I’ll give you 
some thoughts on it in a minute. We’re not certain . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I would . . . I’m listening 
to the debate intently this afternoon and I’ve noticed something 
that I would like to bring to all members’ attention. 
 
There are two ways of addressing debates in the commons or in 
this legislature, and one is, the accepted way is to, in debate, 
address your remarks to the Chair and speak about the 
opposition in the third person as opposed to speaking directly to 
the opposition. And I would ask your co-operation . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . or to the opposition or the side 
opposite, pardon me, to the side opposite. And I would request 
your co-operation on this in order that we not personalize the 
debate, but that we address the issues. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as the 
debate has ensued here this afternoon, our leader, the hon. 
member for Rosetown-Biggar, made some comments about his 
thoughts in agriculture. And I recall when that was happening, 
the minister, the Hon. Minister of Agriculture said that maybe 
the leader would be prepared to put his seat forward on that. 
Well I think we would, and I think I would. If you want to put 
your seat up, I’ll put my seat up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We’ll see . . . We would be prepared to see 
whether they support your initiatives or whether they’d put our 
initiatives forward. Whether you’re prepared to put your 
initiatives forward or not. What we have seen from your 
administration in the last little while is absolutely nothing, and 
the farm families of this province understand it. 
 
The new Minister for Rural Revitalization said, and we were 
talking about this this morning in caucus, some of the things 
that they’ve been putting forward. The moment that . . . it is 
almost laughable some of the things, Madam Minister, and, Mr. 
Speaker, that they have put forward in terms of this thing. They 
are saying that one of the problems in rural Saskatchewan is is 
the fact that we don’t have high-speed Internet. 
 
Oh and I can just imagine how many farmers as they go to sleep 
tonight and are thinking about whether or not, whether or not 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 35 

 

that they can pay their bills, whether or not that they can pay 
their bills, whether they can buy fertilizer and whether they can 
buy fuel and whether they can put seed in the ground are going 
to bolt upright in bed tonight and say, well at least we might 
have high-speed Internet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And one of the other initiatives, one of the other 
initiatives was we need to have better cellphone coverage, and 
I’d support that because I use it a lot. But I can imagine them 
bolting upright in bed again tonight and say, well at least when 
I’m going broke, at least when I’m going broke maybe I can 
phone somebody. 
 
What exactly are you thinking in agriculture? What exactly are 
you thinking in agriculture? Because we see nothing to this 
point — absolutely nothing to this point. 
 
You want to know . . . What we believe needs to happen is 
threefold right now in terms of agriculture. We believe that the 
province has to fulfill its responsibility in terms of a long-term 
safety net. You have to do that. That’s something you have to 
do, and that’s what we would support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We would support sitting down and talking about 
the various safety net options from cost to production to any 
other idea that there is out there, we would be prepared to sit 
down and discuss all of those options that are available out 
there and decide as a group whether or not they make sense or 
not. We’d be prepared to do that. That’s something we are 
prepared to do. 
 
We’d also be prepared to continue to put pressure on the federal 
government to live up to its responsibility in terms of 
international trade discussions. We’d be prepared to help in that 
regard; we’d be prepared to help in that regard. 
 
We’d also be prepared to take the unprecedented step, along 
with you people, of going to Ottawa in an unprecedented 
fashion . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Everybody. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Yes, the entire legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s almost laughable. The member from his seat is 
saying that they don’t trust us as individuals to go. Well 
actually, I think they probably do. But I think it would be a 
bigger impact if we all went; I think it would be a bigger 
impact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Even whatever modest amount of help you 
would be able to provide — and I suspect it would be modest 
— even your help would be valued in that kind of effort. Even 
your help, and the member next to you who knows a little bit 
about agriculture, he would be worthwhile on a trip like that. I 
believe every single member of this legislature would help in 
that effort. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — In terms of long-term safety nets we need to get 
down to business here very soon. We haven’t had one in place 
for 10 years and the clock is ticking. And every farmer in 
Saskatchewan knows that it’s ticking on them, and it’s grinding 
down on them very, very hard. And another crop is going to be 
seeded here pretty soon in Saskatchewan and still there is 
nothing at all in place in terms of it. 
 
And we’d like to know from the minister and his department 
and your government what plans do you have in terms of a 
long-term safety net? I don’t think it’s good enough to just say 
to Ottawa you design it and then we’ll criticize the heck out of 
it when you put it in place. I don’t think it’s good enough. 
 
That’s what happened in AIDA. My colleague reminds me of 
that — that’s what happened in AIDA if you recall. When 
AIDA was put in place — let’s just think about that for a 
moment — what did you people do? Did you put forward any 
ideas? None whatsoever. 
 
In fact, the minister wasn’t even at the discussions. I don’t 
know whether you had officials there. You may have had 
officials but they wouldn’t have been in a decision-making 
capacity at that . . . they’d have been as an observer or someone 
that just sat there and listened to what the discussions were. But 
the minister was not there and made no apologies for it in fact. 
In fact, he said at the time, and the member for 
Rosetown-Biggar said — and I remember that as well — there 
is no crisis. 
 
If you recall, Mr. Speaker, at that time there had been a very 
small increase in the initial price on wheat of about 20 cents a 
bushel I believe it was. And the minister stood up and said, I 
don’t know what you people opposite — referring to us — are 
talking about, because the crisis in agriculture is over. That’s 
what he said. 
 
And the people in rural Saskatchewan couldn’t believe that the 
Minister of Agriculture was so naive in terms of that at the very 
time when they were trying to put in place a ad hoc safety net 
program — at the very time that that discussion was going on 
— the leadership from Saskatchewan, in terms of agriculture 
policy was saying, we don’t have a crisis. And is it little wonder 
that we wound up with something like AIDA as a result of that? 
Is it little wonder we wound up with that kind of thing? 
 
And then the federal government comes forward with the 
second part of that, the CFIP program. Yes, we don’t like it a 
whole lot, you’re right. We don’t like it a whole lot, but what 
other options do we have, Mr. Minister? What other options do 
we have? You have got the farmers of this province into such a 
box, you put the farmers of this province into such a box that 
. . . such a box, they are in a position where they don’t like 
what’s there and yet at the same time the federal Minister of 
Agriculture is saying to you, you’re either in it or you don’t get 
any more. 
 
And so the Minister of Agriculture decides to play this little 
game of chicken. Little game of chicken, with the minister . . . 
What our leader said — and let’s correct the record because the 
minister obviously doesn’t know what he said — what the 



36 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

member said, what our leader said was, we don’t like the 
options at all. We don’t like the position that you have put the 
farmers of this province in. We don’t like to see CFIP program, 
but that’s what we’re stuck with because of your inaction. 
 
We don’t like it; we would want to see a whole number of 
modifications to that program. But what other options do we 
have? If we are going to get any kind of assistance from 
Ottawa, what other options do we have? What other options do 
we have, Mr. Minister? I said that in that interview, and you 
know I said that. You have put the farmers of this province at 
peril as a result of your inaction. That’s what you have done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And you stood on the stage, you stood on the 
stage in Saskatoon the other day. You stood on the stage in 
Saskatoon the other day and kept on insisting and saying to the 
farmers that were assembled there, I’ve got my money, like 
somehow or another you had ownership over it. Somehow or 
another you had ownership. I’ve got my money on the table. 
Well I will remind you that it doesn’t belong to you; it doesn’t 
belong to the official opposition; it’s the taxpayers of this 
province’s money and you most certainly don’t have it in your 
back pocket and it’s a good thing. It’s a good thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We believe, we believe that there has to be this 
long-term solution put in place. And what are you doing with 
regard to putting it in place? 
 
The Speaker: — I remind the member to direct his remarks 
through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the Minister of 
Agriculture had opportunity when he spoke on the floor of this 
legislature to put in place and outline for a moment to the 
farmers of this province what his thoughts were in terms of 
agriculture. 
 
And he got up and he gave a pretty decent speech, I think most 
people would say, about agriculture. But he missed one — he 
just kind of forgot, I guess — missed one little opportunity. I 
think what the farmers of Saskatchewan could have gained 
some comfort from was if you would have said, we’re looking 
at cost of production as an option. We don’t know about that 
one; we’re looking at it. 
 
We’re looking at a revenue insurance program, if you are, 
something of that nature to help. 
 
We’re looking at some top-ups in terms of NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account) or in terms of adjustments in the CFIP 
program to make it work for Saskatchewan because it clearly 
doesn’t right now. We’re looking at all of those kinds of things. 
 
But what did we get from the minister? Nothing . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Emergency aid and we support that call. We 
support that call but let’s not, let’s not get ourselves into this 
argument about this is going to solve it — this is going to solve 
it — because there’s no plan for a long-term safety net. And 
you know as well as I know that last year we had this exact 

same debate and we’re right back here again because of your 
inaction and your government’s inaction. 
 
Nothing in place for it at all. Nothing in place at all. And that’s 
why, Mr. Speaker, that’s why, Mr. Speaker, we are calling for 
this government to do something in addition to just calling for 
emergency aid because that won’t solve it. 
 
(1645) 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, we have said in the legislature here 
this afternoon that we are prepared to look at all of the options. 
We’re prepared to put forward three new additional options for 
your consideration and the farmers’ consideration of this 
province. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we are saying yes, we 
support the main motion by the minister. But in addition to that, 
we would want to amend the main motion by adding these 
following amendments to that motion; that the following 
amendments be added to the motion: 
 

That this Assembly calls upon the provincial government to 
fulfil its commitment to negotiate and implement a 
long-term agriculture strategy and a long-term farm safety 
net program in conjunction with the federal government. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The second one being: 
 

That this Assembly recognizes the absolute necessity for 
the federal government to live up to its obligations in 
addressing the area of international agriculture subsidy war 
and recognizes the severe negative impact that agriculture 
subsidies in other countries have had on the economy of 
Saskatchewan, both rural and urban. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — 
 

And that this Assembly be adjourned for a period of time to 
allow all MLAs to travel to Ottawa in an united action to 
deliver this motion to the federal government to once again 
draw attention to the ongoing crisis in agriculture. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I move that amendment to the main motion, 
seconded by my colleague, the member for Watrous. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s an honour 
today to join in this debate on agriculture. It’s very near and 
dear to my heart. 
 
It’s disappointing, listening to the debate today, when I see 
members from the opposite side of the House saying what are 
you going to do, pointing to us as the opposition. We have no 
power over the purse strings of the province. 
 
I’ll tell you the first thing that I did — the first thing that I did 
was defeated the Agriculture minister who was doing nothing to 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 37 

 

help agriculture in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — They say that we are always the ones saying 
that this province isn’t going anywhere and they’re always, you 
know, negative. But what have they done to give rural 
Saskatchewan something positive to move towards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Where is their vision? Where is there 
long-term vision and when is it going to come? It’s been 10 
years. 
 
We have to listen to our producers. They are giving us a lot of 
good ideas and we need to at least look at them. 
 
So they’re pulling away, both levels of government have pulled 
away. Both levels of the government are denying responsibility 
for an industry that they control and manipulate, and always 
have. 
 
They are . . . never address the difficulties. They denied them. 
They have denied them for too long. It is now in a crisis 
situation. Now they’re saying agriculture is in a crisis, it’s our 
number one industry; we don’t know what to do. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Again. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Again. We just simply don’t know what to 
do. Well nor do the producers any more. They’re in a state 
where they no longer know what they’re going to do. 
 
Here’s an article in the newspaper and it says — this is the 
esteemed minister that I defeated, Mr. Upshall — he said farm 
crisis, what farm crisis? 
 
It’s been denied too long and it’s been denied too long both 
provincially and federally so that now we’re in a state where 
these farmers need help, they need help today. And they need a 
vision and they need a vision today. They need a long-term plan 
and they need it today. 
 
We started off initially . . . I know a lot of people blamed our 
producers, and our producers have evolved. They’ve 
diversified; they’ve become more efficient; they’ve looked for 
different markets. They’ve expanded into livestock, both 
traditional and exotic. They’ve investigated different avenues of 
value-added processing and they’ve implemented as many 
methods as they could that was allowed within the present 
controls of our government. 
 
And they have survived a lot of years through this, but finally 
they can’t keep up any more. And they cannot compete with the 
global trade subsidies and they cannot single-handedly evolve 
an industry that was structured on government dependency. 
They can certainly not evolve their industry as fast as their 
government is backpedalling out of their own responsibilities 
for that industry. 
 
Ottawa still wants control but without any responsibility for that 
control. 

So what’s going to happen to Saskatchewan and to our own 
province? We have more front line workers in agriculture 
industry than any other province in Canada. We’re fools to 
think this crisis is going to go away and we’re fools to think that 
it’s not going to affect everybody in this province if we allow it 
to continue. 
 
We’re already closing schools; we’re already closing 
businesses; we’re closing small recreation facilities; we’re 
running out of dollars to give to social programs. And 
StatsCanada says that Saskatchewan has lost 13,200 jobs over 
the last year and even our Premier said this morning that most 
of those jobs are agriculture-related. 
 
These are our taxpayers and where did they go? Some, they 
stayed. I know my neighbour quit and stayed. A lot of them left. 
They’re leaving our province. And our whole population then 
just stagnates. 
 
So who is going to provide the tax dollars that’s going to 
sustain programs in years to come if we don’t sustain our own 
number one industry? 
 
We need to realize that we need a vision. And being a producer, 
I’ve waited for 10 years of this government for that vision. And 
I shouldn’t say that my husband and I sat back and waited for it, 
we diversified. And we have changed our agriculture operation 
a great deal. But we can’t keep up to what’s happening in the 
global marketplace. We cannot keep up to competing with the 
subsidies. 
 
We need to give back . . . another thing that we need to do is 
give back our number one industry its respect and its dignity. 
And our press is not necessarily going to help us with this. CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) was gracious enough to 
report that this year with the government’s support pledged at 
$2.6 billion, farmers should end up receiving more than 75 per 
cent of their income from the government. I don’t know where 
they got their numbers, but I do know the impression that they 
are going to make with our non-farming communities. 
 
Does this article create an understanding of how the 
government through intervention has created such as mess? 
And does this article state that the average farm income is 
projected to be $5,000? So even if the numbers were true and 
the government did provide 75 per cent of that income, that is 
only going to be $3,750 per farm family, which I would say 
most of those families have already paid back in taxes on their 
fuel bill alone. 
 
The article didn’t state the tax dollars that’s collected from our 
producers directly or from the industry as a whole. But the 
perception that that article that CBC published is going to be 
very negative and it’s going to have a huge impact on our 
farmers and our producers getting urban people to understand 
their plight. 
 
We need to let the Canadian people, we need to know 
Saskatchewan . . . or let Saskatchewan people know the whole 
picture so they have some understanding and are able to support 
. . . The levels of government need to look . . . both levels of 
government need to look at and to, to design a vision. And we 
need to design a long-term vision of hope, of sustainability, and 



38 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

of stability. We need to build on that vision with our own 
producers. We need to look at their ideas; we need to actually 
do analysis of their ideas and not just totally disregard them 
before we even know what it’s going to cost or if it’s 
sustainable. Our producers deserve that respect. 
 
And members opposite were looking across when the member 
from Kindersley was talking, and saying what are you doing? 
Well I can tell them what I’m doing. At least I’m meeting one 
on one with my producers and listening to what they have to 
say . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I’ve listened to your 
constituents as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — And we won’t debate what we get paid for. 
 
Our producers have given their time to their community, 
they’ve given their dollars to their communities, and they are 
the ones that have been fundamental in building Saskatchewan 
to where it is today. So now we need to give more support, we 
need to live up to our responsibility as government, and we 
need to keep our producers as productive members of society. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I second the amendments put forth by 
the member from Kindersley. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank you 
for allowing me to rise and enter into this emergency debate, 
calling on the federal government to provide $1 billion to 
Canadian farm families immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just an update in case my hon. colleagues have 
forgotten. I was born on a farm and I still have family that have 
farmed all their lives and continue to work in a farming 
community. 
 
And I also want to remind the members here, and I want to 
remind the people that are watching this debate, Mr. Speaker, 
that the Saskatchewan Liberal caucus has been at the forefront 
in bringing to the attention of the federal Liberal government 
the full extent of the plight facing Saskatchewan farm families. 
The caucus has been at the forefront in pushing for a delegation 
to go to Ottawa in 1999 to negotiate directly with the federal 
government for a $1 billion farm aid package. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Liberal caucus promised and 
delivered on its promise to farmers to reduce the tax on farm 
fuels through our coalition government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Liberal caucus promised and 
delivered on relief of the Education portion of property taxes 
for farmers through this coalition government. 
 
The Saskatchewan Liberal caucus, Mr. Speaker, promised and 
delivered to get farm voices heard at the World Trade 
Organization talks through the coalition government, Mr. 

Speaker. 
 
(1700) 
 
The Saskatchewan Liberal caucus has been ceaseless in trying 
to get results from the federal government. We’ve had repeated 
contacts with federal ministers Lyle Vanclief and Minister 
Ralph Goodale. The Saskatchewan Liberal Caucus has called 
on the federal government to make early cash advances 
available so farmers can get on with their spring seeding plans. 
 
Several years ago, Mr. Speaker, our caucus was the first to 
bring to the attention of this House and the federal government 
the issue of rising farm costs. We wrote farm input 
manufacturers, and we urged both federal and provincial 
ministers to look at this issue. Today everyone recognizes, 
everyone recognizes the wisdom of the position we took and 
have been looking for ways of reducing these costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Liberal caucus has done this 
and will do more with our coalition colleagues, because we do 
believe in the Saskatchewan farm family, in the small family 
operations. Mr. Speaker, in my constituency in Melville — a 
constituency that takes in some of the finest farms in 
Saskatchewan — people are hurting deeply, and they need help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was a proud a member of the Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police, I made a solemn vow to protect 
people, to protect them from harm, and to ensure that they had 
justice when they were wronged. Mr. Speaker, I may have 
turned in my RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) letters 
for a suit and tie, but that solemn vow I made still applies today, 
and my efforts on behalf of my constituents, all the constituents 
of this great province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As an MLA I have to protect the people who I represent and 
seek justice for them when they are wronged, and that’s because 
I believe in Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. I believe in the 
Saskatchewan farm family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe in the Saskatchewan farm family. The 
question is, however, do those members opposite believe in the 
Saskatchewan farm family? For example, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’ve heard some of the quotes from the hon. member from 
Kindersley who publicly stated, no point; it’s useless. But in the 
January 22 issue of the Davidson Leader a comment from the 
member from Arm River which was documented and reported, 
and I quote, “Nothing can be done for the farm community.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the hon. member from Arm River has given up on 
farmers who elected him to represent them. Mr. Speaker, he is 
not the only member, and you have already heard the comments 
that the member from Kindersley had publicly made, and the 
member from Elphinstone had alluded to. The hon. member 
from Kindersley may have given up on the farm family as well, 
Mr. Speaker, but the Liberal caucus and the Liberal coalition, 
the Liberal-NDP coalition, will not give up on the farm family. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — While I’m saddened, Mr. Speaker, that the 
members opposite have given up on our farmers, our real 
problem exists that the farm families face. They need help, Mr. 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 39 

 

Speaker, and it’s quite clear that the Saskatchewan treasury 
cannot compete with the forces of Europe and the United States 
all by itself. 
 
Our coalition government said it would put up its share to 
ensure that Saskatchewan farmers get a share of the federal 
emergency money. Unfortunately, the federal payment is too 
small and the share to Saskatchewan does not recognize the fact 
that our grains and oilseed sector has borne more than its fair 
share of the recent pain in this emergency situation. 
 
As a country we face an emergency on our farms. We need our 
federal government to work, not just for Saskatchewan farmers, 
but for all Canadian farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, families do not like to protest. Those people just 
feel they need to get some attention paid to the plight that they 
find themselves in, and nobody seems to be paying attention. 
The people in Ottawa do not seem to want to pay attention. 
 
Saskatchewan residents, all of Saskatchewan residents, want a 
strong Canada. They sincerely want their governments, at all 
levels, to respond to their critical needs like those faced by our 
farmers. 
 
The resolution before us today helps bring further attention to 
this serious cause. My coalition colleagues and I will continue 
to work and encourage the federal government to respond to 
their need, and by doing so, strengthen our province and our 
country as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while additional emergency assistance is badly 
needed in Saskatchewan, we must not forget the great strides 
our farm families and rural communities have made in the last 
30 years in the face of great obstacles. Without these 
achievements, problems would probably be a whole lot worse, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Bred-in-Saskatchewan, for example, canola provides a great 
deal of opportunities that took hold on our farms and in recent 
years overtook what was the king of the crops. Saskatchewan 
breeder Al Slinkard also introduced lentil varieties which 
encompassed 1.78 million crop acres in Saskatchewan in the 
year 2000. We’ve also made — and the Agriculture minister 
has alluded to the fact — the great strides in livestock industry, 
organic crops, horticultural, just to name a few. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, new opportunities present themselves 
with crops like chickpeas which promise an opening to huge 
markets in India and the Middle East. In 1997, there were less 
that 30,000 acres planted to chickpeas in Saskatchewan. This 
spring, it’s anticipated 1.2 million acres will be sown. By 2005, 
Garth Patterson of the Pulse Growers Association expects as 
many as 3.2 million acres of chickpeas will be grown in 
Saskatchewan, which will provide good returns for farm 
families. 
 
The coalition government, Mr. Speaker, has worked to help 
Saskatchewan farmers make good on our opportunities. It is my 
sincere hope that Minister Ralph Goodale and the federal 
government will make good on their suggestions that they will 
work toward such a goal as well. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this leads me to an important point. The members 
opposite want to help farm families, but they don’t believe in 
farm families. They say they want to help people in 
Saskatchewan, yet they talk like they don’t believe there’s any 
hope in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our farmers and our agrologists have been great 
innovators. They believe in the abilities of Saskatchewan 
people. They believed in themselves, the province, and above 
all, they believe in a brighter future for this great province of 
ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I became part of this coalition because I believe in 
Saskatchewan and I want Saskatchewan people and the 
members opposite to believe in this province as well. I’m not 
just here to serve my constituents, but the people in the 
members’ opposite constituencies as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m working to put forward liberal policy, like 
removing the farm fuel tax. But I’m also here to remind 
Saskatchewan people that the sooner all of us join together and 
remind ourselves that we can make this province better, then the 
sooner we will. I’ve heard all kinds of bad things, Mr. Speaker, 
being talked about here this afternoon. But we forget, like our 
grandparents before us, we can meet any challenge and build a 
greater province only if we believe we can. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party members should ask themselves when 
they are going to stop trash-talking Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
they tell Saskatchewan people that things can’t be done here. 
Only in Alberta they say. What a pity. 
 
Saskatchewan people are proud of their province and they’re 
tired of hearing the Saskatchewan Party drag our province 
down. When are the people in the Saskatchewan Party going to 
start becoming positive about Saskatchewan and believing in 
this great province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I see and listen to the doom and gloom . . . 
And then I see facts and figures that are presented here that says 
Saskatchewan is the centre of agricultural biotechnology in 
Canada. Expenditures on biotechnology infrastructure now total 
$700 million with annual expenditures of $68 million on 
research and development. The biotechnology sector now 
employs 1,240 workers, 496 scientists, technicians, 50 in sales 
and manufacturing. 
 
There are 30 agri-food biotechnology and related companies 
with approximately $130 million in sales in 1999. That’s up 490 
per cent, Mr. Speaker, in a very short period of time. 
 
Our farm equipment manufacturers — just listen to this — 
Saskatchewan short-line equipment manufacturers report sales 
of $584 million in 1999. Up $250 million since 1991. 
Employment in that sector doubled. It goes on. 
 
And we talk about the destruction of rural Saskatchewan. Let’s 
listen to this. A number of locations throughout the province 
have been actively pursuing strawboard plants and are at 
various stages of development. Investment in a strawboard plant 
has been approved for Kamsack project. 
 
The flax fibre-processing plant at Canora is operational and 



40 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

markets have been secured for all the flax fibre that can be 
produced. I don’t see that as a demise in those rural areas. 
Expansion plans are even being considered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The opportunities associated for those businesses and those 
lines, those kinds of ventures, are possible in that part of the 
country, Mr. Speaker. A new flax straw-processing plant, Alpha 
Fibre Inc., worth $14.5 million U.S. is locating in Weyburn. 
The plant will create 50 full-time jobs and a local market for 
tons of flax straw. This processing plant is scheduled to be up 
and running by the fall of this year. 
 
Let’s get into a little bit of the food end of it — the food 
processing. We’re talking about innovators. People who believe 
in the province are investing and are doing good things, are 
creating jobs. We’re talking about diversification. We’re talking 
about food processing. There were 279 food processors in 
Saskatchewan in 2000, in the year 2000. That’s almost double 
the 143 firms operating in 1991. Food processors — hey, get 
this — food processors now sell more than, more than 1.9 
billion, billion, Mr. Speaker, worth of products, which make up 
2.1 per cent of this province’s gross domestic products. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Saskatchewan’s food exports, Mr. 
Speaker, increased 90 per cent, 90 per cent between . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m saddened 
again that those people opposite do not like to hear good news 
for this province. They don’t want to boast about it. Well I’m 
prepared to boast about it and talk about all the good things. 
 
I have some more good news for you folks over there. 
Employment in this industry that I’m talking about, in the year 
2000, Mr. Speaker, totalled 7,500 — 7,500 full-time jobs and 
seasonal employees. And you know what the payroll, Mr. 
Speaker, $220 million. Rural-based companies, Mr. Speaker, 
account . . . rural-based companies — let me underline that — 
rural-based companies account for 53 per cent of the total 
number of Saskatchewan food processors. Over two-thirds, and 
that’s 68 per cent, are located outside of the cities of Saskatoon 
and Regina, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There have been some expansions in this particular industry as 
well, Mr. Speaker. Mitchell Gourmet Foods, for example, has 
expanded their plant, created an additional 160 jobs. Fletchers 
announced intentions to expand its facility in Yorkton and 
called on Saskatchewan hog producers to increase their 
production. The company will spend almost $6 million in that 
part of the country to improve its Harvest Meats hog-killing 
plant in the city of Yorkton. 
 
This is one that should be interesting. It will affect the 
agricultural community as well, Mr. Speaker. We should be 
boasting about these things. A $7 million pulse processing plant 
to open in Regina in the spring of 2001. Is that doom and 
gloom? I don’t think so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(1715) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — That particular plant, Mr. Speaker, will 
have the capacity to process 100,000 tons of peas, lentils, and 
other pulse crops each and every year. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we need to start boasting about all the good 
things in this province. We’ve got to stop saying that this 
province doesn’t have any options and opportunities for our 
young people or for people that may be interested in coming 
home to invest or reinvest. But they will be reluctant to if all 
they continue hearing is the doom and the gloom — this ain’t 
the place to be, this is a bad place to live in. 
 
I don’t think so. I know a lot of folks that love this province. A 
lot of people that fight very, very hard, speak very highly of this 
province, fight for everything that we . . . and have fought for 
things that we have in this province, and will continue to do so. 
And I think we should very, very proud of that and not beat the 
province down. 
 
I think we’re just . . . we’re probably the best province in this 
country right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — And you know why, you know why I 
believe that? Because the people out there know we believe in 
them as well, and they will continue to believe in this coalition 
government to do everything we can to make their lives 
tomorrow better than it was today. And that’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, I support the motion that’s put forward to address the 
needs, from the federal government to help our farming 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I rise in this 
important and significant debate, I want to say that I hope that 
all of us can set aside some of our partisan feelings to deal with 
an issue of critical importance to the founding industry of our 
province and the one that continues to be our cornerstone. 
 
And may I say that the most disappointing and upsetting part of 
my work as an MLA has been the number of farmers, especially 
young farmers, who I have to speak with who tell me the 
problems they are up against. These are hard-working, 
innovative people who have made the changes in their farms 
that they have been told they need to make in terms of crop 
diversification, in terms of livestock, in terms of specialty crops 
and specialty animals. And in spite of the changes they have 
made, in spite of the changes they have made, they continue to 
be up against enormous pressure. 
 
And it was upsetting for me to be able to give them so little 
assistance when they would come to me and tell me that their 
AIDA forms were long and complicated even with the 
assistance of a chartered accountant. They took months and 
months to get any sort of reply, oftentimes, most times they got 
nothing. Sometimes when they got something, they got a 
demand for repayment to the federal government after they got 
their cheque. 
 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 41 

 

So these are farmers who are among the most productive in the 
world. These are farmers who are not just sitting back expecting 
that the government and the taxpayers of this country will cover 
them regardless of the result. They are trying to make the 
changes they know they have to make to be modern, to be 
progressive. And yet in spite of the changes they are making in 
the operations of their farms, they still find that they can’t make 
it. 
 
Now possibly the situation is different in Melville where it 
would appear that our farm population is doing much better. 
But I regret to inform this House that in North Battleford I’m 
continually speaking with farmers who are under enormous 
pressure through no fault of their own, and it has been a source 
of personal frustration and disappointment to me that I have not 
been able to offer them more assistance than I have. 
 
Well will the CFIP program, will that be an improvement over 
AIDA? Will the money get out any quicker? Will the forms be 
any more comprehensible? We don’t know that. 
 
I am told that CFIP is not well designed for the grain producer. 
And of course we, of all the provinces in Canada, are the most 
dependent on the grain economy. And that is the reason that our 
producers are up against the most pressure, and I understand it 
when our Minister of Agriculture says that we in Saskatchewan 
are not at all sure that CFIP addresses the problems of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But let me say that I am embarrassed, as a Liberal and as a 
Canadian, when the federal Minister of Agriculture says that his 
squabble with our provincial government is grounds for 
withholding from Saskatchewan producers their share of a 
national program. I find this disgraceful and totally 
unacceptable and embarrassing to me. 
 
We are Canadians. Our producers have a right to share in any 
national program. And a squabble between various levels of 
government can surely not disentitle citizens of this country to 
share in a national program. And I can’t possibly think that a 
squabble between the federal government and the governments 
of, say, Ontario or Quebec would be used as grounds for 
disentitling the citizens of those provinces to their just rights as 
Canadians. 
 
So I call upon the federal government to say that regardless of 
what the provincial government decides — even if they do go 
back on their word as appears to be the case — regardless of the 
decision of the provincial government, the decision of the 
provincial government and a squabble with the provincial 
government is simply not a just excuse for denying the 
producers of Saskatchewan their rights as Canadians. 
 
I also, though, want to say in terms of our provincial 
government, that I listened very carefully to the Minister of 
Agriculture a few minutes ago. I wanted to hear: is he formally 
repudiating the commitment of his predecessor, Dwain 
Lingenfelter? Is he formally saying that the commitment of 
Dwain Lingenfelter on behalf of the province of Saskatchewan 
is now off? Is he formally saying that the Deputy Premier of the 
province, whatever he says, can simply be ignored and set aside 
and not followed through on? If so, what position does that 
leave the government and province of Saskatchewan if 

commitments entered into in good faith by the second-highest 
authority in the province can be freely jettisoned and ignored? 
 
I find that puzzling but I’m not totally opposed, if the Minister 
of Agriculture says we think there are better ways of helping 
our producers than entering CFIP. 
 
I don’t necessarily disagree with the Minister of Agriculture. 
But what I do say is the 75 million that was supposed to go 
from Saskatchewan into the CFIP program, will that be 
committed to the producers of the province regardless, if not in 
CFIP, in some other form? And again I listened very carefully 
to the Minister of Agriculture to see if he would make that 
commitment this afternoon. He did not. 
 
My position is that whether through CFIP or through some 
other mechanism, that is money which must be devoted to the 
farm crisis. And if the Government of Saskatchewan thinks 
there are better ways of assisting our producers in the present 
farm crisis than going into CFIP then, yes, let’s hear about 
them, let’s discuss them, let’s debate what is the best way to 
assist our producers so they can meet their obligations and so 
they will continue into our province’s second century as our 
province’s most important industry. 
 
What I am concerned about — and I very much, Mr. Speaker, 
hope I’m wrong — but what I’m concerned about is that not 
entering the CFIP program will be an excuse for not giving the 
75 million to our producers and instead using that money to 
shore up the government’s urban base of support. Now I hope 
I’m wrong on that. I hope I’m wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I don’t want to be right on that and I do not 
criticize the government if they’re not going to be in CFIP. But 
I do say let us hear a firm, loud, strong commitment that the 75 
million it would cost us to go into CFIP will go to farm aid and 
the farm crisis. 
 
It seems to me there are two reasons for that. The first is the 
obvious need, at least in those communities other than Melville. 
But the second is that while we all acknowledge that 
Saskatchewan with its small tax base and its large number of 
arable acres, its large number of farmers comparatively, and its 
large grain production cannot answer the farm crisis on its own, 
we have to be prepared to do whatever is within our power to 
have the moral right to demand that the federal government — 
the government in Ottawa — stand behind our producers. 
 
We do not have the moral right to go to Ottawa to demand that 
they assist our farmers while we ourselves are saying we will do 
nothing. So we have to do what is within the possibility of our 
provincial structure, our provincial budget, to assist our farmers, 
to assist our cornerstone industry. And having made that 
commitment, then we have a right to demand that the federal 
government treat our farmers with respect and allow them to 
participate fully in all programs designed to assist Canadian 
producers, no matter where they live. 
 
So what I am saying, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, is that a 
squabble between two levels of government cannot be used as 
an excuse by either Ottawa or Regina to deny our producers 



42 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

their just desserts. 
 
Finally, in regards to the amendment introduced by the member 
for Kindersley, I wish to say that I think that if this is going to 
be successful, the members should be prepared to use their own 
money or to go on . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — My concern is that if we ask for a special 
payment to go to Ottawa, that our taxpayers will consider this 
as little more than a junket. And I give my commitment that I 
think this is important enough that I am prepared to go to 
Ottawa on my expense as part of the delegation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And hopefully we can stand shoulder to 
shoulder, not as New Democrats and Saskatchewan Party and 
Liberals, but as citizens of this province who care about this 
province and its first industry. 
 
And on that basis, Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to be part of that 
delegation to Ottawa, and I will be voting in support of both the 
motion and the amendments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
a member of the Assembly who represents a rural riding, as a 
member of the Assembly who still has farmland personally, and 
as a member of the Assembly whose family is very involved in 
farming, it gives me a great deal of pleasure, I should say, to 
enter into this debate. 
 
I do need to say though that — acknowledging both sides of the 
House, the concerns that have been raised on both sides — my 
family’s actually involved in the sector of farming that is doing 
very well right now. That’s the cattle industry. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, I do acknowledge that many 
farmers that are engaged in cereal crop production are hurting 
very badly right now, and that’s why we put forth the motion 
that we have here today. And that is that the Assembly calls on 
the federal government to provide $1 billion to Canadian farm 
families immediately. 
 
There’s much criticism, Mr. Speaker, from across the House 
about what this province, this government, is not doing for 
farmers and the fact that we don’t have any ideas for the 
farming community. 
 
(1730) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, here’s a little bit of what Saskatchewan and 
this government is doing. We allocate, Mr. Speaker, more of 
our fiscal capacity on a per capita basis than any other 
provincial government or the federal government. We provide 
3.3 times as much as the federal government does on a per 
capita basis, Mr. Speaker. We provide 3.2 times as much as the 
average of all other provinces in Canada, Mr. Speaker. And we 
provide nearly twice as much as the next highest province — 
that being Prince Edward Island, Mr. Speaker — on a per capita 

basis. 
 
We have made the commitment, Mr. Speaker, that we’ll 
provide funds to assure that farmers get access to 
Saskatchewan’s share of the $500 million that was recently 
announced by the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are helping farm families to cope with high 
input costs through a number of programs. The Farm Land 
Education Tax Rebate Program will rebate, Mr. Speaker, $25 
million to farmers for education tax paid in the years 2000 and 
2001. 
 
There is now no provincial sales tax on farm fuel. The cap on 
the gas tax rebate was removed in 2000. The provision was 
made to exempt gas used on a farm at the bulk station starting 
in 2001, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And there will no longer be provincial sales tax charged on 
major agricultural inputs. This will, Mr. Speaker, reduce 
fertilizer, pesticide, and seed costs by nearly $80 million. 
 
Exemption on diesel fuel and gasoline are worth over $120 
million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The provincial sales tax rebated on building materials used for 
livestock and horticultural facilities is worth $2 million 
annually, Mr. Speaker. So we’re doing what we can here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Crop insurance, Mr. Speaker, has been improved for the year 
2001. Premium rates will be reduced, Mr. Speaker, by 12 per 
cent in the year 2001, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are providing funding for research, technical expertise, and 
work in partnership with industry to capture new opportunities. 
 
Farmers now grow, Mr. Speaker, 50 different crops, providing 
diversification opportunities when market prices warrant. There 
is now, Mr. Speaker, here in Saskatchewan, believe it or not, 
2.3 million acres of peas produced in this past year — 2000 — 
which compares to 350,000 acres back in 1992. 
 
There is 1.8 million acres of lentils produced . . . that were 
produced, I should say, in 2000 compared to 475,000 acres back 
in 1992. And there are now in this past year — 2000 — 375,000 
acres of mustard produced in the year 2000 compared to 
215,000 back in 1992. 
 
In total, Mr. Speaker, we have 128 special crop processors who 
employ over 1,000 employees with a payroll of $21 million 
annually. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan helps also in the industry of value 
added through a number of programs. The 
Canada/Saskatchewan Agricultural Food Innovation Fund has 
allocated all of its mandated $91 million to eight sectors since 
its establishment in 1995. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Crown Investments Corporation — the 
portfolio that I am now responsible for — projects that it will 
invest $170 million over the next five years in value added and 
processing sectors for agricultural and related sectors. 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 43 

 

And the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation — another 
corporation that I currently find myself responsible for — 
estimates that approximately 20 to . . . 25 to 30 per cent of their 
investment over the next five years will be in the area of food or 
crop processing and meat production or processing sectors. Mr. 
Speaker, this is significant. 
 
The Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund anticipates that 
10 to 15 per cent of its future investments will be in agriculture 
and food production or processing opportunities. 
 
The Agri-Food Equity Fund is mandated to invest up to $35 
million in new or expanding Saskatchewan agri-value 
businesses. 
 
Agricultural Development Fund provides approximately $18 
million in the annual funding to research and development 
projects by the Saskatchewan agricultural . . . Agriculture and 
Food. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, technology adoption and demonstration 
programs — Saskatchewan Ag and Food, Mr. Speaker, 
provides 3.5 million annually for adoption of technologies in 
areas that are critical to crop and livestock production and 
processing. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Beef Development Fund 
provides 300,000 to $400,00 in annual funding to support the 
development and diversification of the Saskatchewan beef 
industry. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, and very importantly, new generation 
co-operative assistance programs will provide up to half a 
million dollars a year to assist the development of value-added 
new generation co-operatives. 
 
My point, Mr. Speaker, in all of this is that Saskatchewan is and 
has been at the plate with its commitment by way of new ideas 
and financial assistance, Mr. Speaker, and it’s now time for the 
federal government to step up to the plate to show its 
commitment to agriculture in Saskatchewan as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I call on the federal government to 
immediately come to the table, come to the plate if you will, 
with $1 billion in financial assistance for Canadian farm 
families as soon as is absolutely possible. And we call on that 
assistance to be immediate. And I encourage all members of the 
Assembly to strongly support that motion. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find it somewhat 
confusing. We have the Minister of Agriculture bringing an 
emergency motion into the House today to debate the crisis in 
agriculture. And then we have the member from Melville stand 
up and give us a good news story in Melville — you would 
think that the federal Minister of Environment wrote a speech 
for him — that everything in Saskatchewan is great. And then 
we have the member from Meadow Lake stand up and say that 
agriculture is doing quite fine in Meadow Lake. 
 
I would like to remind that member that if we should happen to 

get foot and mouth disease in this province, our livestock 
producers are going to have some huge and serious problems. 
Dr. Otto Radostits of the College of Veterinary Medicine was 
recently on the radio just the other morning saying that if foot 
and mouth happens to hit in Canada, it could be a $20 billion 
problem. You think we’ve got problems now? You ain’t seen 
nothing yet. 
 
So I would suggest that the Minister of Agriculture talk to his 
two members who can legitimately claim that they represent 
rural Saskatchewan. And I see where they’re coming from 
because, certainly, things aren’t that rosy. As many members on 
this side of the House and members on that side of the House 
have said, that agriculture is in a crisis. That’s why we’re here 
past the hour debating this issue today. 
 
And nothing really has changed since . . . I can recall, shortly 
after the ’99 election, soon as the House was called into session 
in December of ’99, we sat here till 10:30, 11 o’clock at night 
listening to the farm organizations telling us about the crisis in 
agriculture. And here we are again. Here it is, March of 2001, 
and we’re right back right where we started from. 
 
At that time, Mr. Speaker, we in the Saskatchewan Party, the 
farmers, the farm organizations told this government that if they 
didn’t get to work on solving the problems in agriculture, 
developing a long-term vision, developing a long-term safety 
net which is part of a strategy, that we’ll be right back . . . 
nothing will have changed. We won’t have solved the problems. 
And their predictions were exactly dead on the money. 
 
And it’s quite evident today that this government has no plan 
for agriculture. They don’t have a long-term vision. They don’t 
have an idea, any kind of an idea for a long-term safety net 
program, and they refuse to listen to the folks that have some 
ideas, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the sad thing about this whole situation, Mr. Speaker, is 
that they are playing with the lives of our farm families. Our 
farm families are telling us we need to know where we fit in the 
picture. What is the long-term plan? Do we have a future in 
agriculture? Does the family farm have a future in agriculture? 
 
What will the family farm in the future look like? Will it be the 
husband and wife and the family working the farm or will it be 
a combination of father and sons, brothers, neighbours getting 
together, forming small corporations, and farming the land. 
That probably . . . all of those things are probably the vision of 
the family farm, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But they want to know where they fit into that puzzle. They’re 
right now . . . there’s many farm families are cashing in the few 
RRSPs (Registered Retirement Savings Plan) that they have — 
if they do have some — to try and hang on but they’re getting 
weary. They’re tired of hanging on. In fact some of our farm 
families are giving up and saying, I’ve just had it. This crisis 
has just gone on far too long. 
 
We’ve seen crises in the past and we . . . and they’ve hung on 
and saw their way through it because they knew there was a 
light at the end of the tunnel. Right now many farm families 
don’t see a light at the end of the tunnel, Mr. Speaker. 
 



44 Saskatchewan Hansard March 21, 2001 

 

As I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, we need those plans. We need 
some vision, we need some stability, and this government had a 
chance to get that process started. They had . . . they called the 
farm organizations and we in the opposition together last year 
to go down to Ottawa and lobby for some short-term money. 
And so the trek to Ottawa took place and as it turned out there 
was a bit of money late in the year. 
 
As one of my producers said to me, they threw us a few crumbs 
in the hope that we’d go out and seed a crop. And we picked up 
the crumbs and we did that. But that’s all that was 
accomplished. 
 
The former minister of Agriculture in this government . . . they 
had an opportunity, they had the farm groups together, they 
could have started developing a long-term strategy for 
agriculture. When members of that farm coalition asked to do 
that very thing, they were told no. The only reason we brought 
you together here is to go down to Ottawa and lobby, Mr. 
Speaker. And so, therefore, there was a lost opportunity. 
 
So finally what happened here in September of 2000, right in 
the middle of harvest, the Minister of Agriculture brings ACRE 
(Action Committee on the Rural Economy) together. Isn’t that a 
coincidence? In September, in harvest time, that’s when he 
finally gets around to working on the problem. Not unlike 
having an election in 1999, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So now we’re faced with the situation, Mr. Speaker, where the 
federal government has said here’s $500 million. Provinces, if 
you want a piece of the action you’ve got to join . . . you’ve got 
to join this program that the feds designed, called CFIP, which 
had no input from this government, from Saskatchewan. It’s the 
brother of AIDA. If AIDA didn’t work, this program isn’t going 
to work. 
 
But we on this side of the House feel that there’s $190 million 
that can be made available to our farmers. So if we’ve got a gun 
to our head maybe that’s the only choice we have. But if we had 
a plan, a plan that we developed here in Saskatchewan, a plan 
that worked for western farmers, we could say to the federal 
government, CFIP doesn’t fit here but here’s something that 
will work. If you don’t have an alternative then what are your 
choices, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government certainly has a 
responsibility in this farm crisis. There’s no doubt about it. You 
won’t get an argument from this side of the House that the 
federal government has a huge responsibility in this trade war. 
 
I heard it recently described that the producers of western 
Canada, the grain and oilseed producers are the cannon fodder 
in a trade subsidy war; and I think that person, a prof from the 
College of Agriculture in Saskatoon, made that statement 
recently at a farm meeting and I think he hit the nail right on the 
head. 
 
We look at history, Mr. Speaker, recent history, we’ll see that in 
the early ’70s, the federal Liberal government changed the 
Crow rate. There was certainly need for that change, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But at that time, Mr. Speaker, there was two schools of thought. 

One school of thought said, okay if we’re making changes to 
freight subsidies and those sorts of things, maybe we should 
look at paying the producers and not the railroads. But what did 
we hear from the then government of Saskatchewan, the NDP 
government of Saskatchewan? No way, don’t you dare give that 
money to the producers; you better give it to the railways. 
 
Then in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker, the Liberal government . . . or 
there was a change I should say, I believe it was the Liberal 
government, although I stand to be corrected, there was a 
change to the grain transportation. There was a proposal put on 
the table, memory serves me correctly I believe that it was the 
PC government, Charlie Mayer said that, look if we’re going to 
change this and make a further change, I’ve got $7 billion for 
western agriculture — $7 billion. 
 
Now we’re quibbling about an additional 500 million but there 
was $7 billion on the table for western agriculture at that time. 
And what did we hear from members opposite and their 
supporters? No way, keep continuing paying the railroads. Well 
now, Mr. Speaker, we are paying the price for those 
short-sighted views. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — The federal government pulled the subsidy which 
— to rail transportation — which was between 5 and $600 
million annually, to the western grain transportation system and 
now we have nothing. And that’s part of the problem that we’re 
seeing today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite have asked what is our plan. 
And the member from Kindersley this afternoon outlined part of 
our plan, Mr. Speaker, and so therefore I’m not going to go into 
that area. I think we’ve got some things on the table that we 
could talk about, Mr. Speaker, and I think we better get to work 
on those things. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you might ask . . . people in urban 
Saskatchewan might ask why should we really be so concerned 
about this whole issue and this whole crisis? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, on every occasion that I get I like to go into 
the retailers in my constituency and talk to them about how 
their business is, how the sales are, are sales up this year over 
last year — those sorts of things. Every one of those retailers in 
my constituency will say to me at some time during the course 
of the conversation, they’ll ask me the question: when are you 
going to get some money for our farmers so that they can come 
into my store and buy something? 
 
And that sentiment is not only in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. If you take some time and go and talk to some of the 
small retailers in the larger centres in Regina, Saskatoon, Moose 
Jaw, Prince Albert, and those centres, they’ll tell you the same 
thing. I recall a recent conversation with the owners of a paint 
and wallpaper store. Now you would think how would a store 
like that be affected by the crisis in agriculture. And they 
assured me, they said they could see by their sales and the 
volume of business that they do, they know exactly the state of 
the rural economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I don’t think the members opposite should delude 



March 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 45 

 

themselves in thinking that this agriculture crisis won’t impact 
on the cities because it’s already happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — I’d like to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the former 
premier and members opposite like to stand up in this House 
and brag and crow about the rate of growth that happened in 
this province in the middle ’90s. Saskatchewan experienced 
some record economic growth. 
 
And there is a reason for that, Mr. Speaker. Part of the reason, I 
think a large part of that reason is that if you look at what was 
happening in agriculture, agriculture was doing fairly well at 
that time. Canola prices were up around 8, $9 a bushel, lentil 
prices were 20 cents a pound, wheat prices were fairly strong, 
and the impact was immediate and direct on the whole economy 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And in fact today the Premier said that one of the reasons why 
the Saskatchewan economy isn’t performing the way it should, 
is because of the crisis in agriculture, Mr. Speaker. So it is 
important to every citizen living in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion, I would call upon all members 
of this Legislative Assembly to quit playing political games 
with people’s lives and . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — And pull together, Mr. Speaker, and find a 
solution that will work to solve this crisis. And I think part of 
the solution to at least address the short term is to get on board, 
for all of us to get on a plane, go down to Ottawa, and stand at 
Mr. Chrétien’s door and say; look, we’ve got a problem here, 
we’re not leaving until you do something about it. And let’s 
then see how arrogant Mr. Chrétien’s going to be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Can you imagine if we extend that invitation to Manitoba and 
Manitoba comes on board and then if Manitoba comes on 
board, maybe Alberta will come on board and then as someone 
mentioned, maybe Ontario will come on board. Then we’ve got 
a movement, Mr. Speaker. We could have 200 and 300 elected 
members on Mr. Chrétien’s door saying; we’ve got a crisis in 
agriculture and you’ve got to do something about it, we’ll do 
our part but you’ve got to do your part, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say to members opposite, get on the plane and let’s get 
down there and get the job done. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 5:51 p.m. until 5:53 p.m. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken McMorris D’Autremont 

Bjornerud Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert Hillson 
 

Nays — 30 
 
Calvert Trew Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Wartman Thomson Belanger 
McCall Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 
Prebble Jones Higgins 
Harper Lorjé Osika 
Kasperski Yates Addley 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — By leave of the Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move that . . . and it would be seconded by the 
member from Cannington: 
 

That the Speaker, on behalf of the Legislative Assembly 
transmit copies and verbatim transcripts of the rule 46 
motion and debate with respect to the farm income security 
crisis now facing Canadian farmers, to the Prime Minister 
of Canada, the federal Minister of Agriculture, the federal 
Minister responsible for the Canadian Wheat Board, and all 
opposition party leaders. 
 

I so move. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 6:01 p.m. 
 
 



 

 

 


