















































Hansard: April 30, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 783 
 April 30, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition regarding two of the government’s Crown 
corporations — SaskPower and SaskEnergy. Both recently 
announced significant rate increases for residential and business 
customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are primarily from the riding of 
Rosetown-Biggar. I see Biggar, Kelfield, and Perdue. And I’m 
pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I too rise on behalf of citizens 
concerned about the high cost of energy. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use 
a portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are of course from my 
community of Melfort, but also from Saskatoon, St. Brieux, and 
Codette, and Weldon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, to present a petition as 
well, in reference to hospital care in this province. And reading 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users for our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba and beyond. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Redvers, Carievale, Storthoaks, and Fairlight. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
regards to comprehensive tobacco control legislation from 
citizens concerned about the use of tobacco and the problems 
that that causes for many, particularly children and adolescents. 
The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places, and to reduce youth access to tobacco 
products. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise 
again on behalf of people from Swift Current and area 
concerned about the state of the hospital in Swift Current. And 
the prayer of this petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the city of 
Swift Current, from Waldeck, from Ponteix, and from McCord, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of citizens from this province. The petition is 
regarding the Redvers Health Centre. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at a 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our health district, 
southeast Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba and 
beyond. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good people in the Redvers area, 
Wauchope, and Bellegarde. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise with a petition in support of 
comprehensive tobacco control legislation. The prayer of the 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places, and to reduce youth access to tobacco 
products. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This is signed by citizens throughout Regina. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition dealing with the Redvers Health Care Centre. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour care, emergency, and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba and beyond. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Redvers, 
Wauchope, and Antler areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition to stop the conversion of Highway 396 from 
pavement to gravel. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Maymont and Richard. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here of citizens 
concerned and very worried about rate increases from 
SaskEnergy, SaskPower. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

It is signed by the good citizens from Holdfast, Turtleford, 
Assiniboia, Saskatoon, Debden, Chamberlain, Regina, Moose 
Jaw, and Holdfast. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise too today to 
present a petition on behalf of concerned constituents. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
Signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Wynyard, Dafoe, and Jansen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding citizens 
displeased with the energy rate rebate program. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more sustainable energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood and Medstead. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition where 
people from the province are concerned about the Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that, at very least, current 
levels of services and care be maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed from folks from Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, again I rise with a petition 
to stop further cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signators on this are from Assiniboia, 
Rockglen, Lafleche, St. Victor, Limerick, and Crane Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To ensure the Redvers Health Centre be maintained at its 
current level of service; 
 
To remove government funding of abortions; 
 
To not implement centralization of ambulance services; 
 
To consider Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
To ensure current levels of services at Pioneer Lodge in 
Assiniboia; 
 
To provide a more substantial energy rebate to consumers; 
and 
 
To ensure the Hafford Hospital remains open. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, you 
may have noticed that in the Speaker’s gallery there are a group 
of 18 teachers who are now visiting the legislature. These are 
social science teachers who are, for the most part, who are 
engaged in the third social science teachers’ institute here at the 
legislature. They are accompanied by personnel from the 
Department of Education, plus two teachers who are on the 
steering committee. 
 
They came to the legislature Saturday and have been working 
through the weekend and will be working until May . . . 
Wednesday, this May 2, I believe that becomes. And they will 
be meeting with the House leaders, with ministers, with deputy 
ministers, with Clerks. They’ve met with the Lieutenant 
Governor, with the members of the media, and other members 
of caucus staff. 
 
They have a very packed agenda. They are experiencing 
first-hand how our parliamentary system in Saskatchewan 
works. As a result of this, they will be completing an 
assignment to develop units of study and lesson plans. Sask Ed 
will be posting these lesson plans on their Web site so that these 
resources will be available to all teachers in the province. That 
way there will be a benefit, not only to their colleagues, but also 
to the students across Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like all the members to give a warm welcome to these 
teachers at the institute. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I’d like to, through you, ask the members of the legislature 
to welcome today 23 students from Sacred Heart Community 
School in the west gallery, accompanied by their teacher Carey 
Dziaduck and chaperone Donella Harvey. 
 
And I just want to say that I’ve been to this school many times, 
Mr. Speaker — it’s a great school, wonderful artwork all over 
the hallways — and that they have one of the best playgrounds 
in town. 
 
So if the members would join me in welcoming these young 
people here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Debbie Saum, executive assistant 
to the deputy minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs, and program coordinator for the royal visit. And she is 
joined today with her mother, Kathleen Johnson, and I’m sure 
that Kathleen is here to, along with the minister, to congratulate 
and commend Debbie for the excellent work that she and all the 
staff involved with the royal visit did. 
 
So I would ask members to please welcome Debbie and 
Kathleen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Gull Lake Hockey Team Wins Provincial Title 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize an outstanding young hockey team, the Gull 
Lake Pee Wee Greyhounds. Their road to success started back 
in November when they began play and ended on March 30 this 
past year with a provincial banner. 
 
Now this team played a total of 62 hockey games with a record 
of 51 wins, 7 losses, and 4 ties. They won four of six 
tournaments that they played throughout the province and they 
ended up with three championships. They were the Whitemud 
League Champions, they were the Swift Current House League 
Champions, and on March 30 they won the Provincial C 
Championship. 
 
So I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate each of 
the team members on their accomplishments. Winning three 
championships is a result of hard work, dedication to the game 
and to the other team members, and of course requires the 
support of family and fans alike. 
 
The thrill of winning a provincial championship I’m sure will 
last a lifetime. And I would also like to congratulate the team 
manager, Mr. Terry Bailey, and the coaches, Mr. George 
Harvey and Mr. Tim Robertson, whose direction and 
encouragement facilitated this very successful and memorable 
season for the Pee Wee Greyhounds. 
 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 

 
Thank You to All Involved with Royal Visit 

 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The entire province 
was thrilled by the visit of His Royal Highness the Prince of 
Wales. Now that the prince is safely away from our 
responsibility, and now that we can say with assurance that his 
visit was a great success, I want, on behalf of all members of 
the Assembly, to congratulate and thank the many excellent 
civil servants, community organizations, businesses, and others 
who worked so hard to make this a memorable visit. 
 
First, the Provincial Secretary and her highly efficient staff, 
including Deputy Minister Brent Cotter; visit coordinator 
Michael Jackson and the many protocol staff; the 
Lieutenant-Governor’s staff; SPMC; the Legislative Building 
staff; and the entire anniversaries secretariat. Thanks to them, 
the Prince — and we — were where we were supposed to be on 
time. 
 
Thanks to the RCMP security coordinator, Corporal Dale 
Schroh, to the Regina Inn and staff, to Canadian Heritage, and 
the Prince’s personal staff. 
 
And in particular, thanks to all our community event partners: 
the city of Regina, Canada Youth Business Federation, Scott 
Collegiate, Chili for Children, 15 Wing Moose Jaw, the town of 
Assiniboia, Prairie Rubber Plant of Assiniboia, Saskatoon 
Community Services Village, Meewasin Valley Authority, and 
Wanuskewin Heritage Park. 
 
This was truly a weekend to remember, and all these 
organizations helped make it that way. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canadian Forces Snowbirds Show 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday last I had 
the distinct opportunity to attend the 2001 acceptance show by 
the Canadian Forces Snowbirds aerobatic team. This aerobatic 
display was performed before hundreds of family and friends 
and dignitaries. But the real reason for the demonstration, Mr. 
Speaker, was to seek approval from Department of National 
Defence officials, the Federal Aviation Administration, and 
ministry of Transport. 
 
These officials view the display and give their stamp of 
approval for the 2001 air show season. The show was 
performed outstanding and was approved by Brigadier General 
Findlay from 1 Canadian Air Division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Snowbirds are a national institution — dare I 
say a national icon. They fly the Tutor aircraft in the colours of 
the Canadian flag. The team represents the vibrant spirit of this 
nation thrilling audiences across Canada and the United States. 
 
While not a combat unit, the Snowbirds exhibit the skills and 
courage that Canada’s combat forces count on to contribute to 
world peace and security. The Snowbirds are also a visible 

example of the high degree of dedication, professionalism, and 
teamwork found throughout the air force and the Canadian 
Forces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Snowbirds are ambassadors not only to the 
military, but to Canada and especially the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate the Snowbirds 
on their outstanding achievements and wish them a safe and 
successful air show season on behalf of everyone in this 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Science Fair 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to speak today 
about some very exciting youth from my constituency. 
 
Three students from the Jonas Samson Junior High in Meadow 
Lake will be showing their science projects at the National 
Science Fair in Kingston, Ontario from May 12 to 20. 
 
A total of 12 regional fairs were held across the province from 
March 16 to April 7. In total 123 schools and approximately 
1,570 students participated in local and regional science fair 
programs this year. 
 
Out of all of these students Kaitlin Harman and Amanda 
Kunkel won first place, and Justin Groenewoud won second 
place at the Northwest Science Fair on March 21. These 
placings qualified the three students for the national final. 
 
I’d like to wish these students the best of luck in the national 
fair, as I know they will represent the spirit of Saskatchewan. 
 
Also, I’d like to congratulate all the participants, teachers, and 
coordinators who were involved in a local or regional science 
fair. Your commitment to education and the development of 
youth is very much appreciated. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hanley-Dundurn Community Consultative Group 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today in the House to talk 
about a group of men and women who have volunteered their 
time to form a group which consults with the local RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) members relation security 
issues. 
 
The Hanley-Dundurn Community Consultative Group is 
chaired by Cindy Hoffman and has been up and running for 
several years now. They hold meetings once a month and the 
group gets together with the purpose of talking with the local 
RCMP members who are based in Hanley. 
 
These meetings revolve around community input into the 
policing process as well as the update by RCMP members in 
relation to security issues for the town of Hanley and Dundurn, 
surrounding areas, as well as security concerns in regards to 
Highway 11. 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

 

These dedicated people give all communities in Saskatchewan a 
shining example of how they can work together with local 
police officials to ensure that all concerns of a security and 
safety nature are met. 
 
I’m proud to say that my office has attended two of the 
meetings this past winter. I’m very pleased with the results of 
these meetings. It shows that these folks in the Hanley-Dundurn 
area are very focused on the important issues regarding policing 
and the degree of co-operation and assistance between the 
members and the RCMP staff which are three presently in the 
Hanley detachment. 
 
They have indicated that there was once five members there but 
due to several factors they were cut back to three. They would 
simply like to develop a strategy which would include the 
additional two members being returned to their area. I would 
definitely agree with that assessment and would like to 
congratulate the members of this group and the RCMP for all 
the work they’ve done in keeping the communities of Hanley 
and Dundurn safe with the resources they have available to 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

90th Anniversary of Saskatoon YWCA 
 

Ms. Junor: — Among the many stops of the Prince of Wales 
during his Saskatchewan tour was a brief stop at the Saskatoon 
YWCA as part of his visit to the Saskatoon Community 
Services Village. At the Y, Prince Charles unveiled a plaque to 
open the reconstructed YWCA historic arches which, in turn, 
were restored to commemorate the Saskatoon YWCA’s 90th 
anniversary of outstanding service to women and to the 
community of Saskatoon. 
 
It is fitting, Mr. Speaker, that this anniversary be marked by 
such an historic occasion with such a distinguished visitor, for 
the YWCA has been an integral part of the life of our city since 
its beginning 90 years ago. Ours and other cities are better off 
because of the Y’s genteel and civilizing presence. As Sue 
Williams, Chair of the 90th anniversary committee said, the 
YWCA has evolved over the last 90 years to meet the changing 
needs of Saskatchewan women. 
 
It contains within its walls and in its records, the social history 
of our province. It began as a respectable residence for women 
coming to Saskatoon; expanded to offer programs in sewing 
and dancing in the 1950s. Then as society became more 
complex and more challenging, it evolved into providing both 
daycare and crisis sheltering to meet the changing needs of 
women. 
 
To this new role, Mr. Speaker, the official ceremony last 
Wednesday also marked the naming of Margaret’s Place, the 
YWCA’s new transitional shelter for teenage mothers and their 
children. 
 
I congratulate the Saskatoon YWCA for its first 90 years of 
meeting the needs of Saskatoon women. And I am confident 
that it will adapt, however it is necessary, to continue serving 
over the next 90 years. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Young Lady Chosen to Tour with Prairie Region 
Cadet Honour Band 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to recognize 
a young lady chosen to tour with the Cadet Honour Band. Elisa 
Sargent, daughter of Bill and Karen Sargent of Borden, was 
chosen to tour and perform with the Prairie Region Cadet 
Honour Band 2001. 
 
The tour took place April 6 to 22. Over 90 air, army, and sea 
cadets from the three prairie provinces and northwest Ontario 
gathered at Shilo, Manitoba for a week of training, April 6 to 
13. The cadets then performed in Thunder Bay, Winnipeg, 
Regina, Calgary, and Edmonton on April 21. 
 
The mission of the tour was to train and develop senior cadet 
musicians’ musical training and assist cadets with leadership 
roles within their cadet units. The concerts provided high 
quality entertainment and developed the cadet musicians’ 
experience in larger concert presentations. It also presented 
highly visible . . . high visibility of the music program within 
the Canadian cadet organizations. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Elisa Sargent being selected to 
tour and perform with the Prairie Region Cadet Honour Band 
2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week we saw how the NDP’s (New 
Democratic Party) little venture into trying to sell people’s 
health care information failed. It cost taxpayers about $2 
million, but that pales in comparison to the $11 million in losses 
racked up by the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) new 
Information Services Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ISC (Information Services Corporation) was 
originally set up to automate the Land Titles Office. Well the 
Land Titles Office still isn’t automated, and Saskatchewan 
taxpayers have been relieved of about $11 million by this 
Crown corporation. And ISC has lost these $11 million, Mr. 
Speaker, which begs this question to the Minister of CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation): could he explain why the 
government lost $11 million on ISC? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, let me thank the member first for his courtesy this 
morning and to remind him that, in fact, cases that the impact 
on the General Revenue Fund is nil by . . . as a result of the 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

things that have taken place here. The big issue here . . . there 
are two very big parts of this, of this response, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The first is that by regulation the land corporation is required to 
transfer to the General Revenue Fund $8 million each year. It 
has done that. That $8 million is part of the $10.9 million the 
member refers to. 
 
The second component of the response, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
transfer from SPMC (Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation) to the land corporation of the geomatics division, 
of the geomatics asset required a writedown of $5 million. This 
is required by the Provincial Auditor, and indeed by external 
auditors, Ernst & Young. And it is not a loss but it is a 
recognition that once the asset was transferred, in fact, was not 
worth as much as it was reported on the books of SPMC. 
 
So you take those two . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The minister’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Interesting words, but 
the minister seems to be quibbling with exactly how much 
money the government lost in this venture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a lot of people are wondering exactly what ISC is 
up to. It was set up to automate the Land Titles system, 
however it now seems they’re going way beyond their original 
mandate. In fact, an ad in Saturday’s newspaper said, and I 
quote: 
 

ISC will be a leader in creating the environment for 
electronic living. 

 
Mr. Speaker, ISC hasn’t even fulfilled its original mandate to 
automate Land Titles. But they decided to risk millions of 
taxpayer dollars trying to break into the high risk, Internet 
electronic industry, apparently, where investors, thousands of 
investors, have literally lost their shirt in the last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why has ISC gone beyond its 
original mandate? Why is it losing millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars trying to break in to risky Internet electronic industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well I know I was going to give a 
very long answer to the last question, but the fact of the matter 
is that, in fact in terms of land titles registration, the land 
corporation has made a profit of $9.2 million. So in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, on the main element of business of ISC, the land 
corporation is making a profit and is doing what is expected to 
do. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in consultations with the community, with the 
real estate industry, with lawyers and others, the business 
community, during the process of this development of the land 
corporation, it was recognized that this corporation should do 
much more than just deal with registration, transfer of titles to 
land. 
 

As a result of that, Mr. Speaker, the investment in that 
corporation increased — increased to the point today, Mr. 
Speaker, where this will be a leading-edge computer high-tech 
company in this province providing jobs to young people and to 
others in this province, Mr. Speaker, and providing a very 
useful service to the community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
seems to be writing off these concerns, but I could tell you the 
Saskatchewan Party isn’t the only one raising these concerns, 
Mr. Minister. In fact the first person to raise similar concerns is 
now sitting, is sitting, on that side of the House. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has obtained a memo dated December 
14, 2000. It’s an internal memo, Mr. Speaker, from NDP 
Minister of Economic Development at the time and the current 
member for Idylwyld. 
 
She raises serious concerns about the direction ISC is headed. 
In her memo the former minister says, and I quote: 
 

It now appears that ISC is going beyond its original 
mandate into other information technology areas. This 
apparent expansion is of concern (and get this, she says) as 
there are no concrete opportunities for significant new 
revenue beyond the marketing of land and geomatics. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the former NDP Minister of Economic 
Development is saying that ISC has gone way beyond its 
mandate and it can’t possibly make money in this new area. 
 
To the minister, why is the minister and why is this government 
ignoring the warnings of the former Minister of Economic 
Development? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
fact of the matter is that ISC is wider than it was at its original 
orientation. It goes well beyond what was originally envisioned 
for it, just land, because it’s useful, it’s productive, it’s efficient, 
it’s economic. 
 
(14:00) 
 
It’s a good opportunity for this province, Mr. Speaker, to 
broaden out into other high-tech activities, into other high-tech 
ventures. And, Mr. Speaker, these are services which are in 
demand. We’ve had contacts overseas, Australia and other 
places, where they want this service, Mr. Speaker, where 
they’re trying to do the same thing and, Mr. Speaker, where we 
can gain money, gain revenues for the people of this province 
so we can continue to build the economy of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the minister of Economic Development at the time 
went on to raise other concerns. She said in her memo, and I 
quote: 
 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

 

Any expenses being incurred that go beyond the original 
mandate will ultimately have to be borne by land and 
geomatic clients in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

In other words, land titles’ fees are going to wind up 
subsidizing any losses the NDP incur in this little experiment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why should land titles’ customers and other 
taxpayers be forced to bail out another losing NDP venture? 
Why is the NDP refusing to listen to the warnings of the former 
minister of Economic Development? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the premise of the 
member’s question is simply wrong. Users of the land 
registration system will not be subsidizing any activities of this 
corporation in this regard. These are investments, Mr. Speaker, 
in commercial activities which will repay to the people of this 
province and continue to build the economy of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister questions the premise 
of my question. The truth of it is that was the premise of the 
question of his former colleague, the former minister of 
Economic Development. Maybe he should have informed her of 
that when she raised these concerns, as she should of, in 
December last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the former minister raised many other concerns. 
She said: 
 

SaskTel, not ISC, has the provincial mandate for the 
development of e-commerce opportunities. 
 

So now we have two Crown corporations competing in the 
same market. She also said: 
 

The economic goal of growing the private information 
technology sector may be put at risk with further 
government expansion in this area. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, we have ISC competing with the private 
sector, competing with SaskTel, and losing $11 million. It 
doesn’t make any sense. The NDP’s own Economic 
Development minister tried to tell them that back in December, 
but they didn’t listen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP spending millions of taxpayer 
dollars on a new Crown to compete with SaskTel and other 
private sector firms in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, once again, the premise 
of the member’s question is faulty. What ISC will be doing 
here, Mr. Speaker, is partnering with private sector corporations 
in this province, working with them to develop opportunities so 
that we can benefit the province . . . the economy of this 
province. 
 
It is not about competing, Mr. Speaker; it is about working in 

partnership with entrepreneurs, with investors in this province 
to build this province together. We believe, Mr. Speaker, in 
using the government . . . the Crown’s resources to build this 
province, not to undermine it like the member opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — I guess after listening to these questions and those 
answers, people of this province are going to have to choose 
who they want to listen to, who they want to believe. They’re 
going to have to choose between the much-respected former 
minister of Economic Development, the one-time minister of 
Finance in that government, or they’re going to have to choose 
the line that we just heard from the Minister of Justice. I think 
they’ll side with the former minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s who I think they’ll side with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think they’re also going to share the concerns 
that she has about this Crown corporation. And that’s what 
we’re asking about — about this corporation and the loss of 11 
million taxpayer dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister going to do to rein in this 
corporation and prevent any future losses of taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, in the 
first year of operations dealing with the LAND (Land Titles 
Automated Network Development Project) project, this 
corporation made money. And I don’t think the member’s 
opposed to that. Indeed that seems to be the premise of his 
question that these corporations — as we believe too — should 
contribute to the economy of this province. 
 
Now . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Okay do you want me to go 
through it again? Because these are paper transactions, as the 
member knows very well. Five million dollars because of a 
re-evaluation ordered by the Auditor General and by Ernst & 
Young — $5 million there. Eight million dollars by regulation 
transferred to the GRF (General Revenue Fund) — that makes 
13. That makes a profit in my books. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Impact of Municipal Revenue-Sharing Grants 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been almost a month since the NDP decided to 
hire 570 new government employees instead of increasing 
revenue-sharing grants to municipalities. Now property taxes 
are going up across the province thanks to that government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s latest victim are the people of 
Humboldt. The city commissioner says property taxes in 
Humboldt are going up by 14 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 14 per cent 
because the NDP is refusing to increase funding for revenue 
sharing. 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

Will the minister explain to the people of Humboldt why he 
decided to make government bigger and force taxes up instead 
of increasing municipal revenue sharing and hold the line on 
property tax increases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve said it 
many times in the House in response to questions from the hon. 
member and to this Assembly that this government remains 
committed to municipalities, through the agreements that have 
been entered into through infrastructure programs. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I understand that there are — I know there are — tax 
tools that are available to these communities that allow them to 
shift their tax bases, their policies. They include local mill rate 
factors, minimum tax base, and phase-in taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So this government has done everything possible to co-operate 
with municipalities in responding once again for more money 
for education to assist them in that particular area. Those are 
agreements that have been entered into, and agreed to, and 
we’ve come through with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that the one thing that minister and that 
government’s committed to is forcing every municipality in this 
province to raise taxes this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city commissioner in Humboldt has written to 
the Premier and here’s what he said, and I quote: 
 

The provincial government in its budget has once again 
chosen to ignore the plight of urban municipalities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is the voice of the city at Humboldt. It isn’t 
just the Saskatchewan Party. Communities across Saskatchewan 
are all saying the same thing — the NDP has its priorities all 
wrong. 
 
His letter goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

The province’s key tax revenues have doubled in recent 
years while grants such as revenue-sharing continue at 
all-time lows. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister telling Saskatchewan 
communities they must do with less while this government sits 
on hundreds of thousands of dollars in a Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund — save it for an election fund — and everybody else has 
to do with less? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, in response to the member’s 
question, I want to again remind him that as a result of what the 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) 
people have asked this government, the government had 
acceded to, and that’s more money in education. As a matter of 
fact I’m pleased to see here in an announcement made at noon 
that their Catholic Board lowers mill rate. These are the effects 
of agreements and responses to what we’ve been asked to do. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Speaker, the Centenary grants, the 

municipal infrastructure program grants that have gone to the 
municipalities, have in fact increased that participation by this 
government to assist communities in doing what they need to 
do to maintain a good quality of life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister should remember that Mike Badham and 
SUMA also asked for millions of dollars in increased revenue 
sharing. Where is that money, Mr. Minister? 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the minister hasn’t realized how the 
NDP’s misplaced priorities are impacting the city of Humboldt. 
According again to the city commissioner, and I quote: 
 

We are at the point where the safety and security of our 
homes and businesses have been compromised. 

 
Their RCMP staffing is below recommended levels. They need 
to upgrade their fire equipment. Their sewage treatment 
facilities must be expanded, and the infrastructure partnership 
program may only fund half of the project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s choice to ignore municipalities is 
driving property taxes up by 14 per cent in Humboldt and 
threatening the security and standard of living of Humboldt’s 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the city of Humboldt and as stated in 
this letter, will the minister reconsider the municipal 
revenue-sharing budget and commit another $20 million to our 
communities this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I hope people are listening 
carefully to what the opposition is doing in this question period. 
First we have the member from Swift Current who gets up and 
says the government is losing too much money. Then we have 
the member from Saltcoats who gets up and says the 
government is sitting on too much money. 
 
Now the member from Saltcoats says we’re sitting on too much 
money and we should spend more. Well he should tell the 
member from Carrot River Valley who says, and it’s on the 
record, Mr. Speaker, that we are spending too much. He says 
the budget is excessive expenditures. 
 
He should tell the member from Cannington who is sitting right 
beside him who says the government is spending more money 
than it’s bringing in. That’s what he says, Mr. Speaker. He 
should tell the member from Lloydminster, who sits behind 
him, that says he doesn’t think the budget is sustainable. 
 
And the point is this, Mr. Speaker. These people are trying to be 
all things to all people. They say we’re losing too much money. 
They say we’re sitting on too much money. They say we’re 
spending too much money. It can’t be each of those ways, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
Finance minister’s, that Finance minister’s 2001-2002 budget 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 791 

 

has done one thing. It’s caused an outbreak of tax increases 
right across this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, we just heard about the 
concerns of the city of Humboldt over the safety of their 
residents. 
 
Let’s talk about the city of North Battleford. This community 
has been under a boil-water advisory for several days due to a 
contamination of their water supply by two parasites. Today we 
learned that the water filtration system in the city has been 
vulnerable to contamination for many years and that 
engineering consultants have been brought in by the city to 
review the system and come up with some solutions to the 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is also a provincial government responsibility. 
Cutbacks to revenue-sharing grants to municipalities have 
forced many communities to put off upgrades to their water 
treatment systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government putting people’s health and 
safety at risk by not increasing revenue-sharing funds so 
communities can repair or renew their infrastructure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all this government is not putting any people of 
Saskatchewan at risk. This government takes their 
responsibility very, very clear and it takes their responsibility 
very, very highly. 
 
Number one, Mr. Speaker, this government’s working with all 
people — rural people, urban Saskatchewan people, people 
right across the board — to ensure we have proper water for all 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Number one is that not only have we consulted on a regular 
basis with all people, Mr. Speaker, we have also increased 
funding for water quality testing by $720,000 and 10 additional 
people, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Any time and any day of the week, Mr. Speaker, we will put 
our record against that record. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, my next question is for any minister over there that 
feels responsible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial government often points to the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program as helping 
communities, and that’s true. But the town of Battleford, who is 
also under a precautionary boil water advisory due to the 
problems in North Battleford, has been rejected for funding 
under the program. 
 
They have requested $2.4 million for a reservoir, well 
expansion, and water treatment plant and were turned down flat. 

The fact there . . . was there was absolutely no increase to 
municipal revenue-sharing grants from the NDP and no support 
from the infrastructure program. This means the project will not 
go ahead. 
 
Communities across Saskatchewan are having similar problems 
and water quality is a major one. Mr. Speaker, to the minister: 
how are these communities supposed to deal with some of these 
major issues when the NDP government has virtually 
abandoned them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, water quality across 
Saskatchewan is a very important issue and this government is 
working very closely with all people — municipalities, RMs 
(rural municipality), the small northern villages — and we’re 
putting a lot of effort and we’re putting a lot of resources in 
trying to help Saskatchewan people find long-term solutions to 
water quality. 
 
(14:15) 
 
What did this government do, Mr. Speaker — they hired 10 
additional people to help the people of Saskatchewan with 
water quality problems. It’s a challenge we face right across the 
board, Mr. Speaker. And what is really confusing for me, Mr. 
Speaker, is this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order, please. The 
minister will continue, 30 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What is confusing to me, Mr. Speaker, is this opposition: one 
day they get up and they say you’re spending too much money; 
the next day they get up and say, why are you hiring all these 
additional people. We hired 10 additional people, Mr. Speaker, 
to help with water quality problems for the people of 
Saskatchewan — something that they did not want to do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lanigan Hospital 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the weekend, I received several copies of letters that . . . 
regarding the proposed closure of the Lanigan Hospital. These 
letters were all addressed to the Minister of Health, and each 
letter states unequivocally that the stakeholders were not 
consulted by the Living Sky Health District, before hearing 
about the hospital closure. 
 
This is contrary to what the minister told us in this Assembly 
last week. The RM of Wolverine writes: 
 

To date this municipality has received no written 
notification regarding the upcoming closure; nor have we 
extended an invitation to meet with the district. 

 
The village of Drake writes: 
 

No written announcement or invitation to meet to announce 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

this closure or to discuss other options. 
 
The town of Lanigan says they were never consulted, and to 
quote from the letter to the minister: 
 

If you have been advised that the board and management 
are working with our communities, you’ve been terribly 
misinformed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister tell this Assembly and the 
media that the health district is working with the community 
and the stakeholders when this is so very obviously not the 
case? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this particular community 
the local people are working together to come up with some 
solutions. The health district and the people have worked with 
the town council of Lanigan; they’ve worked with other people 
in the community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House have a lot of faith in 
the people who work as volunteers on the various boards and 
our local communities. We think that we need to give them the 
time to solve this particular problem. They have made an 
announcement that they were planning to do this for June 15 
because they wanted to talk and work with the local people. The 
issue here is finding enough nurses to do the job. They are 
working to do . . . solve that problem. If they can solve that 
problem then a lot of these other issues will be dealt with. 
 
But we have a lot of faith in our local people, and we’re going 
to continue to support them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a lot of faith in the local people in the Lanigan area. And 
in the paper this week, it says: 
 

At this time the stakeholders have not received any 
comment from the Living Sky Health District that their 
efforts will be rewarded. 

 
It says in the paper . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Members will 
allow the member from Watrous to put the question. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — 
 

After working diligently at the task of acquiring additional 
nurses, the town of Lanigan representatives, with the 
assistance and full co-operation of the Lanigan nursing 
staff, have found enough nurses to cover all the shifts, with 
several extra nurses available to cover unforeseen shift 
shortages for sickness and for personal leave days. 

 
So if the town that has worked diligently to find these nurses 
have put this together, can the minister today promise us that 
they will not be having a cutback on their acute care services? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank the 
member opposite for confirming exactly what I said — the local 
people would work together with all of those people on their 
district health board and administration to come up with a 
solution. They’ve got a June 15 target and they’re working hard 
to make sure that they can provide the local services. 
 
I would like to thank all those people who have worked very 
diligently to try to solve this particular problem. It will not be 
easy to manage the whole summer, given the fact that a number 
of the people haven’t had vacations over the longer term. But 
what we do know is that local people have the skills and the 
knowledge and can work together to make sure that these kinds 
of problems are solved. 
 
We believe that our people in Saskatchewan have the skills, the 
ingenuity and we will work to help provide the resources so that 
these services can be provided. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand today and respond to question no. 112 on behalf of the 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 112 has been responded to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 3 — The Historic 
Properties Foundations Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon as we 
continue debate on Bill No. 3, The Historic Properties 
Foundation Act 2001, I was looking through some of the 
speeches that were made through debate in the past couple of 
weeks, Mr. Speaker, and some of the issues that are being 
raised. 
 
Certainly when one looks at the Bill peripherally and takes a 
look at some of the comments that the minister, the Provincial 
Secretary has made, one would think that this was a Bill very 
much needed in this province. And from this point, Mr. 
Speaker, on this side of the House, we understand very clearly 
that historic buildings, historic sites must be protected. And we 
need to set up a process in order to be able to help properties 
and buildings achieve the funding that is necessary to maintain 
them through this century and even into the next century with a 
great deal of hope, Mr. Speaker. 
 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

 

There are some interesting sides though to the Bill, Mr. 
Speaker. It seems as though when this NDP government tries to 
do something for the province, they also have to try to do 
something for themselves. Mr. Speaker, we have a Bill here that 
looks at preserving historic properties in this province, but we 
also have a portion of the Bill that looks at preserving, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP rank and file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is it that every time a Bill is brought forward 
such as this — and there are good portions of this Bill that we 
certainly like — but it also talks about the province having to be 
an integral part, of having to be able to be the watchdog, so to 
speak, Mr. Speaker, of everything that happens in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we understand very clearly that when 
something like this is set up, the province is trying to be able to 
put in place foundations that will help communities, that would 
help citizens to be able to take some initiative and be able to 
protect the properties, the historic properties, in their 
communities. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, certainly in the area of the world that we 
live in, that yourself and myself live in, there’s some properties 
there that, and some buildings, that were created many, many 
decades ago, some of them going back even into the 19th 
century. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, being able to have an Act in place in this 
province, that would allow the citizens in this community where 
we live to be able to create a foundation, to do the fundraising 
that is appropriate, sounds like a great idea. And from this side 
of the House, we certainly have to support that kind of a 
concept. But somehow through this whole process, Mr. 
Speaker, this NDP government is talking about being an 
integral and reactive, so to speak, part of this whole process. 
 
Now we’ve seen in the past, Bills that were presented, Mr. 
Speaker, especially in this session where the NDP government 
always has to talk about creating a new government department. 
They’ve created a new government department already that we 
have a great deal of amusement with on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, that is the so-called Rural Revitalization 
department headed up by the member from Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
The government is talking about bringing in a new Crown 
corporation, the so-called birthday party Crown corporation to 
look at a process that’ll . . . Mr. Speaker, in order to have the 
government involved in a long-term plan, in order to be able to 
hire hacks and flacks, people who have not been able to get 
elected for the NDP, Mr. Speaker, to provide them with a job. 
And which is all we’re really able to find from any of this. 
 
Now we see with The Historic Properties Foundations Act, that 
the government is considering the very same thing again. But 
why is it, Mr. Speaker, that when something that has all the 
potential of providing a great deal of good in the province — 
and I say that with all sincerity, Mr. Speaker. This Bill, The 
Historic Properties Foundations Act, 2001, has all the potential 
to be able to provide to the citizens of Saskatchewan an 
opportunity — a historic opportunity, Mr. Speaker — that 
communities throughout the province, whether that be Prince 
Albert or Regina or Wilkie, the opportunity to be able to look 
after their communities, do the fundraising, create foundations 

that will protect historic properties in their communities. 
 
But what instead do we have, Mr. Speaker? We have a Bill 
coming forward that is talking about the government having to 
be an integral part of this. They have to be the driving force. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House we believe that the 
people of this province are well equipped and well adapted to 
be able to work in their communities as long as they have just a 
few tools. They only need a few tools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now a part of this Bill, this Historic Properties Foundations 
Act, 2001 provides them with some of those tools. The primary 
tool, of course, is the legalization of a foundation that would 
help communities to be able to set up a foundation to preserve 
historic properties. But, Mr. Speaker, that’s really all they need. 
 
They don’t need any more than that. But what we see here in 
this Bill, Mr. Speaker, is another opportunity being taken by 
this NDP government to become far too involved in the 
day-to-day personal lives of the people of this province, become 
far too involved in the operation of communities in this 
province, and again far too involved in directing the lives of 
communities and people throughout this province. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, we need to take some time as we go 
through this Bill to be able to assess the necessity of some of 
the clauses of it. And I think it’s very important that this NDP 
government maybe take some time to review everything that 
they’re doing with this Bill. Is it really necessary for this NDP 
government to become so wholly involved in everything that 
this Bill is peripherally trying to accomplish? 
 
(14:30) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, certainly as we take a look at what the 
minister, the Provincial Secretary, is trying to do here, which it 
states very clearly in the first reading, makes it possible for the 
Lieutenant Governor in Council to establish foundations to 
receive gifts to the Crown, including corporate and individual 
gifts, bequests, donations, grants, for the purpose of preserving, 
developing, and enhancing historic properties in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what could be, what could be better than 
that? This province of Saskatchewan having been 
well-developed since the 19th century; people being here for 
many, many decades trying to create a better way of life for our 
children, for their children, for us, for our . . . even so far as to 
take a look at our grandchildren. 
 
Why is it so necessary, when we take a look at a Bill such as 
this, Mr. Speaker, that the government feels that they just can’t 
bring a Bill forward that allows people of this province to 
preserve a large part of our history, to be able to have 
communities be given the tools that are necessary, that 
communities — such as many that I’ve mentioned before, Mr. 
Speaker — just be able to take the bull by the horn, so to speak, 
Mr. Speaker, that foundations can be set up. Foundations to 
receive corporate and individuals gifts, bequeath even, so to 
speak, Mr. Speaker, donations, grants, however that they may 
come about in a community so that a community and its 
citizenry can establish a foundation to preserve its history, 
preserve its historic sites. 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, from our perspective on this side of the 
House, we believe that this is magnanimous indeed. But why is 
it, Mr. Speaker, that when the government of this NDP 
government talks about creating opportunities such as this, they 
find it wholly necessary to become so particularly involved that 
I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, that what is going to happen here is 
that because of their involvement, that some of the benefits that 
could be achieved are going to be lost. And so I believe at this 
time, Mr. Speaker, that we need to take a little more time with 
this Bill. 
 
And I would ask at this time we now adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 1 — The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Partnership 
Amendment Act is one that I think has been in the works for a 
long time. I have no doubt that this particular government has 
had a lot of input over the last number of years — not just 
months, but years — by people who have asked to have some 
movement take place on partnerships and liabilities. 
 
And what Bill No. 1 does, The Partnership Amendment Act, is 
it allows for limited liability partnerships. And what this 
essentially means is that one partner is not held personally 
financially responsible for the obligation of a partnership 
beyond their own actual financial . . . financial share in the 
partnership. 
 
And I think this is very good, Mr. Speaker, because we have a 
lot of partnerships where you might have one person that has a 
lot of assets, another with smaller amount of assets, and they 
both put some of theirs into a new particular business or a 
partnership. And to have to have the one person be at risk for 
absolutely everything they have in that particular business isn’t 
at all fair, it isn’t at all equitable, and it doesn’t make any 
financial sense whatsoever. 
 
And so this particular Bill says that you can be held liable; your 
obligation is up to the amount of your actual financial share in 
that partnership. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, does support the 
direction of Bill No. 1. We’ve had numerous contacts, as I’m 
sure the government has had, over the last number of years by 
various individuals and groups asking for some changes to take 
place in this particular area. 
 
And so, essentially on the basis of the text it seems a fairly 
acceptable Bill. But we do have quite a number of things that 
we want to comment about as we go through this and possibly 
also need to do some more research. 
 
What’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that this is finally happening 
at a time when we’ve seen in Saskatchewan so many of our 
business people and professional people leaving the province. 

It’s a fact that comes up time and time again, and it’s to the 
embarrassment of this particular government, Mr. Speaker, that 
the stats are such as they are. And those are stats that essentially 
indicate that people that are looking for opportunities too often 
leave our province. They too often leave our province. 
 
And I think what indicates, or underlines that very well, Mr. 
Speaker, is that two other provinces in Canada already have this 
sort of legislation in place. Those two provinces, Mr. Speaker, 
are Alberta and Ontario, and we know very well that those two 
are definitely what we would call have provinces. They’ve been 
on the leading edge of innovation; they’ve been on the leading 
edge of attracting businesses and professionals to their 
provinces. And it’s good that finally in Saskatchewan we’re 
looking in that direction as well. 
 
Since these two provinces are known to be somewhat friendlier 
to business and professions than Saskatchewan currently is, I 
think if we don’t do this we’ll see the exodus of professionals 
and businesses leaving our province at an ever-increasing rate. 
 
And I think we need to look at something that just came out in 
the news a day or two ago, Mr. Speaker, because it gets us to 
the crux of the reasoning and the rationale for this piece of 
legislation. There was an item in the news — I believe it was 
the middle of last week, Mr. Speaker — that indicated that 
British Columbia is on the verge of becoming a have-not 
province. 
 
Now that rather surprised me, and I think it surprised everybody 
else that heard that bit of an announcement, because 
traditionally in Canada we’ve said, well, there’s Ontario, there’s 
Alberta, there’s British Columbia, and those three provinces, 
that’s where the wealth of Canada lies in; they will continually 
remain have provinces putting money into the equalization fund 
and then provinces such as Saskatchewan will get it. 
 
Now I guess it’s fortunate that we get it, but it’s highly 
unfortunate that we have to get those kinds of equalization 
payments, Mr. Speaker. I know we had the former Finance 
minister, the member, I believe, from Saskatoon Idylwyld 
making a statement at one time that it’s good if Saskatchewan 
doesn’t grow too fast because we’ll lose this equalization fund. 
 
It’s a bit like a 15-year-old saying I hope I don’t get my 16th 
birthday because I have so much fun having Mom drive me all 
over the countryside. It’s that same kind of mentality. We shake 
our heads and say, can this be for real? That we would have a 
Finance minister in Saskatchewan say I hope our economy 
doesn’t grow too fast because we wouldn’t get any more 
equalization payments from Ottawa. It’s bizarre. 
 
So therefore we have British Columbia, which should most 
definitely be one of those three major have provinces. They’ve 
got all the oil and gas; they’re literally awash in oil and gas in 
the northeast part of the province. They have forestry that we 
just admire when we go there. Mines. Tourism. On top of that, 
they’re a seaport. And now they’re about to become a have-not 
province. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that speaks to how successful the NDP are 
when they try to run a country, try to run a province. Who else, 
who else, Mr. Speaker, could take a province as wealthy as 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

 

British Columbia and drive it to the verge of being a have-not 
province? 
 
Therefore when we see something like this take place, this piece 
of legislation, Mr. Speaker — and I’m sure that you’re glad that 
we’re staying on the topic — that when we see this piece of 
legislation, we understand that there’s some validity in it, some 
validity in it. Because if we don’t make some very serious and 
definite changes in Saskatchewan to turn this province around, 
we will remain a have-not province for a very long time. 
 
Bill No. 17 is somewhat similar to this and I’ll be speaking to 
that a little later on today as well, I believe. 
 
It will affect probably — some of the key areas would be — 
dentists, lawyers and accountants have probably been the 
groups that have been most interested in this . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member, would ask you to confine your 
remarks to Bill No. 1, if you could, at this time and we will get 
to Bill No. 17. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — As I said, there’s a number of other pieces of 
legislation that are coming up. 
 
This particular Bill, Bill No. 1, is one that relates specifically, as 
I just said, to dentists, lawyers, and accountants. Those people 
who are probably most often involved in partnership 
agreements with others of the same profession. And therefore, 
this Bill has some definite merit, because we’ve been 
approached by those groups, as I’m sure you have. 
 
Those partnerships do things for our province that are good. We 
don’t always have to have co-ops and pools and those sorts of 
things to bring things ahead. These individual partnerships are 
great. 
 
Until now, members of a partnership have not been protected, 
Mr. Speaker, from personal or financial liability for the 
obligations of that partnership. Basically, anything they had and 
everything they had was totally at risk in that partnership, 
making that a totally unfair and unviable situation for many of 
them to become involved in partnerships. Having said that, that 
does not mean that there’s going to be a major rush by all of 
these groups to form partnerships. 
 
But there are those partnerships that would be very viable, 
would make Saskatchewan a better place for them to work in 
and would probably remove from them some of the ideas that 
they have from time to time, that they could probably go to 
another province, such as Ontario or Alberta and carry on their 
business in a viable partnership situation. So I think that’s good. 
 
This Bill No. 1 means that the actions of one partner, though 
separate and apart from all other partners in the firm, could 
impact on all the partners’ personal liability. In other words, all 
involved ran the risk of personal financial ruin if the practice of 
only one of those partners put that into financial peril. If a 
financial obligation or judgment against a partnership 
outstripped the value of that partnership’s assets, all partners 
could be held personally liable. I think that’s one of the key 
things that’s being addressed in Bill No. 1. 
 

Those people who are involved in corporations have not been 
subject to the same unlimited liability, as have professional 
partnerships. So we have to keep in mind, Mr. Speaker, that 
there’s definitely a difference between partnerships and 
corporations. Owners and managers in corporations have not 
been personally liable, but in partnerships they have been. 
 
This Bill in general, Mr. Speaker, extends that protection to 
partnerships. It’s an excellent move. I know, as I said earlier on, 
we’ve been addressed by various groups for quite some time to 
bring this about. We know government has as well. 
 
Members of Saskatchewan Party caucus have met 
representatives, and I have personally, also, of the Law Society 
and the chartered accountants to discuss this issue, along with 
the professional incorporation on the subject of Bill No. 1. 
 
This must be said, though, is not an unlimited shield. 
Sometimes people say, well as soon as you incorporate or you 
form an unlimited partnership, it means that these people are 
totally protected from any form of responsibility for their 
actions. This is not an unlimited shield either. The assets and 
financial interests of a partner has, in a partnership as a whole, 
will still be subject, Mr. Speaker, to obligations and judgments 
against one or more partners, but the amount of that will be 
limited. 
 
Also, and I think this is important, Mr. Speaker, the public will 
have the right and ability to know when a limited liability 
partnership is in effect. And I think the Bill itself has a number 
of things that we should probably take a bit of a look at and 
discuss some of the key parts in it. 
 
It limits, and it says very specifically there, restrictions on 
distribution of partnership properties. So essentially when a 
partnership is operating and the property is being distributed, 
this Bill very carefully makes sure that the public is not put at 
risk because of it. And I think that’s good, but it also allows 
them to function in those sorts of ways. 
 
It also has some very definite rules and directions on what takes 
place on the dissolution of a partnership. So individuals in a 
partnership cannot just jump out of that partnership and sort of 
hope that any responsibility that they have to actions that were 
taken place would then be negated. 
 
And as I just mentioned earlier on, Mr. Speaker, there must be a 
partnership list so that the public is protected in being able to 
know and find out who the members are. And I’ll just read that 
for members of the House: 
 

A limited liability partnership shall keep at its registered 
office a list of the partners involved in the limited liability 
partnership and shall immediately provide the following 
information without charge to any person who requests it: 

 
So very much the public is protected in this area. Also there 
must be periodic reports must be made by these limited 
partnerships. 
 
(14:45) 
 
While we understand the Bill is based on a model of legislation 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

developed by the Uniform Law Conference, we’ve done some 
research on it — I know the government side has done some 
research on it — we haven’t completed our consultations. We 
want to do some more of that. 
 
And therefore at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would move 
adjournment of that. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 17 — The 
Professional Corporations Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I mentioned 
earlier on today, Bill No. 17 deals with some of the similar 
things but it deals with those areas with regards to professional 
corporations which is substantially different from partnerships. 
 
Last year in this province, Mr. Speaker, some of these 
provisions were granted to doctors, and I think that’s good. 
We’d hate to see how many doctors would have left our 
province, along with the ones that have already left and are 
considering leaving, if this hadn’t been put into place last year. 
 
So I think we need to look at these sorts of things to make 
Saskatchewan as business-friendly, as professional-friendly a 
place in Canada as we can possibly have it. We need to do that 
so that individuals that are at all considering coming to 
Saskatchewan to fill the positions in various professions will 
look at it and say, that province is a good place to work, it’s a 
good place to be. Their laws are not the kinds of laws that 
hinder all sorts of actions. 
 
And we do have lots of those laws in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, that essentially just seem to hinder business. I recall 
not long ago speaking with an individual who set up a new 
business in North Battleford, and having carried on a similar 
business in Alberta, came to Saskatchewan and found out that 
here he had two more pieces of red tape, two more applications 
he had to fill out — each one with a fee, one I think of $500 and 
one of $700 — to do exactly the same work he could do in 
Alberta without that red tape and without those costs, which by 
the way, Mr. Speaker, were yearly costs not just one-time fees. 
 
So I think we need to look at that and make sure that 
Saskatchewan is as friendly to our professions as it can possibly 
be. 
 
Bill No. 17, The Professional Corporations Act, moves a fair 
ways down that and it grants, as I said earlier on, those things 
that we granted to doctors last year. The right to incorporate — 
that’s being granted now to accountants, to lawyers, and to 
dentists. 
 
Our indication that, when we talked with some of these groups, 
to see what’s happening in other provinces, it’s not that as soon 
as this happens that every single accountant, lawyer, and dentist 
will then form a corporation. That’s not the case. It would be of 
an advantage to only some, not to all. And the provinces 
whether they really have a legislation such as this, it’s only a 

fairly small percentage that makes use of it. But it’s one of 
those things that we need to do in this province to make us as 
friendly to business and professions as we possibly can be. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, is essentially supportive 
of the direction of this piece of legislation just as we were with 
the Bill last session — the one that granted the rights to 
incorporation of our doctors. Anything that we can do to make 
our province a good place to work, set up professional 
businesses is good. 
 
With professional incorporation there are certain advantages 
that are granted — at last, I should say, Mr. Speaker, at last and 
finally to these professions — advantages such as the area of 
taxation, which has been a point of contention for many. And 
any time that we look at taxation in Saskatchewan we realize 
that it’s one of those things that makes certain other parts of 
Canada and the United States more desirable. And we need to 
look at that. This Bill starts to move in that direction, and for 
that, we think it has some good . . . some good beginnings. 
 
For too long this particular government and other governments 
before this particular one have ignored this congestion of 
important professions, and as a result, many have left 
Saskatchewan for greener pastures everywhere. So if a Bill like 
this stems a tide even in a small way, it’s a valuable and 
important change. And as I said, in provinces where they 
already have this sort of legislation, they don’t all jump on side. 
But it is valuable for certain ones and we need to make sure that 
that opportunity is given. 
 
However, I’m sure this isn’t going to stop the flow of 
professionals from this province. It didn’t stop the total flow of 
doctors from this province. We’ve seen that since they’ve 
passed the legislation last year that gave the doctors the right to 
incorporate, we’ve still lost doctors, unfortunately. But we 
know that there are efforts being made to get new physicians 
into the province, and hopefully, that will make Saskatchewan 
look a slight bit greener as a pasture for that. And this should do 
the same thing. 
 
Last year when we saw the incorporation of doctors, it was a 
move we wholeheartedly supported. While it’s certain that 
some of the doctors that lobbied for it for years and was a 
positive step, this change isn’t going to do it all. 
 
But it’s part of the creating an economic atmosphere in this 
province, an economic atmosphere that puts us on a 
competitive, and in some cases, even an equal playing field 
with other provinces, and I think that’s important. It’s part of 
the puzzle; it’s not the whole thing, but it is one piece and it’s 
here. 
 
And unless this atmosphere of suspicion and resentment against 
those people in this province who are employers and 
entrepreneurs and professionals is abandoned by the more 
left-wing members of the government . . . And I guess we’re a 
little concerned about that, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve looked over 
what’s happened with this particular government as they move 
further toward the left, that some of the moves we’ve hoped in 
the past years . . . They seem to be a bit more business friendly. 
Now they’re moving off to the left again. 
 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

 

And I can, I can . . . I’m afraid that the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member from Lloydminster 
why is he on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you for 
a delay in the debate so I could introduce a good friend of mine, 
Vic Holt, his wife, Bev Holt, and daughter, Crystal. I must say 
that these are constituents in the Waseca area of my 
constituency. 
 
Vic has taken the day to come down with Crystal, who is on the 
short list for an interview with the Lester Pearson institute for 
international studies. It’s a very timely interview, especially 
during the seeding season, where Vic has a considerable 
amount of acreage to seed, and he has sacrificed that for his 
family. 
 
So good luck to Crystal. And would you please welcome Vic, 
Bev, and Crystal Holt. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Professional Corporations Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was just 
commenting on how this government seems to be moving 
rapidly to the left, and I think that’s unfortunate. It’s 
unfortunate because it’s those sorts of things that are going to 
destroy this province. 
 
I mentioned earlier on how British Columbia has just become a 
have-not province under an NDP government, an NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker, that was far left. But this government 
is moving about as far left as they can as well. Unfortunately, 
that leaves us behind with a left government. 
 
Now having seen how much further left they’ve gone . . . And 
it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker — you can hear them chirping 
away right now — that as soon as you talk about where they 
move politically, Mr. Speaker, they seem to be touchy about 
this. I don’t know if they’re ashamed of moving left. I thought 
they were socialists, Mr. Speaker. They should have been proud 
of it. 
 
I mean, we’re not proud of it, the province isn’t proud of it, but 
as members of the government side presently, you’d think they 
would be. This particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, moves us one small 
step in making our province more competitive. Unfortunately, 
we would like to see 100 or 200 pieces of legislation like this, 
this year that would do that. This government seems to at this 
point coming up with half a dozen, a couple of dozen pieces of 

legislation. This province needs a much bigger change than just 
a few small items of legislation to turn it around. 
 
It’s also important to point out, Mr. Speaker, as the minister did 
in introducing this, that the rights of the individuals seeking the 
services of professionals who opt for corporation . . . 
incorporation, do not change with this Act. It means a service 
will be as good, but it means hopefully that we’ll have more 
people in this province to provide this service. 
 
Section 16 points out, Mr. Speaker, the relationship between a 
professional corporation and a person who receives services 
from a professional corporation is subject to all the applicable 
laws relating to the confidential, ethical relationship that had 
been there before. 
 
So people who use these services now from someone who’s 
incorporated do not have to feel that somehow they privacy is at 
risk in any way, shape, or form. 
 
I think it’s also important to point out, Mr. Speaker, too often, 
thanks in large to the political philosophy of the members 
opposite, the very word incorporation sets off alarm bells 
because right away they’re talking multinationals and they’re 
afraid of something’s going to jump out from underneath when 
they climb into bed at night, and grab them by the ankle and 
drag them down. It’s this fear of business, it’s this fear of 
incorporation, it’s this fear of anything that isn’t linked to 
unions and those sorts of things. 
 
In reality, of course, corporation is simply a legal description, 
Mr. Speaker. But it’s still important for the people to know that 
their rights do not change with this piece of legislation. The 
Saskatchewan Party strongly supports the general nature and 
direction of this piece of legislation. 
 
We’ve spoken with individuals from these various professions. 
We need to speak to a few more and get some more detail and 
input on that area. And therefore, at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’ll 
move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 16 — The Film Employment Tax Credit 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Bill No. 16 amends The Film Employment Tax Credit Act. 
Following the implementation of the film and employment tax 
credit, the film and video community identified a concern that 
the sunset clause for the waiver of residency provisions 
contained in the Act would expire December 31, 2001. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the waiver of residency provisions allow a 
film production to claim wages paid to certain 
non-Saskatchewan personnel when calculating their tax credit. 
This provision requires that the non-Saskatchewan personnel 
may only be used when no qualified Saskatchewan resident is 
available. It’s further required that the non-Saskatchewan 
personnel be hired expressly for the additional purpose of 
training a Saskatchewan resident. 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

So as you can see, Mr. Speaker, these provisions have allowed 
the industry to significantly speed the process of training 
Saskatchewan residents. The industry has made a compelling 
case for extending the sunset clause in order to allow for 
additional time to train Saskatchewan people. 
 
So specifically, this Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment 
Act will extend the sunset clause for the waiver of residency 
provisions from December 31, 2001 to December 31, 2003. 
And this will allow the continued training of Saskatchewan’s 
film crew and related professionals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of The Film Employment Tax 
Credit Act in 1998 greatly contributed to the growth of the film 
and video industry in Saskatchewan. And in 1997 the value of 
the film and video production in Saskatchewan was 26 million. 
In 1998, after the implementation of the Film Employment Tax 
Credit, film and video production increased to 58 million, and 
in 2000 production activity reached over 60 million. So this not 
only contributed to the economic growth of the province, but 
created employment in the industry, and continues to contribute 
to the cultural expression of Saskatchewan. 
 
With the growth of this industry, we now find that many 
production companies are able to develop and produce larger 
and more expensive drama projects, often in co-operation with 
other Canadian or international companies through 
co-production agreements. And this evolution is positive from 
both a corporate and cultural perspective. 
 
It enables the development of crew and personnel resources; it 
strengthens the companies. It helps to establish Saskatchewan’s 
presence in the national and international marketplace. 
 
The Film Employment Tax Credit will continue to enhance and 
strengthen the film and video industry in its ongoing growth 
and development. And the industry estimates that volumes 
could reach 100 million in production over the next several 
years. As well, at this production level, the industry would 
generate over 1,000 person years of direct employment and 
almost 2,000 person years of indirect employment. 
 
We recognize that the Film Employment Tax Credit has been 
and will continue to be a critical element in the expansion of 
film and video industry infrastructure. And we do congratulate 
the industry on its growth and success and wish to offer it the 
province’s continued support by introducing this amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the growing film and video industry has proven to 
be a benefit to the economic and cultural well-being of this 
province and I believe this amendment should be supported by 
all members of the legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill, Bill No. 16, An 
Act amending The Film Employment Tax Credit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to speak on this Bill again, The Film Employment Tax 
Credit Act. I remember last year in the House this going 

through and speaking on it then, and I do want to speak a little 
bit more on it this year. 
 
It’s interesting that it has a sunset clause when it’s working so 
well. I mean, it started in 1998 and, as the minister mentioned 
already, that the film industry has . . . I wasn’t exactly catching 
all the numbers that she had mentioned at that time, but almost 
doubled in the three to four years — 37 million to over 60 
million, I believe, and with a projection of up over 100 million 
if things work out over the next couple of years. And I really 
want to applaud the film industry and we think it’s a great idea. 
 
But I think the other issue that comes to play is that if it’s 
working so well here, why don’t you expand the whole idea of 
tax credit? I mean, it shows . . . We’ve been talking on 
decreasing taxes and a lot of people say well if you decrease 
taxes, you cut down revenue and it’s going to go into deficit 
budgeting and all this. But that’s not the point at all. 
 
This is the exact proof, the very proof that by decreasing tax, it 
increases the business. And that’s exactly what we have been 
talking about for many, many years — is that decreasing tax 
does not mean a reduction in revenue necessarily. By 
decreasing tax, by granting tax credit, it will in the long-term, 
over — and this has only taken 3 years to double the business 
— but in the long-term, we can see that we would attract more 
business, not just in the film industry — which this is targeted 
for which we applaud, we agree with — but there’s so many 
other areas that we could look at this for. 
 
Some members have mentioned agriculture. You know, we’re 
struggling in agriculture. We’re struggling in small business. 
 
I remember last week looking on the front page of The 
Leader-Post of a business that was moving to Alberta. And the 
direct reasons . . . they named three reasons why they were 
moving to Alberta and they are all directly related to the 
government in power. 
 
And, you know, just the idea of giving tax credits, giving tax 
breaks, decreasing the amount of tax some of these businesses 
are paying . . . We have said on this side of the House, for a 
couple of years now that we’ve been in place, that we need to 
reduce the small business tax, reduce it down to zero. 
 
Now the government has taken steps, and I said this in my 
speech from . . . my reply to the budget speech, is that they’re 
taking a small step, they’re knocking it 2 per cent. And I would 
agree with that. It was all the other things that were in the 
budget that I couldn’t agree with, okay. 
 
So it’s just the whole point of not being able to take the full step 
— that they have a hard time taking the full step. 
 
And this is one area where we see the film industry increasing 
. . . there’s many other concerns in the film industry. You know, 
we’ve heard lots of talk on the sound stage and some of the 
problems around that and how they need that to develop the 
industry even further. 
 
But one of the reasons why we’re even talking about a sound 
stage right now, one of the reasons why we’re even talking 
about an increased film industry, is the simple fact of this 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

 

legislation. 
 
And if you put that over so many other areas, how much 
business would increase. As I mention, small business whether 
it’s in ag, whether it’s in urban centres with small business, 
that’s what we need to grow this province — we need more 
industry, more business in here. 
 
The film industry is only one small sector. And we’ve talked 
different times about this government picking winners and 
losers. Well definitely the film industry is a winner here. And as 
I said we’d applaud that. 
 
But it’s just an example of what can be done in this province. If 
we increased . . . if the film industry has increased what they 
looked like, what they’re saying perhaps in the next three or 
four years over an eight-year window, increasing by three 
times, just think if we could increase all businesses in this 
province — whether it’s small business, large business, ag 
business — three times in the next eight years this province 
would be, as the member from Rosthern had talked earlier, a 
have province. 
 
And we wouldn’t have to worry about the arguments put forth 
from the other side: but if we become a have province we don’t 
get all the federal money. That’s a pretty sad excuse for not 
becoming a have province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we do want to consult with a number of 
people in the film industry because there are a number of other 
issues, this is only one of them, and get their feelings on this 
Bill. So for now I would like to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 6 very basically amends The Planning and Development 
Act, 1983. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill introduces an amendment that will 
provide the Saskatchewan Municipal Board with broader 
discretion and flexibility in determining subdivision appeals. 
This amendment will allow subdivision appeals to be 
determined on the basis of whether the proposed subdivision 
first of all amounts to a relaxation of the provision of a zoning 
bylaw that would be contrary to its purposes and intent, or 
would injuriously affect the neighbouring properties rather than 
both conditions being required. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment proposed in this Bill is evidence 
of our commitment to maintain a flexible and fair legislative 
framework for land use management and development. Mr. 
Speaker, I believe that this amendment should be supported by 
all members of the legislature. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 6, 
The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to have the 
opportunity to speak to Bill No. 6, an Act to Amend The 

Planning and Development Act. It is an interesting Act which 
does raise a few questions and which I’d like to go into some 
detail about right now. 
 
And it’s concerning will the Act, in the end, make it easier for 
subdivisions. And also will the changes to the Act, appeals 
process, have a desired affect according to what the Bill is 
intended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to point out that the concerns and the 
questions that the industry and business, and rural and urban 
people may have, concerning the effect of the Bill on the 
economy and property owners and potential property owners in 
this province. 
 
And as we know that many of the concerns of small businesses 
and large businesses and people in this province, is the 
unnecessary red tape and regulation that exists in the province; 
and which has a negative effect on investment and the creation 
of jobs and growing Saskatchewan. And one wonders if this 
amendment is going to help in that area or will it be a hindrance 
in the end result. 
 
When we talk about the economy of Saskatchewan, rural 
revitalization, and so on and so forth, the concern is to make it 
easier for businesses to start up in rural Saskatchewan. And I’ve 
had some experience in zoning and subdivisions in rural 
Saskatchewan. I know RMs have had to struggle with this issue 
quite a bit wherever there is a farmer, possibly a retired farmer, 
or someone who wants to subdivide a parcel of land to put a 
home on, or sell a subdivision to a neighbour or someone in 
town. 
 
And one has to look at the effect that has on the rural areas 
when it concerns people that may be building a home near an 
existing and intensive livestock operation or a smaller livestock 
operation, and concerns about the pollutions, the possible 
pollution concerns and the odour. 
 
And so the RMs have had to struggle with this issue for many 
years, and different RMs have approached it in different ways. 
But I’d like to just remind the minister to take that into account 
on any changes to two-zoning or subdivisions, specifically in 
the rural areas. 
 
As I’d mentioned before, to subdivide a small area out to put a, 
possibly an urban person to move out into the rural areas, and 
what possible effect that has on the economy, and both 
positively and negatively. 
 
And also if there is someone that subdivides a parcel of land, 
possibly puts up a business such as a mechanical repair shop, 
and how the RM has to deal with that, and tax that particular 
business in the RM. 
 
And so before we go on I’d like to take this Bill back to the 
stakeholders, and the people that this may affect, and consult 
with them. And at this time I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs and Housing 

Vote 24 
 
Subvote (MG01) 
 
The Chair: — Just before we get underway, I’d invite the 
minister if he wouldn’t mind introducing his officials that are 
here with us this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. To you and to 
all the members here this afternoon, I’d like to introduce, first 
of all, Mr. Brij Mathur, who’s the acting deputy minister, seated 
to my left. Mr. Peter Hoffmann is sitting to my right in the 
second row; he’s the assistant deputy minister of Housing. 
 
John Edwards who is acting assistant deputy minister, 
municipal and community support services is immediately 
behind me. Lana Grosse who is executive director, protection 
and emergency services, again, behind me, one further seat up. 
 
Larry Chaykowski who’s executive director of finance, 
administration and facilities, to my left and one over. And Doug 
Morcom who’s the director of grants and administrations, to my 
immediate right. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome to your officials, Mr. Minister. We have so many 
areas that we’d like to go into, Mr. Minister, that time being of 
what it is today that we probably won’t get anywhere’s near 
where we want to go. So sometime in August we may be able to 
wrap this thing up. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the concerns that I’ve got lately out of the 
government across that you’re a part of now — and you may 
have got this before when you were in opposition, Mr. Minister 
— is that there’s been so many changes in ministers in 
Municipal Government — and I’ve got this from SUMA 
members, I’ve got it from SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) members — that it’s really hard to have 
any continuity in there. 
 
Have you found that to be a problem now that you’re . . . once 
again we have a new minister in that portfolio? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for that 
question. I don’t find it a problem. We have department 
officials that have maintained continuity, and I can understand 
when there are changes that people may perceive that there are 
problems but not if your department is operating on a 
continuous basis and the major focus for the objectives of the 
department are maintained. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe you 
haven’t had the luxury of being there long enough to have a 
number of these concerns brought, but I’m sure you will have 
them brought before you before long. 
 
I’d like to go into the revenue sharing, Mr. Minister. And 
you’ve defended staunchly what the NDP government . . . 
NDP-Liberal government has done with the revenue sharing 

this year in your budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, since you’ve been in that position across there, 
and I know you’ve told us that that government’s doing a lot for 
municipalities and I find that hard to believe, but did you have 
any input into this year’s budget or was it the previous minister 
that — I believe the member for North Battleford actually — 
that would have sat at the table in discussing with cabinet who 
gets what dollars this year. Did you have any input into that, 
Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman. Yes, I was involved in the 
cabinet finalization period for this budget. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I wonder if the 
minister is disappointed like I am, and like every municipality 
in this province. We went through what we thought was going 
to be forced amalgamation last year and then that was dropped. 
A couple of years ago we went through the service district Act 
attempt to bring legislation in and that was dropped because of 
all the backlash that was out there with municipalities of all 
kinds — RMs, towns, villages, whatever. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m beginning to wonder if what’s happening in 
municipal government this year with absolutely no increase to 
revenue sharing, does that have anything to do with a little bit 
of pay back because the municipalities wouldn’t go along with 
amalgamation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that has nothing 
whatsoever to do with it. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well then, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I find it amazing that the minister can sit there and 
defend no increase in funding for municipalities. And you 
know, Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s not one part of municipal 
government out there that’s very unhappy with this government, 
it’s every part. 
 
We can go to the cities; you saw the press conference that, I 
believe, six or seven of the mayors had in the city here not long 
ago — very unhappy with no increase to revenue sharing. And 
they remember as well as every other municipality in this 
province, Mr. Minister, that since 1991 when this NDP 
government came to power that municipal government has been 
one of the main whipping boys that this government has found 
there. 
 
In many situations out there municipalities have found that their 
revenue sharing at this point is probably down to a third of what 
it was in 1990-91 when the NDP replaced the Conservative 
government. I know we hear a lot of — from the members 
across — blaming Grant Devine and a lot more blaming the 
federal government, but at some point that government on that 
side has to take responsibility for what is happening in this 
province. 
 
That government, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair, has had 10 
years. They’ve went through bad times. The member for 
Saskatoon was Finance minister and said everybody has to do 
their share to balance the budget. And we agreed with that — 
they do. 
 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

 

But now we’ve got our house in order, the budget has been 
balanced, we hear the members opposite say, what is it, five, 
six, seven years the budget is balanced, even though this year’s 
not sustainable as the Minister of Finance alluded to in question 
period. But even having said that it’s not sustainable, we’re 
being told and we see the $500 million go into the slush fund 
this year and things are great. 
 
And we realize as well as you do that that’s probably an 
election fund, not a slush fund for the people of Saskatchewan. 
That’s probably a NDP/Liberal slush fund although I’m not sure 
how that’ll quite work out, Mr. Minister, when the election’s 
called. 
 
But times are better now in the province and I guess what 
municipalities are asking . . . you saw in question period today, 
Mr. Minister, a number of communities out there saying we 
have these problems. The water advisory that we have in 
Battleford. We go to Humboldt; we’re going to talk a little more 
about that in the near future. What do you reply to these 
municipalities? What are they supposed to do, Mr. Minister? 
 
They have very few choices. They have the problem of funding 
cuts since ’91. They’ve cleaned up their act out there. If it 
wasn’t in order before, they’ve certainly got it in order. They 
made service delivery cuts. They’ve raised taxes because 
they’ve had no alternative. What do you say to these 
municipalities, Mr. Minister? How are they supposed to make 
ends meet and not raise taxes in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, although the 
revenue-sharing grants have not increased, there has been an 
increase in funding to municipalities through grants in lieu of 
and through infrastructure programs. There was also an increase 
in funding for Education, which the municipalities had asked 
for and this was in effect injected to those communities. 
 
So although there has not been, Mr. Chairman, an increase in 
the actual revenue-sharing program, there have been increases 
in other areas with programs that were recognized as being very 
essential to the communities. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, you say that these municipalities had asked for more 
money for education. And naturally they have, because again, 
this government switched the funding from 60/40 one way to 
40/60 the other way. That was another form of downloading. 
 
But unless your memory is real short, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Deputy Chair, I remember seeing a press release from SUMA, 
not long ago, I believe it was asking for what — $20 million 
increase to revenue sharing. Here SUMA represents every city, 
every town, and every village in this province. 
 
SARM has been another body out there that’s been asking you 
for 20, $30 million for the last . . . Well not you in particular, 
Mr. Minister, because you didn’t have that portfolio at that 
time. In fact I believe, if I remember right, you were joined with 
me asking these questions, sitting on this side, to the members 
opposite. And how short and how quick times change. 
 
But these people have been asking for more than just education 
money. They’ve been asking to replace some of the money that 

that government removed. Is there anything in the short term or 
in the near future that’s going to give these people out there that 
are running these municipalities any confidence that that 
government across — whether it be this year you’re going to 
change your mind and put some money in, or next year — is 
there anything in the future that looks like you will, that 
government will ever put any more money into revenue 
sharing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I can assure the member 
opposite that we will continue to work with municipalities and 
wherever possible to try and increase whatever funding may be 
necessary in either targeted areas or other areas. 
 
With the initiation of the new budget process, I can assure the 
member that there will be efforts made to either increase the 
revenue-sharing grants or in fact ensure that we do continue to 
respond to specific needs and targeted programs. 
 
In conjunction with the federal government on infrastructure 
programs as well as the municipalities, it is our intention to 
work with all the community to ensure that the needs of those 
communities and the citizens are met. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, question period today alone was an example of some 
of the municipalities out there having problems. 
 
Let’s talk for a minute about Battleford, who I believe have a 
precautionary boil water in place out there right now. And they 
ask for infrastructure money, which you’ve said, oh there’s all 
this infrastructure money out there. I think they requested, if my 
information is right, $2.4 million for a reservoir, well 
expansion, and water treatment plant. And they definitely need 
it, Mr. Minister. I think you would agree with that when they 
have this problem sitting there right in front of them. And they 
were turned down instantly. 
 
How do you go about deciding who gets infrastructure money 
and how . . . on what needs out there do you address this issue? 
Because, Mr. Minister, we’re seeing some of these communities 
with . . . This has to be a very important issue in even your 
minds across there and yet we’re not seeing it addressed in any 
way — no revenue sharing increases, no infrastructure money. 
 
What are you saying to these people out there, Mr. Minister? 
Because these are tremendously expensive projects that they’re 
going to have to undertake and they only have one place to do 
that and that’s to pass on to the local taxpayer. Mr. Minister, are 
you not addressing these through infrastructure and, if you’re 
not doing it there, are you going to help these municipalities in 
any way, shape, or form? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the specific 
question with respect to Battleford’s application for the CSIP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program) program, the 
town of Battleford’s application for a water supply upgrading to 
increase the capacity of its water system, not for upgrading its 
water treatment, there was no health issue was identified in that 
particular application. That was one of the reasons. 
 
The communities that identified a serious or existing or 
potential health problem with their water supplies were given 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

priority under that particular program. And, Mr. Chairman, the 
priorities are such that we’re . . . they’re identified as serious 
priorities, that’s what’s responded to. 
 
So I just want to point out that all the funding available in 2001, 
okay, available through that particular Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program, has been allocated. 
 
However if the town of Battleford has a serious ongoing 
problem with its water treatment infrastructure, it can apply for 
funding to try and correct that problem for next year. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess 
the town of Battleford would be very interested in that answer 
but I would go one step further: how long will they have to 
wait, Mr. Minister? How long do they have to be in the 
situation with the water condition that they have out there? 
Could you take the initiative and say to them we will guarantee 
you some money out of that fund next year, now seeing that 
we’ve had this advisory precautionary boil water into effect out 
there? 
 
If the town of Battleford came to you tomorrow and said look it, 
now you know that the problem is very serious, can you give 
them the assurance that they would get some money out of next 
year’s infrastructure money? Then they could probably start to 
proceed with some of the projects that they have to do, whether 
with you or without you, I would presume. 
 
But could you give them a reassurance that they would be 
guaranteed money out of that program next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I cannot give that 
assurance because it’s the project committee review committees 
that have input as to what projects will, in fact, be approved and 
that includes SARM and SUMA on those committees, as well 
as the federal government. 
 
So I cannot personally give any assurance that any one of those 
projects will be approved. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I’m very disappointed to hear that because we talk 
about the infrastructure money and I agree, it’s a great program. 
But it’s only a great program if it gets to those most in need. 
And I think it’s probably turning into, possibly maybe it’s 
turning into something like the Centenary Fund. We’re playing 
politics with that one. There’s no argument about that. We’ve 
got five million here, five million there, five million here, and 
all across. 
 
And to me, all that looks like is it’s turned into a political 
football. If you vote the right way, we’ll give you a portion of, 
rather than turning around and just doing the right thing as a 
government and saying, here’s $30 million; we’re going to put 
that money where it’s best needed rather than playing politics 
with it. 
 
I mean if your government, Mr. Minister — and you’re part of 
that government; you have to take responsibility for that, you 
and the leader, so-called Leader of the Third Party — have to 
take responsibility for what’s happening on that side, because 
without you two on that side, if you were sitting over here, we 

wouldn’t have to argue over things like this. We would say, 
look at this, the town of Battleford needs help. You know what 
would happen, Mr. Minister, if you were on that side over there 
with the member from North Battleford? We would saying let’s 
get some action for the town of Battleford. 
 
I’ll go one step further, Mr. Minister. If you and your so-called 
leader were on this side with the member from North 
Battleford, I’ll bet you we would have an increase to revenue 
sharing and we would have it now — not next year, not 10 
years — now, Mr. Minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So I think you have to accept some of this 
responsibility. You can’t sit back, Mr. Minister, and say we’re 
doing everything we possibly can because we know you’re not. 
If you really were serious about it, you’d be over here with us 
and vote the right way. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to talk about Humboldt. And here we go 
again, and you heard this today, Mr. Minister. And I want to . . . 
I’ll give you the quotes again because these are sincere people 
that run local communities. And a quote from the commissioner 
in Humboldt and he says: 
 

We’re at the point where the safety and security of our 
homes and businesses have been compromised. 

 
Mr. Minister, how can you sit there as a government when 
people out there are talking like this and justify no increase in 
revenue sharing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I’m just going to answer the last question, 
Mr. Chairman. The city of Humboldt will be getting $160,000 
more this year than it did last year. 
 
But I just want to point out, I’m a little disappointed with the 
member opposite. He talks about politics, playing politics. Well 
that’s certainly petty politics there, Mr. Chairman, because as 
you can well appreciate, I’m sure, when you have as massive a 
program and the demands, the major demands that exist 
throughout the province, there’s a need to have a committee to 
review all these projects. There are something like 530 projects 
that were applied for. There was insufficient funds to respond to 
all those projects. 
 
Let me just . . . the program management of the 
Federal/Provincial Management Committee is what it entails — 
one federal, one provincial member who co-Chair the 
committee. The program is project-based to ensure that the 
funding is strategically targeted to address federal and 
provincial priorities. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The Project Review Committee was established with 
representation from federal and provincial governments, as I 
pointed out, the Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association, the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities, and for northern projects, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Northern Communities. So these people are the 
ones that review and recommend approval or rejection of 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

 

municipal project proposals to the management committee for 
those decisions. 
 
It is not taken lightly, Mr. Chairman, and when there is so much 
funding available and there are so many projects there needs to 
be a priority set on those projects. And rather than, as the 
member opposite has suggested, that it becomes a political 
game, it’s not. It’s a serious game where there’s a lot of people 
have input to determine where the priorities lie. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Well, Mr. 
Minister, it goes on and I think this next comment — I think 
you’ll find near and dear to your heart, because this is also a 
quote, and yet they talk out there. 
 
They say their RCMP staffing levels that are below 
recommended levels, they need to upgrade their fire equipment, 
their sewage treatment facilities must be expanded. And the 
infrastructure partnership program may only fund half of that, 
so they are saying that they’ve got some money but it’s not 
anywhere near what they needed out there, Mr. Minister. 
 
In response to that they’ve had no alternative but to raise their 
taxes 14 per cent. So, Mr. Minister, we saw last year in the 
2000-2001 budget that that government brought forward, the 
first thing that they said in that budget — I remember that day 
well — they said we’re going to have tax breaks for the public. 
 
But then what did we see a day or two later as things started to 
come out and the smoke started to clear? It really wasn’t a tax 
break because they expanded the PST (provincial sales tax), 
there was a bunch of hidden fees for permits for a number of 
areas. So in the end what did the people of Saskatchewan get? 
They got exactly what we thought they were going to get, was 
tax increases. 
 
Now what do we see, Mr. Minister? 2001-2002 budget; we’re 
told how wonderful it is, even though we know it’s not 
sustainable and we can’t keep going that way. What do we see 
as the smoke clears from this budget, this great budget that we 
were supposed to believe was so wonderful? We’re seeing just 
about every municipality in this problem . . . or province, trying 
to find a way not to raise taxes . . . excuse me. 
 
But in both cases, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair, they can’t 
do anything but raise taxes. The city of Regina are having a 
tremendous debate over how to hold the line on property taxes. 
It’s a real dilemma, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now we have said to you across, and you have said that this 
can’t happen, but we’ve said instead of hiring 570 more 
government workers, why not take that $30 million and give to 
municipalities? Had you have done that, made that a priority, 
the city of Regina, for one example, would not have to be in 
that situation, Mr. Minister. They wouldn’t be going through 
this because their share of that would have helped them hold the 
line on taxes, solve their problem, and it would have done. 
Every other city in the province, every other town, every 
village, and every RM out there could have had an easier job 
trying to bring in this year’s budget without raising taxes. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, can you explain what these municipalities are 
supposed to do out there other than raise taxes? Explain to those 

people today, when they’re making their budgets up, what 
should they do? Cut services or raise taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I appreciate the question 
from the member. When budget time comes along, there’s only 
so much money and people recognize that. And they have to 
make some pretty tough decisions and make some calculated 
and informed decisions on how those precious dollars are going 
to be spent. 
 
The fact still remains that the government, the coalition 
government, has continued to increase monies going to 
municipalities from year to year — whether it’s through grants 
in lieu of, whether it’s through infrastructure programs, and 
assistance of that nature. 
 
Now the member opposite will be happy to hear that there are 
in fact no increases in those areas for permits and what he 
alluded to earlier in his question. So that’s positive. The 
decrease in personal income taxes is a positive thing and that’s 
been explained in the budget as well. 
 
So there are those areas that in fact people with sitting down . . . 
And I respect very much and I admire the people who in public 
office have to make some of these tough decisions, and they 
make them. And as money becomes available they do whatever 
they possibly can to ensure that they don’t have to reduce 
services, that they do their very best to maintain the quality of 
life for all the citizens that they represent. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
question, and I was trying to find it today. Can you tell me what 
the total municipal budget from that government in 1991 was 
and what the municipal budget for today is, this year, in this 
year’s budget? Can you give those numbers? I’d like to see the 
comparison. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that covers quite an 
extensive period of time; it goes back quite a ways. We don’t 
have that information here, but I’ll be very happy to supply it to 
you. 
 
You are asking specifically for the budget from 1991 for 
municipalities, the monies that were the revenue-sharing grants, 
and then compared to the total amount of monies that are going 
to municipalities in 2000 . . . 2001 rather? Is that correct, is that 
the way I understand . . . 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Deputy Chair. I guess if you’re going to that trouble, Mr. 
Minister, and you have to bring that information forward it 
would be really good if you could give us from ’91 on each 
year, what the total funding for the municipalities of all kinds, 
and if you can break that down that would be great, for each 
year since that point, Mr. Minister. I think we would find that 
very interesting and very informative. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think we need to go into a different area because 
I know this is a problem for yourself. And I get many calls on 
it, and I think every MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) probably in the legislature gets these calls, and it’s 
on reassessment. 
 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

And I think we’ve heard a number of examples, Swift Current, 
for an example where taxes have climbed $80,000 for a 
business. Some have talked about how their taxes have gone up 
$20,000. We have the Hotels Association, I believe you may 
have just met with them or one department has. What is in the 
works, Mr. Minister, to start dealing with the problems we’re 
having with this new reassessment this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, he 
will be aware perhaps that there is a review under way. I have 
met with the chairman of that independent body, SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency), and I’ve 
been told that there will be a review of the . . . in southwestern 
Saskatchewan of the assessment figures. And I will be notified 
of that. 
 
I want to once again just point out that it is my intention to 
work closely on behalf of the agencies and people that have 
concerns to ensure that the processes and the concerns are 
addressed. I met with the community in southwestern 
Saskatchewan as well and listened to them. And that’s what 
prompted my visiting with the president of SAMA, to address 
some of their concerns as well. 
 
So all these things need to be worked out in a co-operative way, 
in an amicable way, as opposed to in an adversarial way to 
come to the solutions that we all would like to see. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Thank you, 
Mr. Minister, and I sympathize with the situation we’re in here 
because it’s not an easy one to solve the problem. 
 
Have you looked at all, Mr. Minister, and have you talked to 
SAMA about maybe going to an income-based set of rules, or a 
dollar value for rent . . . what that building would bring in for 
rent? 
 
Are we looking already at some other form? Because what 
we’re seeing right now, Mr. Minister, it’s definitely not 
working out there. And I think we both would be very 
sympathetic to the problem if it were chasing businesses out of 
this province. I think it’s our feeling that we’ve already chased 
a number of them with the high taxes in this province. We 
certainly don’t want to chase any more businesses out, whether 
it be a motel, hotel, whatever kind of business out of there. 
Whether it be in rural Saskatchewan, urban Saskatchewan, 
wherever it is, we can’t afford to lose these businesses. Because 
number one, they’re good, solid, taxpaying citizens in this 
province. 
 
And I think, I’m hoping, what you’re answer’s going to be that, 
yes, we are looking at this. In fact, we’ve already got to some 
point with, possibly an income-based, I don’t know, I haven’t 
seen the fine details of something like this. Could you maybe 
expand on that, Mr. Minister, and where we are with SAMA at 
this point? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, that is a good 
question, because it has . . . that issue has been raised. And 
there has been some work done in that direction, the income 
approach. However we have not received total consensus from 
the mayors on proceeding in that direction. And here again is 
another situation that I want to point out, that’s it’s not 

something that will be imposed. It will . . . something that will 
come about as a result of a consensus from those people that 
will be affected by whatever legislation and direction we take. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. 
Minister. I may have missed part of your answer there. I’m 
sorry if I did. Are we though in the works here? Are we looking 
at that problem right now? Is SAMA looking at that problem? 
Because in the final outcome of all this, the government of the 
day is still responsible. I know SAMA has a board of directors 
and so on, from all the interested parties, but the government is 
still responsible. 
 
And if there’s an injustice happening in the province, we can’t 
wait five years to deal with it, because some of these people that 
we’re talking about from Val Marie, Swift Current . . . and it’s 
happening all over the province as they start to see what their 
assessments are, their new assessments. Are we starting to deal 
with this and trying to deal with it in a very quick fashion out 
there? Or are we going to let . . . one of these things we’re 
going to let drag for five years before we see any changes 
happen in the way SAMA is doing its job? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, SAMA has in fact been 
looking at that approach. And the Department of Municipal 
Affairs has also been doing some work on drafting processes or 
procedures in that direction as well. 
 
The most important thing is that the mayors have — some of 
the mayors — have told us to perhaps not go too quickly in that 
particular direction. And as I pointed out, it’s consensus from 
those people that we are looking for before proceeding in the 
implementation of any legislation that will cause SAMA to go 
in the direction of the income approach. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
SAMA itself, and I don’t know if you do this, I guess my 
question: do you get complaints about SAMA themselves? 
Have you had complaints about SAMA from the public, from 
people with their assessments, whatever — do you get that kind 
of a response from people out there in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in response to the 
member’s question, when I was in the southwest, I did in fact 
hear some concerns expressed about the disparity in the 
valuations of similar type properties. So I have heard those 
concerns and I have addressed them with the president of 
SAMA. And as a result, there is a review being carried out. It’s 
specifically from that particular area where I have personally 
heard those concerns. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, I guess again the question goes to . . . And I understand 
you have said that the cities, some of the mayors are saying 
don’t panic here; don’t go flying off without knowing exactly 
what you’re doing. 
 
But that’s fine. But the businesses that are sitting out there that 
cannot afford the increase in property taxes, such as we’ve 
talked about in Swift Current, Val Marie, and many other areas 
out there, Mr. Minister, whether it’s a hotel, a motel, a 
restaurant, any kind of business out there that’s being actually 
put under, because many in rural Saskatchewan right now — 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

 

and, Mr. Minister, you represent a rural constituency, you know 
what I’m talking about — many of these businesses, especially 
like small town Saskatchewan, where there’s hotels out there, 
are finding the line between profit and going under a very slim 
line. 
 
And if we come along all of a sudden and raise their 
assessment, whether by . . . because of the system that we have 
set up, it’s too late once we’ve put them under. It’s too late for 
the communities out there that have lost their hotel. It’s too late 
for the communities that have lost their restaurant or grocery 
store or pool room — whatever it is, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I’m sure you know what I’m saying because you represent 
yourself Ituna, Balcarres, a number of these smaller 
communities that one of the last things you have to lose out 
there is your hotel, your bar — they’re providing a service out 
there. Many of them are providing meals out there when the 
restaurant closes. These places we cannot afford to lose, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So I would like to say — and I hope you share my concern for 
this — that yes, they’re saying be cautious in how you change 
the rules. But on the other hand, we cannot sit back and not put 
some kind of formula in place that municipalities . . . And 
there’s some in place I know already but it doesn’t seem to be 
directed directly at this problem, to soften the blow so that these 
people can hang on until we get a new way of assessing these 
people. 
 
And I just wonder, Mr. Minister — and I’ll turn it over to the 
member from Moosomin who has some questions — but I just 
wonder if you share those concerns and if you’re hoping what 
I’m saying here today that we can act maybe quicker than 
slower on this problem. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I can certainly assure the 
member that I do sympathize with those communities and the 
business communities. There is an appeal process in place for 
the businesses with respect to their evaluations, their 
assessments. There are tax tools that are offered to communities 
that they may apply to, to ease some of the hurt that the 
member’s referring to. 
 
So yes, I do sympathize. And perhaps as time goes on in a 
collaborative setting that these issues may be overcome. 
 
The member opposite will remember 1997, some of the 
concerns that were expressed at that time that were overcome 
after reviews and re-evaluations, perhaps in some cases, and 
putting into use some of the tax tools that were available to ease 
the effects or the impact of the immediate assessment. 
 
So those are there. And yes, I am sympathetic and will continue 
to work with those communities in their best interest. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, I just want to, before I sit down and let the member 
for Moosomin take over, I want to thank your officials and 
yourself today. 
 

The only other question I had to do with this: is there a timeline 
on this? And you may have responded and I maybe missed it. Is 
there any kind of a timeline to say when we’re going to get to 
the point of addressing these issues so maybe we can get some 
of these problems . . . on the changing of the way that we assess 
some of these businesses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there are a couple of 
questions that the member is asking. On the review that’s being 
carried out, I would hope that in the not-too-distant future — I 
can’t give you a specific target date — but I know that they 
want to do their work diligently and come back with responses 
with respect to the review. 
 
As far as the ongoing process is concerned, the reviews that are 
underway in that respect will hopefully be in place for the next 
assessment, the next time that it comes around for reassessment. 
 
But in the meantime, it will . . . those problems will continue to 
be reviewed, looked at, discussed. And dealing with the income 
approach, hopefully, gain some support — unanimous support 
— at which point in time . . . We do not have that unanimous 
support to move in that direction as yet. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and to your officials, I 
just want to follow up a bit on the assessments. And certainly 
the issue of hotels has come forward and many of the hoteliers 
around the province have indicated that they’re going to see a 
substantial shift in the assessment on their property. And I think 
I just heard you talking about the fact where part of the 
component that might be looked at is the ability of a business to 
generate income. 
 
Now we see, currently in this city, a couple of hotels that are 
facing labour problems with employees. And it would seem, 
Mr. Minister, that this is an industry that is totally dependent on 
the public, and rates will reflect their ability to recover their 
costs. And I think one of the problems that they’re facing, like 
everyone else, is while their employees feel that they deserve 
more, they’re pushed to the limit. And certainly the change in 
the assessment on their properties is going to affect their bottom 
line as well. And so I can appreciate the difficulties they may be 
having right now as they discuss labour issues with their 
employees. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Minister, I want to go to an area that 
. . . trying to get some clarification on. When people appeal an 
assessment, and many cases they’re trying to find out from 
SAMA exactly how their property was assessed, and we’ve 
talked personally about a couple of instances in my 
constituency and I’m sure, certainly in other areas, you’ve 
probably had the same question raised. 
 
But what I found, Mr. Minister, is even talking with SAMA 
officials in our caucus we get . . . the term they use, the market 
adjustment factor, is an avenue that is used to determine or 
place a value on that property. And yet if an individual appeals 
or tries to appeal and they’re laying out their appeal, they’re 
trying to find out exactly how the assessment on their property 
was arrived at and they’re told it’s a market adjustment factor. 
But I haven’t found anyone yet who has been able to get that 
factor from SAMA so that they can sit down and legitimately, 
when they’re appealing their decision or the assessment factor, 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

put an appeal together. 
 
And I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, exactly what the market 
adjustment factor is and how a business or an individual would 
gain access to that so that they can put a proper appeal together 
to certainly show the Appeal Committee that their assessment is 
. . . or their property is way overvalued? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the hon. member, the 
businesses should know, should be aware of that market 
adjustment factor because it does vary from region to region 
and business people I know, in the southwestern communities 
that I spoke to, were aware of their market adjustment factor. 
 
So I’m not sure if that answers your question. And I’m not 
aware of why they would not be familiar with the market 
adjustment factor for any particular region that they represent. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
coming directly to the one issue we related in the Moosomin 
area with the Pipestone Valley Agro Parts, that is one factor that 
it seems that the owner of this business still to this day has not 
received or been given the layout of how that process works and 
what the market adjustment factor would be. Like I believe 
what that person is looking for is exactly how have you arrived 
at this, and I’d like you to give me the formula or whatever so I 
can get a better understanding of how you’ve arrived at 
assessment, so that I can put my appeal together. 
 
And I believe there are other businesses that are facing the same 
thing, certainly right in the area. I haven’t raised them 
personally, they haven’t come to me but they’re certainly 
watching the one situation. 
 
And what I’d like, Mr. Minister, and I believe a letter came to 
your office pointing this out, asking for the information as to 
how you get direct access to that and I’m wondering if you 
could give us a clarification on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Chairman, to the member 
opposite, I’m told that the gentleman you’re referring to would 
have had or should have had access to that market adjustment 
factor from SAMA, and I’m disappointed if that information 
has not yet been transmitted to him. 
 
But SAMA are the people that would offer up that information 
to an appellant during that process. And if that hasn’t yet 
happened, if that market adjustment factor or the information 
has not yet been conveyed to him, I’ll certainly be happy to 
follow up. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister. I believe just from recent consultations and certainly 
the gentleman has contacted your office as well and the 
suggestion of thought, I believe, was to go ahead with the 
appeal and then we’ll . . . that information should be available. 
And we’ll certainly follow up on it. And if it doesn’t arrive, 
most likely they’ll be bringing it to your attention as well. 
Because I believe . . . what do you have, about 30 days after 
you put your appeal in? I’m not exactly sure in order to then 
make . . . state your case to have that issue reviewed. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, we’ll certainly follow up and make sure that, 

indeed, the information is available as has been suggested. And 
certainly I appreciate the opportunity to meet about two months 
ago on the . . . raising the issue and just asking for some of 
these factors. 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, actually SAMA could save itself a lot of 
headache too, if they were . . . it seems that they’re really 
hesitant to give people information as to how they arrive at their 
assessments. And all it does is it creates anger and confusion 
out there, and then the unfortunate part that you and I, as the 
elected officials representing our constituents, we’re the first 
ones on . . . because we’re the handiest ones and we’re 
supposed to answer for the actions of bodies like SAMA. 
 
And I think if it’s imperative that we make sure that bodies like 
SAMA do disclose the avenues by which they arrive at 
assessments so that when people do raise their appeals, they 
know exactly what they’re working with. The bottom line is . . . 
the black and white is very clear, and they can make their 
appeal, an appeal that is based on a fair argument because 
they’ve got all the questions or the answers in front of them . . . 
the information in front of them. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think we need to pass that information to 
SAMA that they have to be a lot more open and upfront with 
any business or individual regarding the assessment that they 
may be appealing so that that person can then have a fair 
argument to present to the appeal board. 
 
And having said . . . mentioned the appeal, I just want to point 
out one other thing. Mr. Minister, when it comes to appeals, and 
I’ve argued this on numerous occasions, I’m wondering if there 
should be another avenue of . . . the establishment of appeal 
boards. Usually that’s someone from local government, and in 
fact, it would seem to me that . . . not necessarily being an 
arm’s-length removal from the direct impact that it might have 
on local government. It may not really give what could be 
perceived as an unbiased opinion in the final decision. 
 
And I’m wondering if your department, as well, Mr. Minister, is 
maybe looking at ways where we can remove the . . . or make 
the appeal look . . . the appeal process be more open and what 
would be perceived as more non-bias? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I very much 
appreciate the line of questioning from the hon. member from 
Moosomin. I want to point out that I’m informed that the 
current rules in place require SAMA to produce in writing the 
information that an appellant would require. 
 
And I’m also able to respond, Mr. Chairman, that we did have a 
discussion with respect to the appeals board earlier and there 
have been some changes made to that process. So your 
questions or the member’s questions are extremely valid and the 
issues that the member raises are being addressed or have been 
addressed. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. A 
follow-up question to the minister, if I may, as a result of the 
questioning from the member from Saltcoats. 
 
You mentioned when questioned about the timeline for the 
review that SAMA is conducting as a result of some of the 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

 

concerns that have come forward, you mentioned something 
about the next assessment period as a possible timeline. And 
that would be of concern. 
 
My understanding is, and I think the member outlined some of 
the concerns in my home city and other places very well, some 
hotel properties that are independently owned are seeing tax 
increases in the order of 70 to $100,000 as a result of the 
assessment. That’s increase in taxes, not increased in 
assessment. So their concerns are real and they’re emergent — 
they’re right now. They’re all about the situation right now. 
 
So when you indicate the timeline for the review, I wonder if 
you could expand on that. I think the understanding on the part 
of people in my constituency is that SAMA is looking at 
assessments in that area right now with the potential for, 
hopefully, a resolution in the near future, certainly not waiting 
until the next assessment period. Would you please confirm 
that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And I 
apologize to the members opposite if I created some confusion 
with respect to the review that is being undertaken by SAMA 
currently; it’s underway and it will be reported back in the very 
near future. 
 
The long-term review that I was referring to dealt with different 
approaches such as the income approach to future evaluations 
and assessments. 
 
Mr. Chair, I move we report progress. 
 
(16:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 

Subvote (PE01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Chair. Two things before I do 
my best to respond to the questions from the hon. member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood, I’d like to introduce an additional 
official who wasn’t before the committee when we met last 
week, and it’s Jim Benning who’s seated at the back, and Mr. 
Benning is the president of the Saskatchewan Communications 
Network, SCN. I’m glad to have him here. And I also was able 
to . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Sorry. Would the minister please 
introduce all of his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Okay. I’m not sure, this is off the top of 
my head . . . I recognize faces and I recognize names but I’m a 
bearcat when it comes to titles there, Mr. Chair. But the deputy 
minister to my left, Neil Yeates; and the assistant deputy 
minister to my right is Wayne McElree; and seated behind me, 
Lily Stonehouse; John Janzen, the executive director of student 
financial assistance branch; and Mae Boa, who is the executive 
director of finance and operations. Okay. 
 
Is that okay now, Mr. Chair? Thanks. 
 

And I would like to pass on, too, some information that the hon. 
member asked on Monday that we didn’t have available here, 
regarding education of our Aboriginal peoples. And if I can just 
. . . These would be numbers that would be taken from the 1996 
census, and so we would expect with the census this year that 
we will have some updated numbers in the not-too-distant 
future. 
 
For the member’s information, Mr. Chair, the Aboriginal 
population which has completed post-secondary education — 
now this is population 15 years and over, so not just those who 
are in the workforce, but 15 years and over — is 22 per cent; 
with some post-secondary education is 35 per cent; and those 
with at least grade 12 is 41 per cent. And I expect that that 
provides some information similar to the question that the hon. 
member asked. 
 
We look forward to discussion and questions from the hon. 
member. Thanks, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to welcome the minister and 
his officials here this afternoon and continue our discussion of 
estimates, pick it up where we left off last session. 
 
I believe near the end of our last examination of estimates in 
Post-Secondary Education, I’d asked the minister to explain the 
increase in staff of 34 positions, and he indicated, if I 
understood him correctly, that there was 22 positions in 
information technology area of the department. And I was 
wondering what the other 12 positions, where will they be 
utilized or why are they necessary? And also, what is the total 
cost of the additional 34 positions that are being added to the 
department in this year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the hon. 
member in response to his questions. First of all to respond to 
the last part of your question first, the net cost in the IT 
(information technology) area will actually be minus $400,000. 
So the impact will be a saving of $400,000 in total. And as I 
said the other day, that’s good news, I think, for the operation of 
government and the taxpayers to be well served. 
 
Of the positions themselves, 28 positions, including the 22 that 
you were referring to in your question, we’ll convert existing 
secondments, terms, and contracts to permanent positions. So 
there’s no new people; they’re just being converted to a 
permanent position from something that wasn’t previously that. 
 
There will be 4.5 new positions that are new to the system, and 
they will be to manage student loan agreements and the 
administration of the student tax credit programs and the like. 
 
And then there is also a 1.4 — and when I say a 4.5, 1.4, I’m 
talking about full-time equivalents, of course — 1.4 net 
positions which are transferred from Education, and that is in 
the area of payroll administration. As the hon. member may be 
aware those were previously done jointly and in the interests of 
effectiveness it was decided to do them separately, and so that’s 
where that one position comes from. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess I have a couple 
of questions in response to your answer. The 1.5 full-time 
equivalents that were transferred from the Department of 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

Education to the Department of Post-Secondary Education, I’m 
not sure whether you can answer this or not, but was there an 
equivalent reduction in the Department of Education? If they 
are no longer providing that function for your department, in 
fact they are doing it in-house, would we see a corresponding 
decrease in that department? 
 
And secondly, the 4.5 new positions that you indicated, to 
manage student loans and administer the tax credit, I wonder if 
we could have a breakdown as to how many people or what 
type of manpower is required to administer the tax credit, and 
are these people doing both or is there a division of 
responsibilities there? I wonder if you could address that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. The response to the 
member’s question, the 1.4 — it’s not 1.5 — 1.4 position 
transferred from Education is a transfer. There would be a 
corresponding reduction in Education. 
 
Of the 4.5 positions that I referred to, they’re captured in five 
bodies, of course. And two of those employees are working 
specifically focussed on the graduate tax credit; one is with 
information technology assignment; one is a manager and one is 
clerical. And their duties are not . . . They’re integrated with 
student financial assistance operations. So they are essentially 
to do with the loan agreements, administration, student tax 
credit programs, and other such initiatives. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister, in the last consideration 
of estimates, indicated that near the end of last fiscal year there 
was an additional $10.2 million in special warrants added to 
student financial assistance. And he indicated that this was 
more of the good news that we heard last time. 
 
I would like to point out to the minister that his government saw 
fit to, by and large, confiscate students’ millennium 
scholarships. In some provinces the students actually benefited 
from the millennium scholarship. But in this province the 
provincial bursary was reduced by the amount of the 
millennium scholarship. So in effect, basically the students are 
getting money . . . Money is being put into the bursary program 
that would more or less equate to the millennium scholarship. 
 
And I just would like to ask the minister if that in fact will 
happen in this current fiscal year? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, first of all, the amicable 
working relationship between the hon. member and myself 
appears to be a bit under strain with that question, but I 
recognize the context with which he asked it. I’ll not for a 
second accept his use of the word funds being confiscated from 
students — not for a second would that be true. In fact, much 
the opposite. 
 
There was a one-time assignment of funds to the benefit of 
students as a result of understandings with the millennium 
scholarship. And this was also in the context that the special 
bursaries program, which makes the Saskatchewan student loan 
program the most attractive, many would argue, in the nation, 
having been implemented the year in advance. But in that 
context it was requested to have permission to transfer some $7 

million to the universities directly, that was added to their base 
operating funds, and that has continued. 
 
And so there would have been a direct impact for reduced 
tuitions for all students attending our two universities in that, in 
that school year. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I listened intently and I . . . no where 
in the minister’s answer did I hear any indication as to whether 
or not that additional funding will happen again in this current 
fiscal year. So I think I will ask the question again. Will there 
be an additional $10 million in student aid in this current fiscal 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, what I was meaning 
when I said that the money was included in the university’s 
base operating grants, is that that was not a one-time infusion of 
funds to the universities which then didn’t continue. So the 
answer is that the funding to the universities that was initiated 
as a result of those funds being directed, continues in the base 
operating grant. And therefore is part of what’s before us in the 
estimates here today. It simply continues. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, from the minister’s answer, perhaps 
either I am confused or he is, and I’m not sure which, and 
perhaps this question will clarify that. The minister said in the 
last session that there was $10.2 million in the special warrant is 
being added to student financial assistance. Now do I take it 
from that statement that that money was added to the 
university-based operating grants? And that was my question. 
There was this one-time special warrant in the past fiscal year, 
if I understand the process correctly, and I’m asking will we see 
that again in this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, without attempting to 
respond directly to the question as to who’s most confused, let’s 
just simply say that we’re both dedicated to finding the truth. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, in that context I would simply want to explain 
that the $10.2 million that went to the student financial 
assistance fund is there as a part of a pool of funds that are 
drawn from them to provide the student loans. It’s administered 
separately from . . . There is a fund that is established for the 
direct purpose of having the funds available for the 
Saskatchewan student loans, and when those funds are depleted, 
they need to be replaced. 
 
And what was done then in the special warrant is that there was 
an addition of $10.2 million into that fund in the previous fiscal 
year that was made available by the unanticipated resource 
revenues. And that was seen as a good investment in the future 
and in our students — important access to funds from the 
Saskatchewan portion of their student loans. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I would like to thank the minister for 
his answer. So then what I understand from his answer then is 
that this $10.2 million was put into a student aid fund, which 
then is made available in the form of student loans and not 
bursaries or both? I’m not quite clear on that point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Both. 
 
Mr. Hart: — At this time, Mr. Chair, I would like to perhaps 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

 

look at a series of questions having to do with SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology). 
As we all know, SIAST plays a very important role in our 
province that provides the skills training and many other 
education and training services for students. 
 
I understand that the current president of SIAST will be retiring 
or is resigning from the position. And I understand that there is 
a search process initiated for a new president. I wonder if the 
minister could update us as to timelines as far as searching for a 
new president and just where exactly he’s at with searching for 
a new president? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — First of all, Mr. Chair, I want to thank the 
hon. member for his question about SIAST and acknowledging 
the important place that SIAST has in the lives of many people 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
What may be of interest . . . Just if I can take about 60 seconds 
to report some more good news actually to Saskatchewan 
people through the course of the estimates. If I remember the 
numbers correctly, and I don’t want to statistic the House to 
death, but they are I think significant numbers and they are 
consistent over the last several years. But the most recent 
review of SIAST grads done six months after graduation — this 
would be the ’99 grads — showed that within six months 91 per 
cent of the SIAST grads had gained employment, 83 per cent of 
them specifically in their field of training, and literally 95 per 
cent of them right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so it, I think, can be said by all of us with some pride that 
SIAST is an institution that is serving the needs of our students 
and our economy well. 
 
Now the leadership of the organization in the person of the 
president is currently under review. Dr. Knight’s term will be 
expiring and I expect he’ll be retiring. And the board of SIAST 
has formed a search committee which has engaged Executive 
Source to assist in the process of identifying people across the 
nation who may be appropriate to fill the president’s chair. 
 
The search committee of the board has now done its shortlisting 
and I’m advised will be doing some interviews in the next few 
short weeks. And I would expect some time this summer, 
depending on the circumstances of the successful candidate, 
that over the course of this summer the incoming president of 
SIAST will be announced. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your answer. Again 
dealing with SIAST, I’m looking at a newspaper headline that 
says that SIAST staff ratified a new contract and it’s dated 
March 13. I understand negotiations went ahead and the people 
at SIAST ratified a contract for three years. 
 
I guess one of my questions would be to the minister: does this 
new contract contain within it a unified pay grid for instructors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member. As part of 
the collective agreement negotiations, an agreement was 
reached to provide a process to develop a pay equity framework 
and that is being worked on now. And the target for 
implementation of the pay equity framework would be July of 
2003. 

Mr. Hart: — I wonder, Mr. Chair, if the minister could expand 
on this pay equity framework. What does it entail? How will it 
affect instructors? 
 
As he indicated, it will be implemented in July of 2003, which I 
believe would be the start of a new contract, if my math is 
correct. I know there are some serious concerns if a unified or 
pay equity program is the same as unified pay grid. I wonder if 
the minister would care to comment and expand on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the help of my 
officials to bring me up to current status of the discussions that 
are going between management and union. 
 
The process, and I think both are very clearly calling it the pay 
equity framework, is the process that they’ve agree that they’re 
engaged in. There’d be two things that are necessary. First of 
all, a specific means by which jobs can be number one, 
evaluated, and then secondly, a payment framework. 
 
They’re a long way from achieving the end result on the pay 
equity framework that they’re working on. But the thing that is, 
I think, clearly understood by both of the parties that are 
engaged in it is that this would be mutually negotiated and 
developed over a period of time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if the minister could perhaps 
give us some history as to how pay equity framework became 
part of the salary grid. Who first made the proposal? How long 
ago was this proposal first put forward? And why is it being 
looked at now? I understand this proposal has been put forward 
in the past and never was really taken or given much weight, 
and now it seems like it is being seriously considered. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, just to 
answer first of all the question: who initially proposed the 
unified pay grid? It would have come from the union some time 
ago. But it’s really, they’ve moved away, I understand it in the 
discussions, they’ve moved away from that and are now finding 
themselves engaged in the discussions around a pay equity 
framework at SIAST for the in-scope staff. 
 
Why is that happening? It occurs as a result, I think, of the 
influence of a government-wide initiative that has been going 
on in a number of fronts already, with the desire that our public 
employees would be receiving fair compensation based on 
equal pay for work of equal value and with the sense that that’s 
a fair and just way to determine the specific payments that 
individuals will receive. 
 
Just for the hon. member’s information, the discussions that 
SIAST is having related to the in-scope positions will not be 
groundbreaking in the sense that there is not a lot of work in 
progress that has been made in that regard in a number of other 
fronts. 
 
Government departments have already been implementing, 
working and implementing pay equity framework agreements. 
Regional colleges have in the post-secondary, so we have some 
experience there. Crown corporations have. The university 
administrative staff have done at both of our campuses here, 
and also SIAST administrative staff have got pay equity 
frameworks in place. 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

So I think there is a context of the desire to have fair 
remuneration based on the principle of equal pay for work of 
equal value. And the experience in these and a number of other 
fronts will probably serve to guide those discussions to try and 
make them meaningful. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if the minister could perhaps 
differentiate between pay equity and a unified pay grid, because 
I know with the latter there are some very . . . there is quite a 
number of people have some very serious concerns. And I 
wonder if the minister could give us his definition of both pay 
equity and unified pay grid. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I may not be the most ideal 
person to ask this question because I’m not engaged in the 
business of collective bargaining, of course, and I’m not there. 
But as I understand it, the essence . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Now the hon. member may have difficulty hearing because 
there’s a little chirping coming from his left ear there, and it 
may very well be extremely difficult to ever please the hon. 
member to his left and up. But anyhow we won’t go there, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
As I understand the difference between what would be referred 
to as a unified pay grid and the pay equity framework would be 
described something like this. The unified pay grid would refer 
to a system where everybody is being paid the same amount 
whereas a pay equity framework would attempt to do two 
things: number one, engage in a job evaluation process to 
determine those factors that contribute to the value in the job 
itself; and then secondly an assignment to the position based on 
the points that that position commands, and those can range 
from . . . be influenced by responsibility, supervision, education 
that’s required, and so on. 
 
So as I understand it the circumstance at SIAST, the in-scope 
staff, is that they’re moved to discussion about a pay equity 
framework where, as I said earlier, then the logical first step 
then is to engage in a fairly sophisticated kind of exercise where 
position by position then it’s an attempt to define the values of 
that position so that you can assign the appropriate level of 
remuneration. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I listened to the minister’s explanation 
and I guess I would have to say that I have received a number 
of very serious concerns with some of these things. As the 
minister indicated, there needs to be a job evaluation, which 
granted that’s true, and then of course establishing a set of 
remuneration for that position. 
 
But I guess the question is . . . that’s assuming that all people 
that fill this position — and particularly my remarks concern 
the instructors at SIAST — not all people are the same, not all 
instructors have the same qualifications, the same experience, 
the same levels of education. 
 
How would the concerns of these instructors . . . And what 
incentives would there be if everyone is treated the same, if 
they’re all doing the same job instructing classes, but yet one 
instructor has considerably more experience, considerably more 
education? How would that be handled? Or how would you 
handle the situation when you have a brand new instructor that 
is new on the job and that sort of thing? 

I mean, there’s some real serious concerns in that area. I would 
like the minister to respond to those concerns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, the process 
that is involved is bringing into place a framework by which 
there is assessment of the knowledge, skills, and abilities that 
are required for a position. But from that, there . . . I mean, let 
me change that — not from that. That would be in the context 
of the . . . still again, we go back to the importance of the 
collective agreement and negotiations. 
 
As the hon. member will be aware, it would be normal that 
there would be a pay grid and one of the things that’s common 
with a pay grid would have to do with experience, for example. 
And so that it’s certainly not for people like the hon. member 
and myself to come to conclusions here in the House. 
 
But the decisions would be made at the appropriate place where 
you have management and the employees’ representatives, the 
union, that are engaged. The discussion is about assessing the 
values of the positions, assigning remuneration, but all of that in 
the context of a grid which takes into consideration experience 
among other things. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, then from the minister’s answer, I take 
it then levels of education, years of experience, and those sorts 
of things that instructors may have will be recognized, and that 
there will be incentives for instructors to improve their 
education and their skills. Did I understand the minister 
correctly when . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I think in all frankness that’s not the kind 
of commitment that the minister is responsibly able to make in 
the House. That those are the kinds of conclusions that must be 
reached as a matter of or as a course of negotiations. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I would urge the minister to use 
whatever influence he has to make sure that there are incentives 
for the instructors. And I realize that some of these things fall 
within collective bargainings and so on, and the reason I would 
urge the minister to make sure that instructors with certain 
levels of education and years of experience are rewarded for 
having those types of qualifications is in the interest of quality 
education. 
 
If we end up having a job description and everybody gets paid 
the same regardless so long as they meet the minimum 
requirements, I mean that doesn’t auger very well for quality 
education. And this is something I think we have to be very 
careful to guard against. 
 
With that, I believe my colleague, the member from Cypress 
Hills has a few questions. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, and your officials, I appreciate the opportunity to 
address some of the questions in front of me today, and I hope 
that you’ll be able to answer them for me. I spent, in retrospect, 
I spent too long in post-secondary education. They were the 
most enjoyable years of my life, but they were too many of 
them. 
 
But I have a special appreciation for post-secondary education 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

 

because of that, and I know the importance that institutions of 
those types play in our economies and in our social fabric. 
 
And I’m deeply interested in the number of people who will 
take advantage of post-secondary education, in terms of the 
number of graduates that we might have from post-secondary 
schools of all types in the province. Can you give us the number 
of graduating students you’re expecting for this year? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member for Cypress 
Hills, I first of all share his enthusiasm of the importance of 
post-secondary education, and I would maybe just take slight 
issue with his statement. I don’t know that it would be possible 
to spend too much time in post-secondary education, and I note 
that he said that somewhat facetiously or tongue-in-cheek. 
 
Probably the easiest way to give you a reasonably accurate 
forecast would be the number of graduate tax credit receipts or 
certificates that were mailed out this year that would have gone 
out in February. And it was very, very close to 10,000 graduates 
from post-secondary in the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, to the 
minister again: the tax credit receipts that you mailed out, 
they’re valued at $350 apiece as I understand it, for this year’s 
budget. And I’m wondering, I don’t know if it was clarified 
anywhere or not, but is that tax credit available to all students 
regardless of whether or not they stay in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — No, a student has to file a Saskatchewan 
tax return in order to claim it, because it’s a tax credit. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Can the minister tell me, if given that the data 
that you’ve got now, how many students you anticipate will 
stay in Saskatchewan out of the 10,000 expected graduates? 
 
Or I’m sorry, you said you had 10,000 certificates sent out. Can 
you equate that to the number of graduates? Can you give us 
any percentage relationship between the number of statistic . . . 
I’m sorry, the number of people who graduated and the number 
of people who got the tax credit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — It’s difficult to be precise when you’re 
asking one to forecast, of course. 
 
A piece of information that the hon. member may have not 
heard me refer to just a little bit earlier when the hon. member 
for Last Mountain-Touchwood raised the matter of SIAST, I 
was just describing there the most recent graduate survey of 
SIAST which probably serves as a good guide. 
 
The most recent one done is 1999 grads and the results were 
very, very consistent with the two previous years that I’m 
familiar with. That told us that within six months of graduation 
from SIAST, 91 per cent of the graduates were working and 95 
per cent of them working here in Saskatchewan and, if I 
remember correctly, I think 83 per cent of them working 
precisely in their field of training. 
 
So that would give you an indication of the SIAST grads. The 

data that we will be able to collect over a period of time, of 
course, from the take-up on the post-secondary graduate tax 
credit, will give us a much more accurate and measurable 
number in the future. But at this point in time it’s difficult to be 
precise. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I’m going 
down this line of questioning is that given my opening 
statement, recognizing the importance of post-secondary 
education for the future of our province from an economic and a 
social perspective, I’m asking the effect of the $350 tax credit. 
 
In your view, is that a sufficient amount of tax credit to have 
people justify staying in Saskatchewan? The statistics you gave 
us of SIAST graduates are very encouraging. I’m not aware of 
any statistics at any other institution that would be quite that 
overwhelmingly positive. 
 
And I refer to a situation that I’m aware of at the University of 
Saskatchewan. The civil engineering graduates from the 
University of Saskatchewan last year, I believe there were 17 in 
total, and out of that 17, I’m told that 11 of those graduates left 
the province. Several went to other provinces and quite a 
number actually went to the United States. So in view of that 
kind of evidence on the other side of the spectrum, I’m 
wondering whether $350 in tax credit is enough to keep those 
very valuable students, those well-educated and expensive 
students, I might add, in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, again, the question the hon. 
member asks is difficult to answer with precision as he will 
understand. When any one of us makes our decisions about our 
future it’ll be realistically for a combination of reasons. And I 
suppose among them for this young lad who grew up in Alberta 
and then went away to Manitoba to get my first . . . my degree, 
ended up coming to Saskatchewan. And that’s not an 
uncommon story. We will have Saskatchewan graduates 
leaving our province, going to other provinces and other 
countries in the similar way that we will have in fact, other 
people coming from . . . or graduates coming from other 
provinces to Saskatchewan. 
 
And I may just take a moment to fill the hon. member in on 
what is the most recent national survey to try to capture that. 
But before I do, just to put it into a context as well, it would be 
my view that in Saskatchewan we’re not just training only 
Saskatchewan people. We’re not just training 
Saskatchewanians. We’re training Canadians. And we would 
want them to see that. 
 
And it’s partially in that context that it’s really quite justified 
that, although education is a provincial jurisdiction, 
responsibility, that we do expect the federal government to 
contribute to post-secondary education, not just in 
Saskatchewan but across the nation. 
 
And it’s really in that context that one of the things that we’re 
working hard at, all of the provinces together, is to have 
mobility for graduates and recognitions of credentials across the 
nation so that Canadians are able to be mobile and to have their 
credentials recognized across. 
 
So we need to acknowledge, first of all, that Saskatchewan is 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 30, 2001 

 

not an island and there aren’t fences up at the border, nor would 
we want them to be. 
 
But if I can just very, very quickly advise the hon. member, Mr. 
Chair, the most recent national survey and movement of grads 
was done by the Council of Ministers of Education of Canada, 
in concert with Statistics Canada. It’s done about every decade 
and what they do is assess where graduates are at two years 
after completion of their studies. So in other words, after the 
dust kind of settles and they get themselves established. 
 
So the most recent study in the nation was on graduates from 
the 1986 academic year, two years later, ’88. And that study, to 
make a long story short — I can give you more detail if you 
wish — but to make a long story short, showed that we had four 
and a half percent more post-secondary graduates working in 
Saskatchewan than we had produced. 
 
After all was said and done, Saskatchewan was a net importer 
of graduates. Now will that be the same every year? These will 
be influenced by many dynamics, of course, in the nation as we 
know them but certainly would give us reason to believe that 
when Saskatchewan is investing tax dollars in the 
post-secondary system in support of people who grew up here 
some, many, most, of course, we know will establish 
themselves here and make their careers here and be part of 
building the future of our province. Some will choose to leave. 
Others will choose to come. 
 
And it’s kind of interesting when I looked at where are they 
going to and where are they coming from, the answers are really 
both the same. Where are they going to? They’re going to 
Alberta, BC (British Columbia), Manitoba and Ontario. Where 
are they coming from? They’re coming from Alberta, BC, 
Manitoba and Ontario. 
 
But the reality is that we live in a modern day economy in our 
nation in which there is a relatively higher, I think, level of 
mobility among graduates than there may have been when you 
and I first came out of our post-secondary studies and entered 
the workforce at that time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
I’d like to ask a couple of questions, as our time for closing is 
near, to allow us to prepare some research for the next time that 
Post-Secondary estimates are up. 
 
If I could ask you to refer to the budget document on page no. 
14 and 15 which are the schedule of lending and investing 
activities of the government. And on page 14 we talk about the 
receipts of government from loans. And on page 15 we talk 
about, of course, the disbursements that would be made by way 
of loan. 
 
On page no. 14 there will be receipted income by this 
government of $28.3 million. Now there’s two questions there, 
Mr. Minister. Where is the $28.3 million coming from? Is it 
from repayment of old loans or is it federal money? 
 
And the second question — that seems to indicate that there’s a 
new system of accounting because the previous year there was 
no money allocated in the way of receipts — could you indicate 
to the House what changes have occurred for that number? 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for the 
question. As the hon. member may be aware, the student loan 
year begins on August 1. And he will be aware that we have a 
lending agreement with the Royal Bank which expires July 31. 
 
And what this represents is the amount of student bursaries that 
will be paid out through our student loan system between 
August 1 and March 31. So this won’t be for a full year because 
the estimates before us are on the fiscal year. And we will be 
going to — we talked about this in the last estimates — we’re 
working on an integrated loan system together with the federal 
government where then those payments will be made directly 
by the province of Saskatchewan. So this is bursary amounts in 
the student loan, beginning August 1. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — And the second part of my question, Mr. 
Minister, why do we note the difference in that the blank . . . 
there is a blank number for the previous year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — You’re asking about the 62 million 800 
thousand. Then this is . . . right now in the . . . because we’re 
still not at August 1, the money is being loaned by the Royal 
Bank. And these 62 million 800 thousand is the estimated 
amounts from August 1 to the end of March for student loans 
that the province of Saskatchewan will be directly loaning. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much for clarifying that, Mr. 
Minister. Now, Mr. Minister, as you’ve indicated, the contract 
will expire with Royal Bank and I was reading through your 
comments that you have in Hansard on April 23 regarding the 
negotiations that are underway. 
 
I recall, Mr. Minister, that a lot of problems existed with not 
only student delinquencies but I guess bankruptcies would be 
the word to use, and the rates that were provided by 
post-secondary officials back a number of years ago showed 
that the incidence of declared bankruptcies on student loans was 
skyrocketing. I recall an estimate of 60-some bankruptcies one 
year, and then within a few years right after that it was up to 
700-plus. And in the negotiations with Royal Bank, the Royal 
Bank in fact demanded or insisted on a bump-up to ensure that 
they could be compensated for those bankruptcies that would 
occur. And I think the minister understands that that was in 
existence. 
 
Now if we’re moving to a new program effective August 1 
where Saskatchewan and Canada will technically be the 
lenders, the approvals, those officials that will approve them, 
what will happen when we start to look at those new loans four 
or five years from now? Who is going to be able to administer 
whether or not there’s a bankruptcy? 
 
(17:00) 
 
And I recall the vice-president of Royal Bank saying very 
clearly that we want to establish a relationship, a client and 
business relationship, to ensure that we want to keep the client 
forever. I can recall her saying we want a loan for a car, we 
want a mortgage on the home, we want to be providing this 
business. So yes we know there will be a few that will declare 
bankruptcies but we’ll have them as our client. 
 
How will the government be able to control . . . You don’t want 



April 30, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

 

them as the lending client forever. And yet you will be the first 
lender as of August 1 for the new clients. What kind of a system 
are you thinking about in your negotiations with the federal 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, he will be 
aware that really since the time that he’s referring to, that the 
federal government has, by legislation, limited the ability of 
students to declare bankruptcy. And that appears to have very 
significantly influenced the outcomes as they relate to 
bankruptcies by students. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It now being past 5 p.m., this committee 
stands recessed until 7 p.m. this evening. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 
 


