















































Hansard: April 12, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 541 
 April 12, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I rise to present a petition on behalf of a number of 
people in the community of Gull Lake and Tompkins. And the 
petition concerns their worries, frankly, about the 
recommendations in the Saskatchewan EMS (emergency 
medical services) development project report. And they have a 
petition which reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present 
a petition on behalf of young people in Regina who are 
concerned about protection from tobacco and second-hand 
smoke. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive provincial 
legislation to protect children and youth from second-hand 
smoke and protect them from the health hazards of tobacco 
use. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am happy to 
present a petition from petitioners who are concerned about two 
of government’s Crown corporations, SaskPower and 
SaskEnergy, who both recently announced significant rate 
increases for residential and business customers. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners reside in the community of 
Biggar and I’m pleased to present the petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to present today on the EMS report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 

implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are all from Naicam. 
 
Mr. Stewart: —Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a 
petition prepared by citizens concerned with the proposed 
weight restrictions to Highway 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the economic harm that the plan to close 
Highway 43 to heavy traffic will do to south-central 
Saskatchewan and instead to vote necessary funds to 
upgrade Highway 43 in order to preserve jobs and 
economic development in the area. 
 

And the petition is signed from individuals from the 
communities from Vanguard, Swift Current, and Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
on behalf of young people who . . . and I’ll read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures are from students, young students from the 
city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people concerned about the state of the hospital in Swift 
Current. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of this petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, a thank you to the entire Rush Lake Hutterite 
colony, the Hofers and the Wipfs, who live there who have 
signed this petition. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition on 
behalf of young people in Regina also concerned about the 
harmful effects of tobacco use. And the petition reads: 
 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 

 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it is signed by students in Regina. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about their ambulance service. And the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Radville, Pangman, Ceylon, 
and Gladmar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in 
support of a comprehensive tobacco control legislation. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to protect children and youth from 
second-hand smoke and protect them from the health 
hazards of tobacco use. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to present a 
petition from citizens concerned about the future of the Hafford 
Hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary steps to ensure the 
Hafford Hospital remains open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good citizens of Speers, North Battleford, and 
Richard. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
of citizens concerned with the rates charged by SaskEnergy, 
SaskPower. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 

portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the towns of Davidson, Bladworth, and Girvin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned with the 
centralization of ambulance services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve the community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to the petitions comes from the communities of 
Mozart, Wynyard, Leslie, Elfros, Quill Lake, and Dafoe. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
Reverting highways to gravel; and 
 
The protection of children from tobacco use. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today to 
introduce two very important people in my life who are now in 
Alberta, my sisters. I’m fortunate because I know the true 
meaning of the saying, sisters by chance and friends by choice. 
 
My sister, Carol Secondiak is from Brooks. She’s an 
independent nurse practitioner. She works with private 
companies for pre-employment medicals and drug screening. 
 
And my other sister, Judi Legaré is from Calgary. She’s the 
purchasing agent and customer relations person for United 
Agri-Products and deals with many Saskatchewan 
agri-businesses. And I can monitor the farm situation in 
Saskatchewan by just phoning Judi. 
 
So please welcome my sisters. 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, it’s a privilege to introduce, in your 
gallery, two guests with us today: John Schmeiser, the 
executive vice-president of the Canada West Equipment 
Dealers Association, and with him his administrative assistant, 
Carol Wieland. They are here for meetings that they’re having 
with the Prairie Implement Manufacturers Association from 
their office in Calgary. 
 
And I just ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Celebration of Easter and Passover 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
weekend marks the end of the most sacred time of the year for 
two of the world’s great religions — Christianity and Judaism. 
Last Sunday was both the first day of Passover and Palm 
Sunday; tomorrow of course is Good Friday, followed by Easter 
Sunday, when many of us will celebrate the miracle of life out 
of death which is the heart of the Christian faith. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, this forum is not the place for sectarian 
comments, but I believe that as we prepare for our traditional 
spring break, it would do no harm for us to take with us the 
central messages of this season as it derives from the shared 
history of these two faiths. 
 
From the Passover celebration we are reminded that as long as 
any are in want we are all still in bondage, as were the children 
of Israel. But at the same time, there is always the hope of 
redemption. And I quote: 
 

For in the time of freedom, there is knowledge of servitude. 
And in the time of bondage, the hope of redemption. 
 

And from the lesson of Easter, as I mentioned, the message of 
wonderful consolation that out of death comes life; out of 
suffering, wisdom; out of sorrow, joy. The fact that both 
observances come at the beginning of spring, when the earth 
reaffirms this message, is no accident, Mr. Speaker. As the 
author of the Book of Psalms says: 
 

Those who sowed with tears, will reap with songs of joy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as we prepare each in our own way to observe 
this weekend, we bring you and all members the prayer from 
the Passover service: 
 

Peace for us. For everyone. For all people, this is our hope. 
Next year in Jerusalem. Next year, may all be free. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as well to 

add some comments in regards to the special weekend that 
we’re looking forward to celebrating. I know, Mr. Speaker, that 
the members in this Assembly, be they government or 
opposition or the independent member, Mr. Speaker, and 
including the Speaker, we’re all looking forward to going home 
and joining together with family and friends. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as we think of this special time of the year, 
it’s the Easter season, it’s a time when we pause for a moment 
to reflect on the love expressed by an Almighty Heavenly 
Father for his people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know we’re . . . as we get together with 
family, we all appreciate our families, and we enjoy our 
families, and we enjoy the time of sharing that time of 
fellowship together. Certainly the people who celebrate the 
Julian calendar are going to be taking time to spend the time 
with their family, and share in that special moment. 
 
But this moment around Easter centres around a time of what, 
we use the term Good Friday, but, Mr. Speaker, it’s anything 
but, when we think of the death of the Lord Jesus Christ. 
 
However, the greatest aspect of the Easter season is the 
Resurrection, it’s a time of new life. And we’re into the spring 
season where we’re going to see new life beginning to spring 
forth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to, on behalf of my colleagues, wish each 
and everyone in this Assembly a very blessed Easter season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ninth Annual National Aboriginal Curling Championships 

 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, good news this Easter 
weekend. The Metis National Council, and the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan are proud to host the ninth annual National 
Aboriginal Curling Championships. 
 
The event will take place April 12 to the 16 in Saskatoon, at the 
Granite Curling Club. This event will see teams from 
Saskatchewan, Alberta, Northwest Territories, Manitoba, 
Ontario, and British Columbia. 
 
This event not only brings the best Aboriginal curlers to our 
great province, but they are pumping in tens of thousands of 
dollars to the economy in Saskatoon. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to congratulate the host 
committee led by Maynard Whitehead, and Martin Aubichon, 
for a job well done. 
 
I also want to welcome all curlers and visitors, and hope their 
stay is a memorable one. 
 
I also want to also congratulate last year’s champions. The 
junior women’s champ was Sharise Kadachuk from 
Cumberland House. The junior men’s champ was Doug Sinclair 
from Green Lake. The women’s champ was Lena Dubray from 
Meadow Lake. The men’s champ was Marshall Bear from 
Little Pine. 
 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 

Eastend Kinette Club Marks Anniversary 
 

Mr. Elhard: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 
today to have this opportunity to publicly recognize the Kinette 
Club of Eastend on the occasion of its recent 40th anniversary. 
This past weekend I was invited to attend the celebration of this 
milestone at a special dinner and program, and it was my 
pleasure to bring greetings to the assembled guests on behalf of 
the provincial legislature and the people of Cypress Hills. More 
than a hundred turned out for that event including many former 
residents of the community and several of the charter members 
of the original club. 
 
Now the Eastend Kinettes chartered their club on February 2, 
1961 and they’ve been fundraising and serving the community 
ever since. Their activities include the provision of school 
scholarships, sponsoring swimming lessons, the kid’s ID 
(identification) program, fundraising for the food bank, cystic 
fibrosis, and of course Telemiracle. 
 
Now every thriving community owes its success and its future 
to its volunteers and a strong leadership. It is obvious to all who 
live in or visit the town of Eastend that a good deal of its 
leadership and volunteerism have roots in the Kinettes and their 
fellow organization, the Kinsmen. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to publicly acknowledge 
and congratulate the many club members who have worked 
tirelessly for the past 40 years to provide community service to 
the town of Eastend and to the province generally. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Donates Equipment 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to 
announce to the Assembly that SaskPower has donated some 
new equipment to the Palliser campus of SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) for its electrical 
engineering technology program. 
 
Once again, our Crowns are showing themselves to be 
responsible community citizens as well as excellent providers 
of necessary services. Although, Mr. Speaker, this time there is 
a wee bit of responsible self-interest in SaskPower’s gift. 
 
The electrical engineering lab has received a gift of $5,000, 
which it has used to purchase four oscilloscopes, an instrument 
that is as vital to scientific research as it is difficult to 
pronounce. The oscilloscope is used for a wide range of 
measurements that one finds in electronics development and 
scientific research laboratories. These instruments will enable 
SIAST students in the program to more easily make the 
transition from classroom to workplace. 
 
And here’s where the self-interest comes in, Mr. Speaker. 

SaskPower hires the graduates of this program. A Saskatchewan 
corporation hiring Saskatchewan youth to work and raise their 
families in the province. As Arnold Boldt, SIAST dean of 
technology, said: 
 

This is a prime example of education and the workplace 
working hand in hand. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is the third year in a row SaskPower has 
donated money for equipment so the program can remain 
updated. As I said, one does not have to go far to look for good 
corporate citizens, as far as the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assiniboia Rebels Hockey Team to Compete 
for Keystone Cup 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I’d like to recognize the accomplishment of the 
Assiniboia Rebels Hockey Team of the Junior B League. They 
started out the playoffs in southern Saskatchewan with four 
straight wins against Canora. Then they went on to win the 
southern regional B championship with four straight wins 
against St. Philips. 
 
Next, Mr. Speaker, they played against the Junior B 
championship from the North, Saskatoon Royals, winning in 
three straight games. Now they advanced to the Western 
Canadian Junior B Championship to compete for the Keystone 
Cup to be held in Maple Ridge, BC (British Columbia) on April 
19 to 23. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is quite an accomplishment in 10-0, perfect 
record in playoff games, and they have not lost a game since 
January. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of everyone in the Assembly I’d like to 
congratulate the Assiniboia Rebels for their successes and wish 
them all the best in the Keystone Cup in Maple Ridge, BC. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Hosts First Nations Winter Games 
 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
stand before you today to speak about the 21st annual First 
Nations Winter Games being held in Prince Albert. The Prince 
Albert Grand Council has some experience hosting the games 
as it did so in 1995. 
 
The opening ceremonies will take place at the Prince Albert 
Comuniplex from 2 to 4 p.m. on Easter Sunday. There is a 
change in format at the games, Mr. Speaker, from previous 
years. The games have been divided into two parts. The 
younger aged groups will compete in the first half of the games 
from April 15 to 17, and the older athletes will compete in the 
second part from April 18 to 19. 
 
Between these two areas there will be a total of more than 3,000 
athletes, coaches, and chaperones participating at this year’s 
games. 
 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

 

Also new to this year’s games, Mr. Speaker, will be the 
introduction of arm wrestling and female hockey. Another new 
aspect of the games will be a focus on wellness. Wellness 
booths will be set up at each venue for the purpose of 
promoting a healthy lifestyle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these games are a great opportunity for First 
Nations youth to participate in sport. I would like all the 
members of the House to join me in wishing good luck to the 
athletes and to the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Estevan and District Music Festival 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After two weeks of 
performances, the Estevan and District Music Festival came to 
a successful conclusion last Wednesday afternoon at the 
Estevan Comprehensive School with a concert and awards 
presentation. 
 
This year the adjudicators recommended eight individuals and 
one choir to perform at the Saskatchewan Music Festival 
Association finals to be held in Saskatoon from June 15 to 17. 
This is the largest contingent to ever be recommended to go 
from the Estevan festival. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I would also like to 
congratulate Shirley Andrist of Estevan for the recognition she 
received for the endless hours of volunteer work with the 
Saskatchewan Music Festival Association. Shirley is involved 
in many organizations in Estevan and the southeast of 
Saskatchewan, and is a tireless worker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Shirley, and also congratulations to all performers at the 
Estevan Music Festival and the best of luck in the finals. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Fyke Commission Report 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Yesterday Ken Fyke offered some disturbing 
observations about Saskatchewan’s health care system. After 10 
years of NDP (New Democratic Party) mismanagement, Fyke 
describes Saskatchewan’s health care system as fragile. He also 
says the health system has, quote: “yet to achieve an appropriate 
level of quality.” Translation — the NDP health care system is 
failing. 
 
And after 10 years of failed NDP health reform, the quality of 
health services is substandard. But what is the NDP response, 
Mr. Speaker? The Premier wants to form another committee 
and do nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much longer does the Premier want to wait 
before taking action, to fix the NDP’s broken health care 

system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased this 
morning to have the opportunity to speak to the question by the 
member opposite on behalf of the Premier and the Government 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite and to this House, Mr. 
Speaker, that Saskatchewan gave to Canada a very important 
gift. Saskatchewan gave to Canada the gift of medicare and 
health care not only for this province, but for all Canadians. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, in this House and this Assembly, the 
Premier and this government have put forward a plan. A plan to 
examine and look at this very important issue of health care and 
medicare in Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, we’ve outlined how that process will 
work. This will be about engaging all of Saskatchewan people 
in the dialogue. A very important dialogue, Mr. Speaker, that 
will be about the future of health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, we should pay attention to 
what Mr. Fyke said in terms of how we build a strong, 
integrated health care system for Saskatchewan and Canadians. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party is 
thinking about the invitation to sit on the health care committee 
that the NDP proposed. But it’s really hard to conclude that the 
Premier’s latest committee is anything more than a stalling 
tactic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP just spent $2 million on the Fyke 
Commission. Fyke spent the past year consulting with the 
public and health care professionals and, while the 
Saskatchewan Party is disappointed with many aspects of the 
Fyke report, the fact is that Fyke has now reported and now is 
the time for the government to put an action plan in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier really think that hiding behind 
yet another committee and doing nothing for another six months 
is going to improve health care quality in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the House 
and to the member opposite, last year, as I sat in my chair on 
this side of the House, I listened to the member opposite get up 
on a daily basis when we talked about health care in this 
province and he continued to ask this Assembly and put the 
point forward about having a public audit of the health care 
system, continued to be on a daily basis his wordage. 
 
We said to the member opposite we have a process in 
Saskatchewan today to examine what the member opposite was 
talking about, to have a discussion and examination in 
Saskatchewan with all Saskatchewan stakeholders, people who 
use the health care system about what our health care system 
should look like. 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

And today, Mr. Speaker, what we have in this province, we 
have a document that provides us with a bit of a template about 
what we should be looking at in terms of the future of health 
care in Saskatchewan. And I say to the member opposite, why 
don’t you join the discussion, why don’t you participate in the 
discussion about how we’re going to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I would ask the 
Deputy Premier, in his responses, to address his responses 
through the Chair, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the government’s refusal to 
lead on health care reform is nothing short of pathetic. It comes 
at a tremendous cost to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
According to Mr. Fyke, the NDP’s refusal to take action will 
cost hundreds of millions of wasted health care dollars. People 
will lose their lives unnecessarily because of error. Doctors and 
nurses will continue to leave Saskatchewan and hospital waiting 
lists will continue to grow. Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the 
government to stop hiding and make a decision and to come up 
with their plan for what health care needs to be improved in, in 
this province. 
 
Does the government support Fyke’s report’s plan to close 50 
more hospitals in Saskatchewan and, if they don’t, what is the 
government’s plan for fixing the health care mess that their 
government has created. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I hear the member going on 
about issues that he, it sounds like, has already decided about 
what should happen in Saskatchewan. And I want to say to you, 
Mr. Speaker, that on this side of the House and through the 
process that we’ve indicated to Saskatchewan people, there 
haven’t been any decisions made about what the future of this 
province’s health care system should look like. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, I say to the 
member opposite. Yesterday the member opposite in this House 
says this: it is absolutely critical that people right across the 
province have a mechanism where they have ownership of the 
system rather than just be standbys and observe what’s been 
given and come down on high, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say to the member opposite, that’s exactly the kinds of 
process that we’re engaging in over the next couple of months 
— over the next couple of months. 
 
And we support the member opposite’s position on this, Mr. 
Speaker. And I say to the member opposite, you need to be part 
of that process in the way . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Just to remind the member once more, use the 
word they or he rather than you, and direct your remarks 
through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 

NDP government, the NDP government has been hiding behind 
Roy Romanow to avoid taking responsibility for its health care 
mess. Well Roy Romanow is gone. The NDP has been hiding 
behind the Fyke commission, and the Fyke commission has 
now reported. And now the NDP wants to hide behind yet 
another committee for another six months before making any 
kind of decisions. 
 
Meanwhile, Saskatchewan is on the verge of losing our College 
of Medicine in Saskatoon and just this week the NDP hid while 
more heart surgeons and psychiatrists are leaving the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the government to stop hiding and 
start doing its job. What is the NDP’s position on the Fyke 
report and when will the NDP take action to clean up the mess 
that they have created? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
asks the question about what are we going to do over the next 
six months. And I say to the member opposite, if he’s been 
paying attention to the process, the process is clearly painted. 
 
First of all in this province this year this government, through 
the work of the Finance department and the Treasury Board and 
a budget we put $250 million into the health care system so that 
we can provide some assurances to the people of Saskatchewan 
over the next several months as we make the . . . as we have the 
discussion with Saskatchewan people about what the new 
health care system should look like in our province. So we put 
some money aside to make that happen. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we’ve said to the people of 
Saskatchewan and this Assembly that we’re going to have a 
dialogue with the people of Saskatchewan on the 
recommendations that Mr. Fyke has put forward to us. 
 
So we’re going to bring Mr. Fyke into the House, we’re going 
to have all Saskatchewan people participate in watching what 
we’re going to ask. We’re going to have a process where we’re 
going to have the stakeholders come into this Assembly or into 
this building, have an inclusive — inclusive discussion about 
what Saskatchewan people want in health care for the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all 
that we’re getting from the NDP is stalling tactics. It took a year 
after the ’99 election to set up the Fyke Commission. Mr. Fyke 
spent $2 million and another year to complete his report. He 
literally had presentation from hundreds of Saskatchewan 
people. And now the NDP wants us to set up another health 
care committee and listen to the same hundreds of people 
present their same reports over and over again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the government to stop hiding. The 
Saskatchewan Party has provided a brief to the Fyke 
Commission and has laid out our belief of what needs to be 
done to improve health care in Saskatchewan, and the NDP has 
done nothing. We’ve expressed our opinion to the Fyke 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

 

Commission, and the NDP had refused to say anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cost of the NDP refusing to act is a further 
deterioration of the health care system in this province. Mr. 
Speaker, is that the kind of price this government is willing to 
pay in order to delay and hide longer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the 
House, having a discussion with people of Saskatchewan, 
advising people of Saskatchewan about what the process might 
be over the next couple of months, Mr. Speaker, is not about a 
stalling tactic. This is not about a stalling tactic, this is about 
having a discussion with the people of Saskatchewan about 
what the future of one of the most important services in this 
province is going to be — health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the member opposite says that this is a stalling tactic. Now 
I would ask the member opposite to go to Saskatchewan people 
and say to them that we’re not going to involve you in the 
process. Because this is what he’s indicating — we should not 
involve the people of Saskatchewan in the process. 
 
And I say to you, Mr. Speaker, we have a process. The process 
is going to be to take this document, Mr. Fyke’s document, 
present it to Saskatchewan people, have the stakeholders come 
back and advise us so that we can build the most accessible, 
sustainable health care system in the future, not only for 
Saskatchewan, but I think Canadians will adopt, like we gave 
the gift of medicare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Protection for Children in the Sex Trade 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Justice. Mr. Speaker, this NDP government still has no 
legislation in place to protect children involved in the child sex 
trade. 
 
The Government of Alberta passed legislation to deal with this 
issue three years ago. And just last month they proclaimed 
amendments to make their original Bill even stronger. The 
Government of Alberta is taking action; Manitoba has taken 
action. Now it may not be perfect, but without question some 
children are being helped. Some children are being saved from 
a life of misery and degradation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am starting to feel like the NDP government’s 
intent in striking the Committee to Prevent the Sexual Abuse 
and Exploitation of Children was to provide them with an 
excuse not to take action — to stall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an urgent matter. When is the government 
going to act? Will we see legislation in this session to protect 
children caught in the child sex trade? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for her question. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House, attempted to work 
with the other side of the House to strike a committee to look at 
this horrible problem that is taking place in some of our 
communities, Mr. Speaker. We hope that this committee will 
report back to the House with its findings and make 
recommendations both with respect to legislation and programs 
and services that we might institute to help us and to help 
communities in Saskatchewan to better deal with this issue. 
 
If that committee wants to come to the House after question 
period, to present its report with its recommendations, I am sure 
that on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we would be 
prepared to give leave for the committee to do just that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, there are some very clear indications 
that the NDP is using the all-party committee as an excuse to do 
nothing. They are dragging their feet. They are stalling. They 
don’t want to make any decisions and they don’t want to take 
action. As a result, we will not see legislation to deal with this 
issue this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have been raising this issue for five years now 
and the NDP has done nothing. And every year that passes, Mr. 
Speaker, hundreds of more young girls and boys become 
trapped and enslaved in this demeaning, degrading activity that 
destroys their lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is using this all-party committee to 
abdicate their responsibility as a government. Mr. Speaker, 
when will the government take responsibility? When will the 
Minister of Justice push his members on the committee to get 
the report done immediately so he can introduce legislation this 
session? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank the member for the question. This is a serious problem in 
Saskatchewan in some of our communities, Mr. Speaker, and it 
falls upon all of us, both in the provincial government and in the 
communities, to find ways and means of dealing with this 
terrible problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding that the committee does 
have, and the member should know because she is one of the 
Chairs of the committee, that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if they don’t want the answer then perhaps 
we can move on to another topic. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, there is your answer. There is your 
example of co-operation. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP wonders why the 
Saskatchewan Party is wary about getting involved in yet 
another all-party committee. Well this is why. It’s because the 
NDP uses — they use these committees as an excuse to do 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day on the streets of Regina and Saskatoon 
and Prince Albert, pimps and johns are preying on children and 
destroying their lives while the NDP sits idly by and does 
nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. How many more 
children, Mr. Premier, will have their lives destroyed before the 
NDP decides to take action? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I want to 
thank the member for the question. Mr. Speaker, when the . . . 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
the Legislative Assembly establishes a committee to investigate 
a certain matter, then it’s incumbent upon that committee to set 
its own work plan and to make the plans come back to the 
House. If there are members on the committee that cannot be 
available to attend meetings and the committee can therefore 
not proceed, that is not something that is the responsibility of 
the government. 
 
If for example — if for example, Mr. Speaker — the member 
who is asking the question cannot be available for the whole 
month of January because she has to go away on holidays, as an 
example, then that’s hardly something that the government can 
do something about, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to say that in debate we generally 
do not refer to the presence or absence of members in the House 
and I think that would extend to committees. 
 

Financial Assistance for Farmers 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions this 
morning are for the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, 
earlier in this session we had an emergency debate on 
agriculture in this House which resulted in an all-party 
resolution asking for more financial support for Saskatchewan 
farmers from the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said he wanted all of us to speak with 
one voice in support of more federal aid for the farm families of 
this province. And this legislature did that. Mr. Premier . . . The 
Premier said that he would send a strongly worded letter to the 
Prime Minister indicating the extreme urgency for the situation. 
 
Well it’s been several weeks now, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
have you heard anything at all from the Prime Minister of this 
country? And we would ask you today if you would table the 
response that you have received, if you have received anything 
at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Speaker: — I would ask that all questions also be phrased 
through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that I did say in this House, and I say to the member 
opposite again, that this Premier and this government continues 
to pressure the federal government for additional farm aid 
money — for additional farm aid money. 
 
And what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve sent our 
correspondence on to the Prime Minister, as has Manitoba sent 
their correspondence off to Alberta. And we have today, Mr. 
Speaker, the Premier of Manitoba, who is the minister — the 
first minister of all the premiers in Canada — and he has 
corresponded, as I understand, with members from Ontario, 
from his counterpart in Ontario, with his counterpart from 
Alberta, and with his counterpart from Quebec, and they are 
looking at a strategy as to how they might be able to encourage 
the federal government to provide some additional dollars to 
Canadian farmers — not only Saskatchewan but Canadian 
farmers. 
 
So that process is underway; continues to work hard for 
Saskatchewan/Canadian farmers. We’ll continue to do our work 
Mr. Speaker, from that perspective. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
seems to be a common theme here today. It starts with the 
NDP’s inaction on every issue. They can’t make a decision so 
they try to get everyone onside to take the heat off of them. 
That’s what happened with the emergency resolution, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well I would like to say the heat is back on, Mr. Speaker, on 
this government. The Premier and his strongly worded letter 
have got no response whatsoever from the federal government. 
Roy Romanow, who isn’t even the premier of this province any 
longer, at least got the ear of the government in Ottawa and got 
a job. This Premier can’t even get that Prime Minister to return 
his phone call. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan families, farm families are simply 
weeks and in some cases days away from the beginning of their 
spring seeding operations. They can’t take any more delays 
from this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier’s plan now to 
secure more farm assistance for the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that in this province today we have an additional $500 
million for Canadians and $120 million for Saskatchewan 
farmers because this minister and this government and other 
ministers from our prairie provinces went to Ottawa and said 
we need to have more money for Saskatchewan/Canadian 
farmers. 
 
That’s why we have $500 million, brand new dollars, and that’s 
why we’re continuing to fight for 500 million more new dollars. 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

 

But I want to say to the member opposite who is the ag critic, 
we haven’t seen the member opposite at any function, event. He 
hasn’t talked to a farm organization, a farm group. And he 
should have a discussion with his friend, Mr. Stockwell Day, 
because Mr. Stockwell Day has everyday the Liberal caucus in 
his view and purview where he can ask the questions. 
 
Mr. Stockwell Day, whom the member opposite supported on a 
regular basis, hasn’t asked a question of the federal ministers in 
more than two months, Mr. Speaker. And I say to the member 
opposite, what have you done to work with the other . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is all so typical of 
the NDP — all talk, no action, no decision-making, no 
leadership in any area. And after the 1999 election they set up 
an all-party stakeholder agriculture committee and then they 
dictated the most narrow mandate possible. And the minute we 
raised concerns about the inaction of this provincial 
government, they accused us of breaking ranks and disbanded 
the committee. 
 
They did it in a purely partisan effort. It had nothing to do with 
helping farm families whatsoever. Instead they set up an ACRE 
(Action Committee on the Rural Economy) committee with a 
long, obscure mandate to help revitalize rural Saskatchewan. 
 
But in the meantime is this government doing anything 
whatsoever? No, they are hiding behind the committee and they 
will use it as an excuse to do nothing once again. 
 
(10:45) 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Agriculture tell 
the farm families of this province what actions he intends to put 
in place with respect to a long-term safety net before spring 
seeding? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
our record is clear about what we’ve done for farm families 
over the last several years and the last several months. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, about what his 
interest is in supporting rural Saskatchewan families and 
communities. And this is what the member opposite said on 
January 18 of 2001, from The Western Producer. This is what 
he said and I quote: “Boyd said propping up small operations 
won’t help,” Mr. Speaker. 
 
He doesn’t believe in small farms in this province. He doesn’t 
believe in agriculture and what was the response, Mr. Speaker, 
from what the people of Saskatchewan are saying about his 
response? And they say this, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: In The 
Western Producer of January 18, Boyd said, speaking at the 
Saskatchewan Party crop production show in Saskatoon says, 
“small farmers with small livestock operations are completely 
uneconomical.” 
 
And what the people from Waldeck says is this: Mr. Boyd is 
developing his corporate model. He knows very little about 

agriculture. He needs to get connected with Saskatchewan 
people rather than disassociating himself, as he’s been 
completely with . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fyke Commission Report 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. The present budget is not 
sustainable. Not only does it spend 200 million more than 
current revenue and projects 300 million in increased Crown 
debt, but health spending increases a staggering 11.5 per cent at 
a time when the economy is growing at 2 to 3 per cent. 
 
The Fyke report has made clear that if we continue to have 
heath spending at 4 to 6 times the growth of the economy, there 
will soon be nothing left for any other program. For the past 
nearly a year the government has avoided taking any action, 
saying they needed the Fyke report. 
 
Now we have the Fyke report. Their answer is we need a study 
into the study, a commission on the commission, and we will 
have a report on the report. 
 
When will the government take responsibility? When will it act 
or is it simply going to rag the puck and get groups to come in 
here to repeat what they have already told the Fyke 
Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say to the member opposite that 
he should understand, Mr. Speaker, about the process that 
we’ve put into place, because Saskatchewan people have said, 
across the province including people from North Battleford, 
have said that we want to be involved in a process. We want to 
be included in a process. And we want an opportunity to 
express our opinion and position as it relates to the 
recommendations of Mr. Fyke. 
 
And that’s what this government is about, Mr. Speaker, It’s 
about giving people in Saskatchewan an opportunity to respond 
to the recommendations. 
 
And we say to the members opposite, we say to the member 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, why don’t you become part of the 
solution as opposed to being part of the problem, Mr. Speaker? 
Why don’t you become part of the solution? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the budget projects transfers from 
the Government of Canada of over $1.1 billion, or 377 million 
in equalization. If the Ontario economy slows or if resource 
revenue rises, that equalization figure could dramatically fall. 
And if that happens, the unsustainable nature of this year’s 
budget is going to become apparent this year rather than two or 
three years down the road. 
 
At least the government needs to be congratulated on not 
blowing the entire $500 million in reserve, as advocated by the 
Saskatchewan Party, because we may in fact not have that 
money in reserve. 
 
Nonetheless, Fyke is right. We need a sustainable system. The 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

present system is not sustainable. Does this government truly 
want to govern? Does it want to take responsibility? Or has it 
already abdicated its responsibility for managing this province 
in favour of consulting, consulting, consulting . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very sorry to see 
that the Liberal member from North Battleford has been so 
badly affected by the spirit of doom and gloom that dominates 
the benches over there. 
 
Because it’s unfortunate, Mr. Speaker. The member talks about 
the level of spending. What I’d like to say to the people of the 
province is that level of spending on highways, for example, is 
going to mean the twinning of the bridge crossing the river in 
that member’s community. And it’s very unfortunate for the 
people of the Battlefords that that member from North 
Battleford voted against twinning the . . . (inaudible) . . . 
 
That member from North Battleford, since he left the coalition 
government, voted against increased funding for education, Mr. 
Speaker. That member from North Battleford is voting against 
sustainable tax reductions to the people of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that may be good politics in the short term for the member, 
Mr. Speaker, but it’s not good politics for the people of the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to the members of this Assembly a couple of guests 
from my constituency that are in your gallery. John Len was the 
former mayor for the city of Estevan, and Bernie Collins was 
the former Member of Parliament for Souris-Moose Mountain 
and a former mayor of the city of Estevan. 
 
Would you all join me in welcoming these two gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With a good deal of 
pleasure this morning, Mr. Speaker, I introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, the present mayor 
of the city of Prince Albert and a former member of this 
Assembly many, many years ago. It’s good to see you in Regina 
today, Mr. Mayor, and I hope you enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too 
would like to join with the member opposite in welcoming the 
mayor from the city of Prince Albert. He, as you will know, was 
a former member of this legislature. He added a lot to the colour 
of the politics here in Saskatchewan and so I’d like to welcome 
Mr. Cody, Mayor Cody, to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — By leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I too would like to join with the 
member from Estevan in welcoming John Len and Bernie 
Collins, fine community leaders from a fine city. And just to 
recognize that Bernie Collins has observed proceedings before 
and was an excellent MP (Member of Parliament) when he 
represented Souris-Moose Mountain. And the same goes for 
Mr. Len, who was a fine mayor when he was mayor of Estevan. 
And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Shall we just revert back to introduction of 
guests. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I too want to join with the 
members who have welcomed Mayor Len and Bernie Collins to 
the Legislative Assembly this afternoon . . . or this morning. 
 
I want to say that the strength and success particularly of Mayor 
Len’s time while he was the mayor in Estevan had a lot to do 
with where he came from. And most won’t know this, but Mr. 
Len had his origin and beginnings in Yorkton and his roots are 
there. 
 
And so I want to recognize the tremendous contribution that 
he’s made to the city of Estevan because most of where he got 
his skills and technique came during the time that he lived in 
Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Being an open and 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

 

accountable government, I’m extremely pleased to answer 
questions nos. 61 through 66. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 61 to 66 inclusive have been 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
The Chair: — I’d ask the minister if he’d please introduce his 
officials here with him today. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
introduce, on my left, John Whyte who’s the deputy minister of 
Justice and the Deputy Attorney General. Doug Moen, the 
executive director of public law, community justice, on my 
right. Mike Pestill, the acting director of administrative services 
branch is just behind us. Colleen Matthews, the executive 
assistant to the deputy minister is right behind me. Don Head, 
the new, slimmed-down Don Head is the executive director of 
corrections; he is right here on my right; along with John Baker, 
the executive director of law enforcement services; and a 
number of other officials also, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
minister and to his officials here this morning. And we’ll enjoy 
spending some time going through some of the details of the 
budget and probably also some of the directions that we see in 
the Justice department. 
 
And I would like to at first open this up to the minister to sort of 
give us an outline of where he sees his department going and 
what his direction is for the next while. We’ve just had a new 
budget; we’ve had a Speech from the Throne. And I’d like for 
him to outline to us and people of the province what differences 
and what directions he has in mind for his department in the 
coming years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, let me thank the member 
for his first question. Let me thank him too for his co-operation 
in indicating the main issues he wanted to raise with us today. It 
makes it easier on the officials. 
 
What I might say, Mr. Speaker, and Mr. Chair, in general — 
I’ve promoted you already — in general terms is that the 
department remains committed to ensuring that Saskatchewan 
people can live in safe and secure communities; that they feel 
safe in their homes, their neighbourhoods, and their 
communities; and that we expend resources to ensure that that 
happens. Everybody, I think we will all agree, has the right to 
that safety and security and it’s our job to do our best to ensure 
that that is available to them. 
 
With that in mind we have some significant issues that we’re 

addressing at the present time. And we do this more in the 
context of dialogue and working with communities than we do 
in terms of directing communities. 
 
And I might raise with the member for example the question of 
Aboriginal justice, the relationship between Aboriginal people 
and the justice system which, as we know, has been troubled 
over the years. We are working with Aboriginal communities, 
with the justice system as a whole, police, people in 
communities, to ensure that we have a direction which will 
work and which will ensure that the justice system is more 
responsive to the needs of Aboriginal people. 
 
And I look forward, Mr. Chairman, to significant new 
directions in this regard in the future. And I would want to 
commend our partners in the police services, in Aboriginal 
communities, for their work in moving this along with us. 
 
There are significant new initiatives in the budget, and 
significant new commitments of resources to continue 
directions we’ve generated in the past. 
 
And the member will know of more money for organized crime 
units. We hear stories in the media, regularly, and we know the 
importance of addressing organized crime in our province and 
across the country. 
 
We’ve committed more resources to the police services 
working in that area, to SHOCAP (serious and habitual youth 
offender comprehensive action program), which is the serious 
and habitual . . . young offenders — I know I should never try 
and read these things — but you know what it is, and it works 
very effectively, as you know, in addressing those most serious 
young offenders. And we’ve seen significant reductions in 
criminal behaviour on the part of those young offenders who 
are in that system. More resources for that in our communities. 
 
Significant commitment to community policing. Just a 
conference, earlier in the week, where we met with city 
officials, with those in the justice community to focus on new 
directions in community policing. And we are constantly 
working with rural and northern communities as we address 
their concerns and attempt to meet their needs. 
 
There are, Mr. Speaker, some significant additions in the 
budget. More money for policing than we’ve ever had before. 
Over the last two years, record new commitment to policing. 
 
But all in the context, Mr. Chair, of our commitment to 
ensuring safe and secure communities, a justice system which is 
trusted and respected by the community at large and a justice 
system which serves to assist communities in developing social 
order, and an ability to move forward in both economic and 
social terms. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Chair. Thank you for that answer, and I 
think there’s a number of things we’ll want to explore a little 
further. Mentioned among that answer, some of the ideas were 
to have some greater emphasis on organized crime, and we’ll 
want to have quite a number of questions on that in a little while 
— emphasis on youth offenders, rural and northern 
communities, more money for policing. 
 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

What I didn’t hear in that — and it may have been an accidental 
omission; we’ll give an opportunity for correction on that later 
on if it needs to be — is there was nothing in there on 
rehabilitation. And I appreciate the beginning of that particular 
answer which basically said that the key emphasis was safety 
and security and I think that is obviously a prime secure. 
 
And I think that’s one of the directions that we always hope that 
rehabilitation will take is to ensure that we don’t have a 
criminal reoffending and breaking that peace and security that 
we wish for all of our citizens in this particular province. So I 
think those two need to work together. 
 
I would like to go down one of the roads that was mentioned 
and that is more policing. And I know the promise has been 
made that we would have more policemen in Saskatchewan 
than we’ve had in the past. And I guess we had a promise, I 
believe in 1999, for 200 more policemen. And I have a question 
on how many police officers there were in 1999 and how many 
we have today to see how far down that particular road we’ve 
come. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Let me first of all 
thank the member for raising the question of corrections and 
our commitment to rehabilitation in corrections and indeed in 
our community placement and so on. 
 
Let me first go to the question of police officers. The member 
I’m sure will notice as he drives from Regina to Rosthern that 
there are now many more RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) officers on the highways. I don’t know if he’s met them 
on the highways but they are there. 
 
We have in fact, Mr. Chair, more police officers than our 
complement would require so we are overstaffed in a sense in 
our RCMP contingent. That will come down to appropriate 
levels as some readjustments and reassignments take place, but 
we have over the last 18 months added some a hundred and . . . 
almost 150 RCMP officers to our police service here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And in addition, I think it’s right, that about 10 per cent of those 
RCMP officers are of Aboriginal descent. So we’ve made major 
strides in RCMP complement and also in the numbers of First 
Nations and Metis officers in the RCMP. And the member may 
be aware that just this week Russ Mirasty was promoted to 
inspector in the RCMP, an important step in terms of 
responding to the policing needs of our province, and we all 
congratulate him on that. 
 
In terms of policing in general, as I mentioned, this budget 
provides over $6 million in new funding for policing, including 
the 1.6 million for new police officers. That’s an increase of 
$11 million or 16 per cent over the past two years — the largest 
infusion of new money into policing in the history of the 
province. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I think you can see the commitment of this 
government to ensuring safety and security in communities 
through the presence of police officers in our communities. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, let me go on to talk about 
corrections. We’ve made again significant stride in our 

corrections facility under the executive directorship of Don 
Head, focusing more than we’ve done before on rehabilitation. 
Significant commitment to comprehensive case management. 
The healing lodge at Prince Albert is a good example. Programs 
on addiction, on anger management, Mr. Chair. Work in the 
communities with as much commitment to community 
corrections as possible. Implementing effectively conditional 
sentences. A whole range of new initiatives and significant new 
dollars in corrections, in our corrections field. 
 
And I think the member will be aware that a large part of our 
new staff are in fact in corrections. They were people who were 
working before but who are now brought within our full budget. 
So I think a major commitment in the policing area, and in the 
corrections area too, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Continuing along the 
area of the numbers of officers that were committed in 1999, 
which was 200, we were just told, Mr. Chair, that 150 RCMP 
have been added, and that’s now overstaffed, which means that 
number will be going down. 
 
So my question is again and continues, when are the rest of 
these 200 are going to be added, who are willing to be added? 
Because obviously, if that answer is significant, then it probably 
won’t be going into the RCMP area if they are at presently 
overstaffed. So where is that commitment of 200 more people 
going to be completed and where will they be stationed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, with regard to the 
member’s specific question about the numbers of police 
officers, as he will know, 20 new police officers are added this 
year, 25 last year, forming 45 out of that commitment of 200. 
 
I’d like to say to the member: our commitment to safe and 
secure communities is a significant one. Our commitment to 
ensuring that adequate policing levels are available to make 
sure that those communities are safe and secure remains a high 
priority. 
 
In the budget, significant pressures from rural residents, from 
our health care system, from higher education, all those things 
serve to slow the implementation of our 200 police officer 
commitment. 
 
I want to say that our commitment remains. We have two more 
years left in the mandate, and I look forward and this 
department looks forward to filling those vacancies in the years 
ahead. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. A number of interesting things 
were raised there. I think the fact that since ’99 you’ve only had 
45 people added out of that commitment of 200 is a little 
frightening. And then we’re supposed to wait for the rest, for 
the rest of the two-year mandate. We’re not sure if that’s going 
to happen. There’s many people that would doubt very much 
that that mandate will actually last that long. 
 
And I think the other question that comes up is if security and 
safety is a key item, this should have come much nearer the top 
of budget agendas and concerns than it probably is. I could 
spend hours on anecdotal situations indicating that there’s 
definitely a shortage of police officers around the province. 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

 

Staying with the area of policing and police officers, I’d like to 
have some information presented on who presently . . . or where 
the police officers are being trained, and basically how this is 
funded and who funds that and what the minister sees as the 
future in training of our police officers in Saskatchewan is. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s questions, there were a number there . . . let me say 
that he won’t find a stronger proponent for building safe and 
secure communities and policing those communities than me, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And yet, we have to appreciate, as I know he does, the 
requirements and the needs of the residents of rural 
Saskatchewan with major responses in this budget; concerns 
about health care again, major investments, education and so 
on. And those pressures are all brought to bear on the general 
budgeting process. 
 
But within the context of that, the member will know and I 
think should be impressed by the work done by the province 
and the federal government and by the RCMP and Assistant 
Commissioner Boucher to ensure that we have almost 150, 147 
— I think it is — new RCMP officers over the last about 16 
months. This is a major, major achievement which will 
contribute significantly to the safety and security of our 
communities, and of course, in large measure outside of the 
larger municipalities. 
 
He asked about the training. The training at the RCMP depot, 
that training capacity is now working full bore. He will know 
that there was a time when there weren’t as many police 
officers trained at the RCMP depot. But now it’s working at full 
capacity with . . . including amongst other things, including a 
whole contingent of Aboriginal officers and another one in the 
works. That is a federal responsibility in regard to our contract 
with the federal government over the RCMP providing 
provincial police services to us. 
 
In terms of provincial, our provincial or our municipal police 
services, the Police College, is essentially jointly funded by the 
province and by the cities. And he will know too, that that is 
contributing significant new police officers to our 
municipalities. 
 
Let me say that that partnership between the University of 
Regina, the Police College, and indeed, the police services in 
municipalities is going very well. He may have visited the 
college or the graduation, but generating . . . graduating terrific 
citizens who risk their lives on a daily basis for their fellow 
citizens. 
 
He also raised the issue of, well where will these police officers 
go. And let me just list, Mr. Chair, the communities which have 
benefited . . . which will benefit this year from the province’s 
commitment to providing police officers: Regina, Saskatoon, 
Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Estevan, Weyburn, and North 
Battleford, as well as some highway patrol. 
 
So significant numbers of communities which have received 
support from the province. And I think if you ask those mayors 

and those police chiefs, they’re glad of that, of the extra police 
officers to serve their communities; and of course, we’ll be 
continuing to work with them in the future as we fill more 
vacancies. 
 
I hope that answers all the questions the member asked. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I’ll try and refrain from 
putting my questions in such a barrage next time, and try and 
get them a little more singly organized. I’ve been making notes 
on some of your answers and I have two things that seem to 
conflict a little bit. And I’ll ask you to clarify on that. 
 
You made a statement earlier on that 150 RCMP had been 
added and then shortly after that, you said that the number of 
police that had been added additionally, were a number of 20 
and 25, in two different years, for a total of 45. 
 
So on the one hand, I believe, we had 45 were added, and on the 
other hand there were 150 RCMP added. Could you clarify 
those two numbers that you gave, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The 147, I think it is, Mr. Chair, 
represents new RCMP officers in the province. Add to that the 
45 police officers under the commitment to provide new police 
officers to our municipal and RCMP services. So, a total of, 
well, getting on for 200 altogether. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. One of the answers 
recently just referred to highway patrol and that there had been 
an increasing number; also whether I had noticed these between 
Saskatoon and Regina. Haven’t noticed any for years. I guess it 
helps in being noticed by one a long time ago. 
 
But I do have a question on the highway patrols. Some time ago 
there was a move to take people who were serving on highway 
patrols out of more rural communities and moving them into the 
cities. For example, my community of Rosthern had a 
detachment; I believe lost two officers that were moved to 
Saskatoon. 
 
So my question is basically, first of all, is I question the 
efficiency of this on a number of areas. One is obviously there’s 
a fair bit of time involved from moving from the station in 
Saskatoon to outside where the jurisdiction begins. 
 
The second part comes in, and I notice this very much when I 
drive Highway 12 or Highway 11, both of which are twinned 
for a certain distance outside of the city, those twin sections are 
very safe. Very seldom do I ever see anyone pulled over on 
those areas because the traffic flow on those two highways for 
the first distance out of Saskatoon is very smooth and very safe. 
Then as soon as we get into the single-lane areas that sort of 
start at past Martensville and close to Osler, that’s where we see 
a lot of the accidents happening. 
 
And so if we look at the accident occurrences, taken on both 
Highway 12 and Highway 11, there are on those stretches that 
aren’t divided, meaning essentially that the officers coming out 
of Saskatoon waste time coming out of the city, drive down 
quite a lengthy stretch where the flow is very safe, then when 
they get down to the single lanes, they’re a long ways out of 
Saskatoon. To me that seems highly inefficient. 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

Added to that, in the emergency situations that take place in 
rural towns, these officers just really aren’t there to sort of fill 
in, in many cases. So clarification of whether you see that 
working, and a comment on some of the concerns that I’ve 
raised on that particular area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises the question of the 
numbers of RCMP officers in different communities. And I 
think the genesis of those kinds of concerns comes from levels 
which were below complement in the past, leading up to about 
October two years ago. That raised concerns in communities, 
and I’m sure the member heard them just as I did, just as we all 
did. 
 
As I said, the RCMP is now up full complement, indeed a little 
over full complement. As some of the reallocations and 
reassignments take place, we will have the highway contingent 
to full strength at 60. It’s now at around 40. So that will be a 
full contingent and maybe then the member will see some of 
them. They’re the guys with the red lights behind you, Ben . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . and blue as well, yes. 
 
The issue of how many police officers there should be in each 
community is always an issue of major concern. We review this 
and Commissioner Boucher reviews this on a regular basis. We 
hear from communities about the need for more police officers. 
We don’t very often hear the need for fewer. And 
Commissioner Boucher addresses these concerns on a regular 
basis. 
 
The focus obviously is ensuring that there are enough . . . or 
that the crime rate in a particular community is responded to 
with an adequate number of police officers. In those 
communities where crime is lower, plainly there’s a need for 
fewer police officers in order to ensure the safety and security 
of those communities. 
 
I know that that raises concern with communities who see, 
because they’re more law abiding, they see the potential to lose 
police officers. Our job and our effort and our commitment, as 
is with the RCMP, is to try to ensure that there are the right 
number of police officers for communities and for the 
communities they serve. 
 
I think the member will not have heard as many concerns about 
this recently as in the past. It’s a matter we continue to work on. 
It’s a matter of balance; it’s a matter of trying to ensure that 
there are the right number in communities. And as I say, very 
rarely do communities think that there are enough. 
 
But we work on this, you know, in a reasonably scientific way 
and ensure that communities get the kind of service they 
deserve. And the member will also know that some 
communities which had their own municipal police service 
have more recently decided to disband them and use our RCMP 
services as well. 
 
I might also say that, and the member will know this, that police 
services co-operate with each other all the time. The member 
probably has been with the police services, maybe from 
Corman Park or from Saskatoon or from the RCMP, and he will 
know that when there is a need for joint action and joint 
response that is forthcoming. And also we have, as we 

mentioned earlier dealing with serious crime and other matters, 
lots of interaction between the RCMP and municipal police 
services as we address the significant concerns that citizens 
have. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Well, Mr. Chairman, I think we 
had the proverbial square pegs in round holes. We had a great 
answer and we had a great question, but they just didn’t seem to 
fit with each other. 
 
My question was . . . and I’m going to have to ask it again. The 
inefficiencies that I related to very specifically as far as the 
highway patrol coming out of Saskatoon on Highway 11 and 
Highway 12, that they’re enforcement areas where they need to 
do the enforcing and where they do do the enforcing is on the 
single lanes. 
 
Just had another death on Highway 11 just last Sunday, again 
off the divided area probably about 25, 30 minutes out of 
Saskatoon. That’s where the accidents are happening. That’s 
where the patrol needs to take place. 
 
Why then are these people stationed in Saskatoon when they 
could be stationed in those communities where they’re right 
next door to it? And they wouldn’t be wasting 30 minutes of 
driving on the highway to get out to where the critical areas are, 
and they wouldn’t be wasting another 20, 30 minutes getting 
out of the city onto those particular highways. 
 
So I thought that was a fairly reasonable and simple question 
relating to the efficiency of it. So I’m going to ask for that 
particular . . . ask that particular question again. 
 
I’ll add another one to it, and that is: if we’re going to increase 
that contingency of traffic officers from 40 to 60, are those 
again going to be plugged into the city or are they going to take 
this opportunity to put those into those areas where they will be 
the most efficiently used? 
 
(11:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I should assure the member that I 
wasn’t deliberately avoiding his question but it’s sometimes 
hard to keep track of the eight questions he asks me all at the 
same time. It’s not a problem for him; it’s a problem for me. 
 
There are two responses I’d like to give to the member’s 
question, and it’s a valid concern for all of us who travel the 
highway. 
 
At the present time highway patrols are located in 14 
communities. And in terms of the member’s constituency, there 
would be some in Prince Albert, some in Saskatoon, and the 
extra 20 will be allocated amongst those 14. 
 
I think too that once the summer is over and the reassignment of 
RCMP officers is complete, the member will see a situation 
which we have much more closely the right number of RCMP 
officers for each community. 
 
Efficiencies require some kind of regionalization and that’s why 
they’re in Saskatoon and Prince Albert. He will know that they 
. . . well he says that he doesn’t know, but they do travel from 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

 

one to the other and they do pull people over. I’ve never had it 
happen to me but I’ve seen it. 
 
And I think though that the main point is that there are 
efficiency questions, and the RCMP officers are going to need 
to be where most of the traffic is. The member though raises a 
good point about single lane versus double lane. Let me assure 
him that we will take his concerns into account and I’ll get back 
to him on the specifics for the summer as soon as I can. 
 
And that if he has any specific concerns at any time, or indeed 
any of the members opposite do, they should contact either our 
office or Commissioner Boucher and we will attempt to address 
any concerns they have as quickly as possible. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Talking a bit about 
what’s happening with Corman Park, I met with people from 
Corman Park, also Dalmeny, also my constituency had their 
own police force, and they are also working together with the 
community of Hepburn. And I know Hepburn is negotiating 
with them to sort of use their own police force there as well. 
 
A bit of a philosophical question at this particular point. In the 
Speech from the Throne we had a lot made out on a new 
government department, Rural Revitalization. And I think in 
some of the things we’ve just discussed with the minister in the 
past few minutes, it would be just a great opportunity for some 
of that rural revitalization to take place. 
 
And I’m wondering if he’s had any discussion with the new 
minister from the new department to see if, when we’re looking 
at these sorts of things, to take those officers that are now in an 
urban area that could be working more efficiently if they were 
in a rural area, put that all together into Rural Revitalization. 
And they have about close to; I believe a million dollars to 
spend on just dreaming up those ideas. 
 
Here’s an idea, and I’m wondering if he’s planning on meeting 
with that particular minister to see if Justice can play a part in 
this whole concept. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question 
— or it might have been more of a point — I share his view that 
the presence of RCMP officers is an important contributor to 
rural revitalization. There needs to be safety and security in our 
communities in order for our communities to survive and thrive. 
 
And I think he raises a useful point in terms of looking at the 
picture globally, looking at all aspects of rural life and all 
aspects of government policy as it applies to rural life, which is 
the point behind the new secretariat, the new focus on rural 
revitalization. 
 
It’s many components, not just about agriculture of course, but 
it also includes, as I’ve agreed, the notion that those who 
provide safety and security in our communities are there in 
adequate numbers to ensure that that can be done. And I look 
forward to talking with the minister in that regard, and with 
other ministers too. 
 
I might though add that the RCMP is responsible under its 
contract with us for allocating resources in accordance with the 
needs of various communities across the province, and I doubt 

that the member would want me to be dictating how the RCMP 
allocates its resources, and I don’t think he’s suggesting that. 
But we always need to communicate with the RCMP any 
concerns we might have about adequate policing in our 
communities, and I know they respond effectively and quickly 
to those kinds of concerns. 
 
I might also say that while crime is reducing in many of our 
southern communities, the complement of RCMP officers in 
those communities remains significant and it remains capable of 
handling the issues in those communities. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, the minister earlier on 
made just a passing reference to, I believe, fighting, sort of, 
organized crime, basically in the area of gangs and this sort of 
thing. And I’d probably like him to comment at this time how 
much benefit he sees to our particular province, particularly in 
some of the new legislation that’s coming out of the federal area 
on giving the police some more authority and permission to 
fight gang warfare. 
 
I think having read some of the information on that, on the one 
hand we tend to applaud it and say if we can keep gang warfare 
down, that’s great. But on the other hand there’s a definite area 
of concern that’s being raised by a lot of the public to say, well 
how far is this going to go and what’s all going to be allowed. 
And I’d like for the minister to comment on what he’s aware of 
in that area and what his position is on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well let me say how much I share the 
member’s view that organized crime, crime organized in gangs, 
is a serious matter for our province. So we have to accept that it 
is here in Saskatchewan as it is across the country. There are 
different structures, there are different types of gangs, but it is 
clear that we have to address this issue seriously. 
 
We participate in various federal/provincial initiatives in order 
to build an effective strategy here. And we plainly, as would the 
member, strongly support action to address the threat of 
organized crime in our society. 
 
And indeed at ministers of Justice meetings last September, 
there was further discussion and an endorsement of a national 
agenda on organized crime which attempts to coordinate our 
efforts in a more effective way and, as the member will know, 
includes legislative changes to respond to some of the 
challenges that law enforcement officers face when dealing with 
these organizations. And we support the federal government’s 
efforts in ensuring that the police have the tools necessary to do 
the work they need to do. 
 
And I’d say just in terms of our commitment, we have serious 
crime units in Regina and Saskatoon, and also this year we will 
be assisting Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, Estevan, and Weyburn 
with their serious crime units. So this is a big challenge, a big 
issue. 
 
The member will be aware, as all of us will be, of the major 
initiatives by police services across the country over the last 
few months with hopefully some major effects. We have to 
focus on our serious crime, gang issues here. We’re doing so 
and we’re assisting communities to have the resources in order 
to do that. 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

But I just kind of reiterate that this is a coordinated effort with 
the federal government, with our municipal police services, 
with the RCMP, and that, as I said, in this budget, significant 
new commitments to that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for that answer, Mr. Chairman. I 
would like to spend a bit more time on that particular issue of 
organized crime. And I would like for the minister to outline 
some fairly specific details as to what leeway is going to be 
given to police officers in the new legislation as far as allowing 
them to fight crime and break some crimes with impunity in the 
fighting of crimes. And then what areas could be covered 
underneath that, or is this just a carte blanche that covers them 
in any activity in any research and investigation they choose to 
do? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises the question of 
new initiatives at the federal level to address organized crime. 
He will have probably seen that legislation. If he hasn’t, we can 
provide him with some more details. 
 
But these proposed amendments will introduce new offences 
and tough sentences that target various degrees of involvement 
with criminal organizations; also will improve the protection of 
people who play a role in the justice system from intimidation 
against them and their families, and the member will know that 
that’s a serious concern. 
 
The Bill also simplifies the current definition of criminal 
organization in the Criminal Code. It also broadens powers of 
law enforcement officers to forfeit the proceeds of crime and, in 
particular, the profits of criminal organizations and to seize 
property that has been used in a crime, and also establishes an 
accountable process to protect law enforcement officers from 
criminal liability when they commit what would otherwise be 
considered illegal actions while investigating and infiltrating 
criminal organizations. 
 
If the member needs more information and a more detailed 
response on that federal legislation, I’d be happy to provide him 
with it later in the day. 
 
Let me though just briefly refer to the specific measures that 
Saskatchewan has engaged upon to deal with gangs and 
organized crime in the province. We provide three-quarters of a 
million dollars a year to Regina and Saskatoon for their serious 
crime task force units. We also have $635,000 a year for a 
serious habitual offender comprehensive action program which 
targets repeat offenders, many of whom can be expected to be 
in gang activities. 
 
We’ve also signed a federal provincial agreement under the 
forfeited property sharing regulations which ensures that 
provincial revenues to criminal intelligence service in 
Saskatchewan and for joint operations has been increased. 
 
We have, as I’ve mentioned earlier, joint operations between 
the municipal forces and the RCMP. 
 
The RCMP has an integrated proceeds of crime unit which 
attempts to seize property from organized crime and liquidate it, 
a number of specific measures, as well as the regular kind of 
police activity in the province, Mr. Chair. 

(11:45) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Good afternoon, Mr. Minister, and good afternoon 
. . . good morning, I guess it is, to you officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have had a constituent of mine that had some 
problems with the practice of a dentist. And she pursued, with 
her lawyer, the possibility of suing the dentist for malpractice, I 
guess. And what she was told by the lawyer was that she was 
bringing this issue forward after a one-year period of time since 
the malpractice had taken place . . . or the alleged malpractice 
had taken place. 
 
So she was told by her lawyer that there is a one-year limitation 
on liability, and that’s on the work that dentists do. But she 
noted also that for doctors there’s a two-year limitation as far as 
a client being able to sue them. 
 
So why are there different limitations for doctors than there are 
for dentists? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — There are a number of provisions that 
historically have been — of this nature — have been different, 
Mr. Chair. The fact that there are historical reasons doesn’t 
make it right, and we are reviewing the whole issue of 
limitation periods at the present time and look forward to 
making changes in the near future. 
 
There isn’t any particular reason why one profession should 
have a different limitation period over another, and so we’re 
ensuring that this will come together. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, to the minister, are you 
aware of anyone else that has come forward with this type of a 
grievance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well we know, Mr. Chair, that this is 
a significant issue. Plainly, short limitation periods make it 
more difficult for people to adequately respond to injuries they 
may experience. It flows from the time at which the injury 
might be known, so it’s not necessary just from the time that the 
injury was incurred. 
 
But there is a . . . we do have consultation paper out at the 
moment. We’ve had representations from many groups, 
including lawyers and citizens, and other law reform 
commissions are looking at these questions too. 
 
But we have a consultation paper out. We do expect to respond 
quickly. It is a serious matter. And I look forward to clarifying 
the situation and introducing legislation at the earliest possible 
opportunity. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, if there are consultations in process 
about this matter, I would expect that that would point to the 
fact that there are some very major concerns about it that have 
been brought to your department’s attention and to you as the 
Minister of Justice. 
 
And so I’m asking why has this issue not been addressed. I’m 
asking you also how the dentists are responding to this, or if 
they’ve given you any indication of whether they’d be willing 
to move on this matter or not. 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks a specific question 
about whether we receive complaints from individuals. We 
receive some, but not a lot. But we do know that this is an area 
of the law which needs to be clarified and needs to be 
addressed. 
 
It is not as straightforward as it might initially appear, bearing 
in mind that it deals with the whole area of injuries caused 
negligently by members of our society against others, not just in 
a professional capacity but in any other capacity too. 
 
That’s why the consultation process is taking place. That’s why 
we had the consultation paper out to, for example, 
municipalities, all the professional organizations, lawyers, the 
health care system, really across the province. 
 
It is an urgent matter. It’s complex and we’re moving as fast as 
we can on it. And we do look forward to introducing legislation 
as soon as possible. We know it has to be addressed and other 
provinces know that too. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you again, Mr. Chair. Going back to 
that area of organized crime and the legislation that exists in 
that area and, as you mention, there is some new legislation 
coming forward. My question is, is there any opportunity for 
the criminal liability that we were discussing that’s coming 
through from the federal system right now, is there any area 
right now that is open for police officers to commit a crime 
without liability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises an important 
question, in particular for law enforcement officers as they go 
about this difficult task. It’s also an important issue of course 
for citizens at large because we do have to ensure that our law 
enforcement complies with the general standards of justice 
within our society. 
 
But in response to the specific question, the Supreme Court of 
Canada has responded to this issue in the case of Campbell and 
Shirose and sets out some criteria for exempting police officers 
from criminal responsibility for acts they commit in the pursuit 
of their duties. 
 
Understandably, I think the police wanted some specificity, 
more concrete provisions than a judgment of the Supreme Court 
of Canada. And that’s why the federal government, the Minister 
of Justice, has responded with provisions in the new 
amendments to the Criminal Code dealing with the specific 
provisions. And I stated a number of them in an earlier 
response. 
 
If the member would like any more detail, we’d be more than 
happy to provide it. Maybe we could provide him with a copy 
of our briefing on those specific provisions in the amendments 
of the Criminal Code, and he can see the detail with which this 
matter has been addressed. 
 
I mean it’s a question of finding an appropriate balance, 
enabling the police officers to do their duty while ensuring that 
citizens are protected. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Chair, we’ll appreciate 
getting that information and we’ll want to pursue this in a bit 

more depth and detail at another time. 
 
I would like to move to a little different area for a minute or 
two, and we’ll probably take a fair bit of time on this, and that 
is basically the federal gun registration. I think it’s Bill C-68. 
I’d like for the minister to comment on how successful he sees 
this initiative to be. And I’d like to have, or hopefully get a 
recommitment of his government’s opposition to Bill C-68. 
 
And I have quite a number of specific questions and concerns 
about where this is going in Canada and specifically in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member raises a question of 
significant concern to people in the province, and he will know 
that the provincial government has consistently and 
aggressively opposed the implementation of Bill C-68. He will 
know that there was an all-party representation to the 
Parliament of Canada, when the legislation was being 
considered, from this House. 
 
And he will know that there have been significant concerns 
raised by both the opposition and the government about the 
effectiveness of this kind of legislation. I think the best we can 
say is we don’t know whether it’s been effective. But we have 
always harboured significant doubts as to whether this type of 
legislation can have any significant impact on the safety and 
security of our communities. The arguments — we can get into 
them if he wants — but the arguments are pretty well, I think, 
accepted by all of us in this House. 
 
The federal government in spite of representations from many 
provinces continues to be committed to Bill C-68. The member 
will know we challenged the constitutionality of the legislation 
unsuccessfully and that the federal government continues with 
some significant difficulty to pursue this initiative. 
 
We continue to raise the issues of concern to all of us in this 
province about the ineffectiveness, as we see it, of the 
legislation and about the fact that it effectively turns 
law-abiding citizens or runs the risk of turning law-abiding 
citizens into criminals. 
 
I mean, I don’t know what else to say other than to say we 
continue to be aggressively opposed to this legislation, continue 
to voice our concerns with the government in Ottawa, and will 
continue to do so in the future. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think there’s some 
reassurance that at least they’re onside with the opposition to it. 
There was a little bit of questioning as to how effective this was 
going to be. I know research says that there’s well over a 
million people that haven’t complied with even getting the 
licensing, much less registering the firearms. 
 
I can assure you if the minister came to a coffee shop in my 
particular community probably about every second person there 
is now a criminal because of this legislation. And I guess what I 
would like to ask is, because the minister is basically 
responsible for the enforcement of laws throughout this 
province, what his position would be if all of a sudden we had a 
rather aggressive law officer decide that he’s going to just start 
enforcing this law without having given some direction from 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

the minister. 
 
We’re hoping at this point the minister hasn’t given any 
direction. So let’s say he hasn’t, but some officer decides he’s 
going to go around and he’s going to start enforcing this 
particular thing and we have these people being arrested 
willy-nilly, left, right, and centre. In Saskatchewan, rural 
Saskatchewan there will be many of them. 
 
And I’m wondering what’s the minister’s position is going to be 
if we also have a law officer trying to decide that on his own 
volition he’s now going to go ahead and start enforcing this? 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member really raises the 
question of what happens if a police officer enforces Bill C-68. 
Well as we know it’s the responsibility of police officers to 
enforce the legislation, the criminal legislation that’s in place. 
And it’s incumbent upon all of us to abide by the law of the 
land. 
 
The member will know that it will be inappropriate for me, and 
I’m sure he wouldn’t want to live in a society where someone in 
my position, the Minister of Justice, dictates to police officers 
how they carry on their activities — who to charge, who to 
pursue, and who not to. 
 
So the operation of, or the enforcement of Bill C-68 is the 
responsibility of our police officers here in this province. We 
have though, as you know, indicated to the federal government 
that we will not use our prosecution services to prosecute 
anyone charged under Bill C-68. Our responsibility in this 
province, or my responsibility, is to enforce the Criminal Code. 
That we will continue to do. 
 
But like many offences, like many areas of criminal law — 
drugs for example — that matter is outside the context of the 
Criminal Code but within the law of the land of course, and 
therefore within the responsibility of police officers to enforce. 
 
But I want to reiterate that we have, in the strongest possible 
terms, indicated that we will not use our provincial prosecution 
resources to prosecute anyone who is charged by police officers 
for an infringement under Bill C-68. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I’m not sure how much comfort, 
like I said, every second person in my coffee shop can take 
from that particularly. 
 
But I think that the problem, in fact, will become a whole lot 
larger at about the end of the year when registration of firearms 
needs to take place. Because there are a lot of people who 
purchased their licence, because they need the licence now to 
purchase ammunition and firearms and those sorts of things, 
who are totally opposed to the gun registration. They may 
register one or two just in case, you know, they need one for a 
hunting rifle, and in case the SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) decides they’re going 
to start enforcing that or start checking that and those sorts of 
things. 
 
But I can assure the minister that probably the large proportion 

of people who have purchased a licence are now going to step 
into the breaking the-law category across this country. And it’s 
going to make a very high percentage. And I find that very, 
very unfortunate because these are people that, by and large, 
have been our law-abiding citizens. But they find this particular 
law just so totally repulsive and ridiculous that they’re not 
going to comply. And it will be coming a whole lot worse than 
it is at present. 
 
While we’re on that particular issue, I’m not sure if the minister 
is aware of it, but that firearms licences that are issued to 
Aboriginals — and I would imagine that includes Indian and 
Metis in the way phrasing is used — no payment has to be 
made on that. And I’m wondering on the stat as of January 1, 
2001 only 51 of that segment of our population have, basically 
have purchased firearms licences. So are we now creating a real 
split in our society with one group that with 51 people — not 
per cent — 51 people as of January 1, 2000 have purchased 
licences, what exactly his position is on that and where we can 
see this going? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member raises issues that we 
are concerned about too. And in fact really what he’s raising is 
really the proof of our concerns, of our joint concerns about the 
ineffectiveness of this legislation. 
 
What he’s pointing out is the importance of law being accepted 
by communities and responded to by members of those 
communities. If we have legislation, if we have criminal law 
which is not complied with by large members of our society, 
plainly we not only have an ineffective law but we also 
undermine the importance and the efficacy of the justice 
system. We criminalize people who aren’t criminals. The 
member has made those points effectively. 
 
The point though remains that this is federal legislation, that we 
do our utmost to persuade the federal government of the very 
points the member raised. We do so on a regular basis. And if 
the federal government remains committed to the Firearms Act, 
then we will continue to see these significant difficulties; and 
the member’s quite right in pointing out important deadlines 
which will generate even more problems. 
 
So our view is it remains the same — it’s ineffective, it’s costly, 
it damages the reputation of the law as a whole, turns innocent 
people into criminals, and is unlikely, in our view and I think 
the member’s view, to actually improve the safety and security 
of our communities. 
 
Indeed the reverse might be the case, as we see resources 
committed to this registration process which would otherwise 
be committed to police officers and others addressing concerns 
of crime in our communities. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I appreciated the minister’s 
concern that really what this does will create probably more 
criminals, take resources away from the areas that really involve 
peace and security in our province. 
 
When this whole issue started numbers of years ago, there was 
discussion that took place dealing with the notwithstanding 
clause to get provinces to sort of opt out of that. And I’m 
wondering if the minister would like to comment on whether 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

 

this government has sort of reconsidered that as an option, or 
whether they just basically put that one out of hand, totally, as a 
way of dealing with this particular issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises the question that 
. . . the member raises the issue as to whether or not there is 
some way of avoiding the application of the Firearms Act here 
in Saskatchewan or indeed in any of the provinces. And we 
have spent considerable time inquiring into this question and 
have concluded that there is no effective way of doing this. 
 
The member suggested that maybe we can opt out of its 
application by using the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, but 
the member probably is aware that the notwithstanding clause 
has a very limited and specific application. It allows a 
legislature to declare that certain provisions of the Charter 
won’t apply to one of the legislature’s own laws. 
 
So we could do that with regards to, with regards to legislation 
which is within our own jurisdiction to implement. But it 
doesn’t enable this legislature to address a piece of legislation 
emanating from the federal government. So it doesn’t enable us, 
the Charter doesn’t enable us to say that we will not apply 
federal legislation. And so in that sense it’s an avenue we’ve 
pursued but it’s one that is not available to us. 
 
And indeed we see no way in which we can preclude the 
application of the Firearms Act here in the province. The best 
we can do is what we have done — voice our concerns as I’ve 
mentioned here today again — and also as I have done, indicate 
that we will not use our resources to enforce this legislation 
against Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I want to 
really get into another area, but regarding the firearms 
legislation and the concern I have, Mr. Minister, and what 
you’ve indicated is that we are, as a province we’re obligated 
to, and as your department, you’re obligated to enforce the laws 
and the laws of the land. 
 
The unfortunate part is when governments impose laws that 
really go against the wishes of and the will of the people. And I 
would suggest to you that that law that we have seen, this 
Firearms Act, has been on the books for a number of years. 
Some ministers federally have had enough fortitude to stand up 
and say to bureaucrats, no, we’re not going that direction or that 
far. 
 
Unfortunately we have had ministers who have totally caved 
because their vote and their popular support comes directly out 
of southern Ontario and a little bit from Montreal, but enough to 
take the effect of the western voice. And I realize, Mr. Minister, 
we’re a population of one million in a country of, I think it’s 
over 30 million, 30 million people now. But at the same time, 
that should not take away the fact that as a province we should 
have an equal voice. 
 
And I know the Premier of Alberta, the former premier of 
Manitoba, have expressed some grave concerns. I’ve had 
concerns with this piece of legislation for a long period of time. 
It appears that the federal Liberal government could care less 
about Western Canada; could care less about rural Canada for 
that matter. 

We take a look right now at the debate in Ottawa in regards to 
agriculture. We’re seeing even Ontario agriculture producers 
are facing some very significant crisis and it’s getting the ear of 
the federal government a little bit. But it certainly appears that 
the federal government does not intend or could care less about 
how Western Canadians feel. 
 
And I guess what I’m saying, Mr. Minister, it’s the 
responsibility as the minister of the Crown in this province to 
really reinforce with Ottawa the issues that the people of this 
province bring to your attention. 
 
And I know that certainly some of the former ministers, earlier 
on in the early ’80s, Mr. Mitchell, we had significant debates on 
that issue. And I know Mr. Mitchell had expressed some very 
strong support and endeavoured to try and relay that support to 
Ottawa. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, what we’re seeing and we’re hearing 
. . . there’s rumblings of this around the province already. And 
we see groups getting together and starting to talk about 
separation and starting to talk about how do we send a message 
to Ottawa. And one of the reasons we have that discussion is 
because we see how Quebec has, if you will, almost 
manipulated federal governments for years as a result of that. 
 
And people in Western Canada are saying we are becoming 
very tired of federal governments dictating policy to us and as a 
result, we have this voice. And I think it’s imperative, Mr. 
Minister, that we really reinforce with Ottawa the fact that there 
is a major issue and a concern. 
 
And my colleague, the member from Rosthern is right. All you 
need is one or two individuals who decide they’re really going 
to start imposing the law and becoming very arrogant in the 
way they impose the law and then you will have people up in 
arms. So I think, Mr. Minister, we need to really be mindful of 
that and be very firm in your debate with the federal 
government on the issue. So, Mr. Minister, I reinforce that. 
 
But I also want to ask you, Mr. Minister, we hear of discussion 
in Ottawa about the fact that as a result of the cost of 
implementing the Firearms Act in Canada, I believe the former 
minister, the current Minister of Health, had indicated would 
just be a few hundred million dollars. Well it’s well past what 
they had originally said. And coming back to the whole debate 
in this country is how we provide police services, provide the 
finances to provide the services so that we can protect 
law-abiding citizens. 
 
It looks to me, Mr. Minister, that currently now the federal 
government is realizing that this Firearms Act has mushroomed 
way out of control. Now they’re talking of bringing in possibly 
a private service to administer the Act. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Minister, we need to be very mindful 
of that and really raise some grave concerns because as soon as 
you get a private contractor in — contractors, what do they do? 
Their objective is to raise money, raise funds, and they can be 
very indignant in how they impose the law or implement that 
law. 
 
(12:15) 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

So, Mr. Minister, I just want to hear from you, if you have had 
any discussions with your counterparts in Ottawa in regards to 
this, if you will, if it’s a rumour or whatever, regarding the 
privatization of the administration of this current Act. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s specific 
question, the federal government is well aware of this 
province’s position with regards to the registry, and indeed to 
the process which it is apparently pursuing at the present. 
 
I think the member should know, and he probably does, that no 
other province has done any more than this province to oppose 
this firearms legislation. We participated in the Supreme Court 
of Canada challenge on its constitutionality, as you know. We 
opted out of its administration, as you know. And we have 
ensured that we will not prosecute under the Firearms Act. 
 
There is, I think the member will agree, no other province 
which has gone further, no other province which has done 
more. And the fact of the matter is, with the responsibility that 
falls on the Minister of Justice and the Attorney General to 
enforce the laws of the land, we have precluded ourselves from 
as much of that as we possibly can, and left it to the federal 
government to prosecute legislation which we agree, all of us in 
this House agree, is ineffective, expensive, and not likely to 
improve the safety and security of our communities. 
 
So we’ve left no stone unturned. We’ve left no initiative undone 
to work on the federal government on this question. And we 
will continue to voice those legitimate concerns of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I appreciate 
those comments. And certainly as I’ve indicated in past 
discussions with former ministers, we have received those 
verbal assurances. And certainly we will just be mindful of the 
ongoing debate and how firm this government is, and the 
minister and the department is, in regards to issues of this 
concern. 
 
Mr. Minister, an area I’d like to ask a few questions on is 
regarding the issue of maintenance and enforcement and 
actually access. Mr. Minister, over the past number of years we 
have seen that, if you will, I think the pendulum has greatly 
swung in, if you will, to the extreme right when it comes to 
maintenance and enforcement and access. 
 
And what I mean by that, Mr. Minister, it would appear that 
actually while there were some strong arguments as to the fact 
that maybe mothers and women in a divorce settlement were 
not receiving due . . . receiving proper care and adequate care, 
and indeed if an award was made that those awards weren’t 
being followed up very closely to the point that the awards are 
probably made much stronger in favour of the mother. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think that argument has always been that 
way because of the fact the feeling was that the mother could be 
the better caregiver. But on the other hand, Mr. Minister, I think 
we are also seeing that there are a lot of men can be good 
caregivers as well. 
 
And when a couple ends up in a divorce proceeding and ends 
up before the courts and an award is made — and a number of 

issues have been brought to my attention where a judgment is 
made and basically an order is made that the husband must, or 
the male partner must provide a level of maintenance — the 
award also does acknowledge the fact that that husband or male 
partner should actually have access to the child as well so that 
there’s some equal balance in the upbringing of the child. 
 
And I understand, Mr. Minister, that the federal government has 
had some discussions on it. And I’m not exactly sure — it 
seems to me there’s something in Saskatchewan today, a 
meeting in regards to that. And I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, 
where we’re going in really raising the profile of the male 
parent and the fact that there are certain situations where some 
good, honest, hard-working fathers are actually having 
limitations in regards to access to their children. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raised a number of issues 
surrounding complex questions of how we deal with custody 
and access and the contributions made by parents when 
relationships break down. And these are indeed serious and 
complex questions. 
 
I think I should begin by saying that in terms of . . . the job of 
the maintenance enforcement office and Lionel McNabb, the 
director of it, has just come into the Chamber. The job of that 
office is to enforce judicial orders. And I’m not going to get 
into reviewing the quality or any of the issues about judicial 
orders. The orders are made by judges, with the best exercise of 
their skills, and in response to the issues that are presented to 
them. And, of course, in accordance with the provisions of 
respective laws. 
 
Now when we get those orders, then we do our best to enforce 
them. The member will know that not always are people happy 
with the results. Sometimes the money is more difficult to 
obtain than would otherwise be the case because the payer has 
left the province or has become unemployed or various reasons. 
And the member will be familiar with those. 
 
But it is worth remembering that the maintenance enforcement 
office collects significant numbers of dollars for custodial 
parents in the province. And just, in this budget year, we 
increased the budget allocation to maintenance enforcement so 
that it can add another staff person to handle the workload. And 
we, in addition, provided extra staff in June of last year. So I 
think you know our commitment to maintenance enforcement 
and, in fact, the member has made some positive comments 
about it in the past. 
 
The other point he made was with regards to what are we doing 
to address these real substantive issues about custody and 
access? The member will know that there was significant 
consultation at the federal level and at the provincial level in 
1998-99. We are going through final consultations at the 
present time with groups and with individuals in the province. 
 
That consultation will be fed into the provincial ministers of 
Justice meeting, and we will be anticipating changes to federal 
legislation as a result. Because it’s so complex, there is a need 
to consult. We’re finishing that consultation at the present time, 
all provinces are, and that will be presented to the ministers, I 
guess in September. 
 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, I appreciate the fact 
of what the work and the efforts that maintenance enforcement 
is doing, and certainly, Mr. Minister, the fact that we have 
reciprocal agreements interprovincially so that people can’t just 
cross borders and get away from their obligations and 
responsibilities. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, I’m still concerned about the fact that 
while maintenance enforcement is very diligent in reality in 
going after funds that have been allocated, there seems to be a 
real laxness. And I don know why there is in the fact that if 
maintenance does follow through and goes after an individual 
for the maintenance dollars that are supposed to be going to the 
other parent, and yet at the same time while those dollars may 
flow through as a result of the actions of maintenance, that 
doesn’t necessarily mean that the parent who’s paying the 
maintenance is going to have access to their child. 
 
And in some cases it’s really destroyed some husbands and 
fathers who still have a real love for the child or for their 
children, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, I would like to know 
what is the maintenance office doing in addressing this issue. 
 
Wouldn’t it be appropriate, Mr. Minister, if indeed as we’ve 
discussed earlier, an order is given that so much value, 
maintenance value and dollars be handed to one parent, and that 
the other parent actually have a child for maybe it’s one week 
out of the month or two weekends out of the month plus a 
month, and yet that provision is not being followed through on. 
Would it not be appropriate then, Mr. Minister, to follow 
through on that side of the issue? 
 
And maybe even, Mr. Minister, the suggestion that if you don’t 
follow through on your part of the order, then we’re not . . . the 
issue of maintenance may be, and the dollar values that flow 
your way, we may have to start to consider how intensively we 
follow through on getting those payments on your behalf. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well the member raises an important 
practical question. And while the maintenance enforcement 
office has no power to ensure access, it certainly does 
encourage the custodial parent to provide access to the 
non-custodial parent for the simple matter that if access is 
provided there is then less antagonism and so on, on the part of 
the non-custodial parent and more likelihood that the payments 
will be made. So there’s an encouragement to act reasonably 
and sensibly in the process. 
 
We know that this is an issue, that’s there’s no kind of parallel 
between paying your maintenance and having access to your 
children. The consultation process which is underway 
recognizes this and is designed to seek a solution to this 
particular question of access. 
 
I agree with the member that it raises significant, difficult, 
personal problems. It is not helpful in the context of the child or 
indeed of the two parents. So we are looking for solutions, for 
solutions to that. 
 
And I might say that we in Saskatchewan have the most 
advanced enforcement remedies of any jurisdiction in the 
province. And of course the option is always available to the 
non-custodial parent to seek a court order regarding access, but 

plainly that is not the most . . . that’s not the easiest approach 
for many non-custodial parents, and that’s why we’re seeking 
some other process which should make that . . . which should 
facilitate that process. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I guess, Mr. 
Minister, while I appreciate the comments you’ve made, I’m 
disturbed by the fact that I think you indicated that you really 
don’t have . . . or maintenance doesn’t really have the authority 
to follow through on the custody side. And that’s the exact 
question that I would like to know. 
 
Why does maintenance enforcement not have the ability or the 
authority to follow through on the judges’ orders in payments as 
well as access? And, Mr. Minister, if it means a change to the 
way maintenance enforcement is followed through on, Mr. 
Minister, is your department and are you, Mr. Minister, willing 
to create a level playing field and address that issue so that 
indeed children are not left in a position where they’re really . . . 
such anger and hatred is created toward the other parent? 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The simple answer to the question is 
that the legislation does not provide for maintenance 
enforcement to deal with the access side. The rationale behind 
that and the rationale behind consulting on a measure that can 
ensure access is that it is extremely complicated. It is sometimes 
hard to judge which story is the right story. And it’s particularly 
hard to enforce, as you can imagine. 
 
How do you make a person, a parent, provide access to the 
other parent . . . access to the child. It’s very difficult to do that 
and you can’t . . . it’s expensive to do it when you have to have 
somebody there to ensure that it takes place. 
 
So it is complex, and it’s complex mostly because it involves 
complex human interaction. But the consultation is designed to 
try to come up with a response to this. This is happening across 
the country as I say, and we hope to be able to move on this 
significant question. 
 
I can’t agree more with the member about the seriousness of 
this issue. But it is not so easy to find a solution; that’s why 
we’re working on one. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, coming back to that 
final point, and actually the initial point in your last response, 
and the question that I had asked at the end of my comments 
earlier is, what is your department doing to address that 
concern? 
 
And you indicated that actually under the current legislation 
there was no provision for maintenance to really address the 
ongoing concern out there. It’s something that as legislators and 
as a department that you’re going to have to follow through on, 
come up with recommendations even if it means legislative 
changes so that you can begin to address the inequity out there. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I guess the short is, what is your department 
doing? You’re talking about consultation, but how long are you 
going to continue to consult before you come up with 
something that would really address this issue so that fathers 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

have equal access, children grow up learning to appreciate both 
their biological parents rather than just the one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The consultation process should 
ensure that by September when we are — ministers of Justice 
across the country will be meeting, that there will be 
recommendations to address the issue you raise. So it is not 
being put off for a particularly long period of time. 
 
It’s important to really truly get to the bottom of how we might 
do something useful to assist non-custodial parents. It’s 
particularly important, I think, to seek ways that will actually 
work, and that takes a little time. 
 
I might say too though, that maintenance enforcement with case 
after case after case, with person after person after person, with 
all custodial parents, recommends that they provide access to 
the non-custodial parent. So we do what we can within our 
jurisdictional power within the legislation to ensure access. 
 
But the fact of the matter is that in September we will have, 
hopefully, some concrete measures from consultations across 
the province and indeed across the country to address the very 
concern you raise. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, as I address this 
issue, one of the reasons I’m addressing the issue is because of 
the long outstanding concerns that have been brought to my 
attention. Even as an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly), and maybe my colleagues, maybe even your 
colleagues have experienced this, where you begin to be 
accused of actually not raising the issue, of not standing up and 
being a voice to make sure that there is some equality brought 
into the system. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I’m certainly hoping that before long — and 
as you’ve indicated, your department is looking at this fairly 
aggressively so that maybe you can even have a present when 
the ministers meet in September — that you can have some 
positive ideas to bring forward at that conference that would 
address this issue. 
 
And now I know the current federal minister, I believe even two 
years ago, indicated that they were looking at some changes that 
would address this. And they had some discussions with men 
who have formed an association to speak on behalf of the male 
parent. 
 
And in this regard, Mr. Minister, we’re certainly looking 
forward to a means of addressing this issue so that males aren’t 
harassed. And I use that word somewhat carefully but I do 
know that a couple situations in particular, the individuals who 
have contacted me, basically every time they try to even phone 
and even talk to a child, next thing they know, they’re being 
accused of harassment; that the other partner, even just to call 
on the phones is a means. 
 
And I think that comes to the point you alluded to earlier, how 
complex the whole issue is. And like you say, I don’t know. 
There isn’t a clear-cut answer but I think we need to make a 
diligent attempt to draw a more level playing field and try and 
get the animosity out of the whole divorce settlement. 
 

And having said that, Mr. Minister, I come to another point. 
And that’s, what is your department doing or have you taken a 
stronger look at sitting down and negotiating divorce 
settlements rather than . . . or mediation, using a form of 
mediation rather than the confrontational approach of the court 
system when it comes to divorce settlements to see if we can 
come to more amicable agreements and understandings when a 
couple decides that they’re going to separate. So that at the end 
of the day, there’s still some reasonable appreciation for the 
other partner, but as well an understanding of the hurt that 
children face when a divorce is entered into. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well let me say how much I share the 
member’s concern and commitment to resolving these kinds of 
issues and to providing mechanisms so that these kinds of 
issues can be resolved in a more effective and efficacious way 
than is often the case when people fight. Because that plainly 
doesn’t . . . is not the most constructive way to address these 
concerns, and particularly it has the potential for significant 
harm to the children involved. 
 
And of course our commitment, all of us in this House, is to 
ensuring that children come first in these disputes and that 
children are indeed, their interests are put ahead of all others, 
and that they have access to both of their parents. 
 
And within the context of that, there are significant family 
support services available to parents, and significant mediation 
services available to them as well. I agree with the member that 
mediation is a much better way of addressing these concerns 
than a kind of a pitch battle which sometimes takes place. 
 
The consultation document that I’ve been referring to in 
response to the member’s questions engages these issues. Ways 
in which we can ensure that separation and divorce is not as 
harmful on the children as otherwise might be the case. So the 
consultation will address legislative changes and also program 
changes such as mediation in this context too. 
 
So I think the member can see that the consultation process is 
wide-ranging, covering all aspects of the issue he’s raised and is 
attempting to, across the country, to arrive at solutions to these 
very difficult problems. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, under the 
current system of divorce settlement and mediation, what is the 
process? 
 
If a couple decides that they’ve just come to the point in their 
lives where they really feel that they just can’t continue to 
reside together and are going to pull the pin on that relationship, 
Mr. Minister, is there an obligation first of all for that couple to 
go through and seek the services of mediation before they 
would end up going to the court system? To see whether or not 
you could arrive at a consensus, an amicable consensus that 
would work, that would create a more caring environment, 
especially in view of the children, and that includes, actually 
includes the children in the equation of the process of the 
divorce settlement. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, what is the process? Is there an obligation for 
a couple to actually seek the services or to go through the 
mediation process before they actually seek the services of the 



April 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

 

court settlement if . . . or the court process, if they determine or 
just are at that point where they’re not willing to accept what a 
mediator may recommend. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The process the member refers to, 
some assurance that those parents who decide to split, to split 
up, are in fact left with no other option or seriously consider 
these questions is certainly a valid one. These are serious 
decisions which should be made considering all the 
circumstances, and in particular as the member says, 
considering the interests of the child. 
 
We have available across the province, parent education for 
these kinds of purposes, including other purposes, and we 
certainly do advise and encourage mediation at the time of 
potential dissolution. So it’s our advice for people to pursue this 
option. 
 
Now I can say to the member that we’ve had significant 
discussions about mandatory mediation in the province. We’re 
looking to a pilot project to test it for the citizens of the 
province, in Yorkton. We’re discussing this issue with the bar 
and with courts, with judges, with affected parties, and we 
anticipate being able to introduce this pilot as soon as possible. 
And I know the member would watch with interest the way in 
which that works, as we will. 
 
So hopefully, shortly we will be able to announce that pilot, 
which in fact is what the member is asking for, and then we can 
see how that works and see the way in which we could expand 
it across the province. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that and I’m 
pleased to hear that that’s taking place. And I guess the question 
that I want to raise as well is what kind of acceptance do you 
find in the legal community. I guess my feeling sometimes is 
this might be imposing on the ability of the legal community as 
to their ability to create revenue. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you mentioned you were consulting with the 
bar, and I just want a clear understanding of the acceptance of 
the legal community to this type of initiative in view of the goal 
to really build upon that family relationship and take into 
consideration the children as well. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, can you kind of give us . . . can you give us an 
idea of where the legal community in general is on this issue 
and whether you’re getting some resistance from the legal 
community, or if they have begun to realize the importance of 
addressing this as an overall family issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks what is the result of 
consultation with the bar over this question, and I think the 
member can anticipate that the response has been somewhat 
mixed. And indeed across the province, when these matters 
have been discussed, that has been the case as well — a mixed 
response, positive and negative. But over time as the mandatory 
process is being adopted, the negative responses decline and the 
positive responses increase. 
 
But we’re, you know — the member’s right, we’re right, I 
think, in pursuing this agenda. And we anticipate a positive 
response from the bar and being able to move forward in this 

process. 
 
(12:45) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I certainly would 
encourage your department, in the consultation process, to 
really reinforce the fact that this is a family issue and we have 
young children at risk here. And I use that term, at risk, because 
my colleague, the member from Rosthern, was talking about the 
need for police services. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure, maybe the question we need to ask is, 
when we look at the number of young people that end up before 
the court system, how many of these young people are there 
because they come from situations where they feel that no one 
really cared for them as a result of these broken relationships? 
 
And so if we can find a way to address this issue in the broader 
perspective, so that these young people feel that they are still 
important and loved, that we may save the judicial system down 
the road in the area of prosecutions as a result of criminal 
activity. 
 
And so, Mr. Minister, having said that, I just want to encourage 
you and your department in your debate, in your consultation, 
that this issue be viewed in the broad spectrum, and that the 
family and young people certainly be taken into consideration. 
 
And I thank you for your comments and your involvement 
today, and the involvement of your officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, I mean, I think the member and 
myself are on, you know, we’re on the same track here and 
we’ll do everything we possibly can to ensure that the points 
he’s been making, effective points he’s been making, will be 
realized. 
 
I might encourage the member to respond to the consultation 
document. I think you’ve received a copy — if you haven’t 
we’ll make sure you do — and I think also a request to respond. 
 
So I’ll be more than happy to meet with you to discuss some of 
these questions, and certainly be very pleased if you have some 
specific points that you think will be useful in response to the 
document. It’s a serious matter you’ve raised; we treat it 
seriously too. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House do 
now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, before we adjourn, I would like to 
just wish everybody a happy long weekend. 
 
I want to mention that this weekend, people are celebrating 
Easter. It’s the Easter weekend and it’s not only the Easter 
weekend for the Roman-dominated Christian sect, but it also 
happens to be the same for the Eastern rite, sect people who 
have come to this country from the far countries of Russia and 
Ukraine and Poland, Romania, and a few others. 
 
And so I would like to wish you a happy Easter in the language 



564 Saskatchewan Hansard April 12, 2001 

 

of my forefathers and mothers: Chrystos Voskres, which means 
Christ has risen; and Voyisten Voskres, indeed He has risen. 
 
This House stands adjourned until Wednesday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:51. 
 
 


