















































Hansard: June 15, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1833 
 June 15, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today from people from the Kelvington area: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Kelvington health 
care centre be maintained at its current level, offering 
24-hour acute care, emergency, and physician services and 
that laboratory, health care, home care, and long-term care 
services be readily accessible to users from Kelvington and 
beyond. 

 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, everyone that has signed this petition is 
from Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, my petition this morning is 
concerning a restoration of Old Government House in 
Battleford. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to designate the 
restoration of Territorial House in Battleford as a centenary 
project and provide the necessary funds to complete this 
project prior to the 2005 Saskatchewan centennial. 

 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford, Cochin, Edam, 
Gallivan, and Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
condition of Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Avonlea, Spring Valley, Moose Jaw, and Briercrest. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from southwest Saskatchewan concerned with their 
hospital facilities in the area. And the prayer of their petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, petitioners signing today in this morning’s petition 
are from the city of Swift Current, Ponteix, Webb, Waldeck, 
Elrose, Hazlet, and Leader, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
level at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre, and Pangman 
health centre, in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition dealing with health care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Gainsborough, Storthoaks, Redvers, Antler, Moosomin, Regina, 
Bellegarde, Glenavon, Manor, and Maryfield, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from citizens calling for the immediate 
implementation of a province-wide 911 emergency service. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to fulfill its 
promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
system province-wide. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Rabbit Lake. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present to do with the lack of funding to non-profit personal 
care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 



1834 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 
 

The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Kamsack, Togo, and 
Mikado. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with citizens 
opposed to possible reductions in services at Davidson and 
Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Craik and Davidson area, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Bladworth and Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly again to bring forth a petition from citizens of 
the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency and their concerns 
regarding the cellular telephone coverage in the area. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will every pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Lloydminster, Saskatoon, Leoville, Chitek Lake, and 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks that are concerned about the high cost of 
energy. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Neilburg, 
Unity, and Marsden. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens concerned with the 
future of ambulance service in rural Saskatchewan, and the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good citizens of 
Coronach and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order petitions presented yesterday on 
June 14 regarding providing a more substantial energy rate 
rebate to Saskatchewan consumers has been reviewed and 
pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be irregular and therefore 
cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and they are hereby read and received. And they are petitions 
that are addendums to 11 previously tabled petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this weekend the Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres and SARCAN are having their annual meeting here in 
the city. And in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are the 
representatives of a number of different community-based 
organizations throughout the province who will be attending the 
annual meeting this weekend. 
 
And I would firstly like to introduce Glen Holmwood. Glen is 
the president of the Board of Directors of the Porcupine 
Opportunities Program in Porcupine Plain; my former 
employer, Mr. Speaker. Glen has also served on the Board of 
Directors of SARC (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres) as well. 
 
Seated next to Glen is Hugh Macdonald. Hugh is the managing 
director of Handi-Works in Nipawin, and Handi-Works is the 
agency in Nipawin that provides residential, vocational, and 
employment services to people with disabilities. Next to Mr. 
Macdonald is Mr. Bob Taylor. Mr. Taylor is vice-president of 
Handi-Works in Nipawin, and Mr. Taylor was just recently 
elected to the provincial Board of Directors of SARC as well. 
 
Accompanying these three gentlemen this morning are Kim 
Krueger, who is the regional coordinator for SARCAN for the 
southeast region. And I might add that Kim is an avid skydiver 
as well. And sitting next to Kim is Sandra Pratt. Sandra is the 
president of the Board of Directors of Handi-Works and the 
vice-president of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rehabilitation Centres, and I believe the Chair of the SARCAN 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1835 

 

committee . . . of SARC. 
 
So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming these 
guests here this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all the members 
of the legislature a group of 27 grade 4 students from the Ruth 
Pawson School in my constituency and they’re seated in your 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And they’re accompanied here today by their teacher, Sharon 
Malley, and I understand the group is going to take in some of 
the proceedings of the House, tour the legislature, and I’ll have 
the opportunity to meet with them later for a photo and some 
refreshments. 
 
I ask all the members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this Hon. 
Assembly, a group of 27 grade 3 to 6 students from Chaplin 
School seated in the east gallery. 
 
The students are accompanied by their teachers, Teresa 
Chicoine and Debbie Waldenberger, and also chaperone, Lisa 
Fisher. 
 
I hope that everyone will have an educational, interesting, and 
fun day here in their building, and I ask all members to 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was enjoying the 
last introduction so much I almost forgot to introduce my own 
school group. 
 
I have a group sitting in the west gallery from Massey School. 
This is the second group from Massey that we’ve had here this 
session. It’s a group of 26 grade 5 students. They are 
accompanied by their teacher Ms. Horst; and two chaperones, 
Mr. Anderson and Mr. Benson. 
 
I note that they have requested a French or bilingual tour, but 
fortunately only an English visit from the MLA (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), so I should be able to accommodate 
them on that. And I would like very much to have all members, 
and you, Mr. Speaker, welcome my guests to the gallery today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join with 
my colleague from Carrot River in welcoming the people here 
with SARC and SARCAN (recycling company). But a special 
welcome, Mr. Speaker, I want to do to you and through you to 
the rest of the Assembly, is Sandra Pratt, who although she’s in 
Regina today, spends most of her time in Love. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d ask you and all members of the Assembly to 
please join me again in welcoming Sandra to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you several guests seated in your 
gallery today. First of all, someone who will be fairly familiar 
to people in the building is one of my ministerial assistants, Joy 
Strueby. But I don’t want to say more importantly, seated 
beside her in fact, joining us from Richmond, BC (British 
Columbia) today is her mother, Eleanor Milne. 
 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to please join me 
in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a guest seated in your gallery, and a constituent of 
Swift Current. It’s Mr. Len Ens, a long-time radio personality at 
CKSW in Swift Current, and a very active member of the 
community. 
 
I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming Len to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Health Care Strike 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
this morning to express the gratitude of the official opposition 
to those who went above and beyond during the health care 
strike. 
 
First of all, to those affected directly: to the seniors who put up 
with much disruption and reduced service; to those whose 
medical procedures were delayed or cancelled; to those who 
had important medical tests delayed — thank you for coping as 
best as you could through this strike. 
 
To the countless volunteers, family members, and out-of-scope 
personnel who laboured through very difficult times, spending 
countless hours caring for loved ones despite being dead tired at 
times — thank you for your love and commitment to those in 
need. You embody the spirit of Saskatchewan. 
 
(10:15) 
 
To Vince Ready for his mediation role — thank you for your 
wisdom and energy to spend 42 non-stop hours leading to a 
solution. 
 
Finally to the Minister of Health for being able to listen to 
suggestions from the official opposition. On Monday we 
suggested that a mediator be brought in — the minister listened. 
On Tuesday we asked that additional workers be added to 
Pioneer Village and Santa Maria homes — they were. 
Yesterday we asked that workplace issues be addressed — $4.5 



1836 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

million were added. Thank you for realizing our suggestions 
were positive steps to a solution in this strike. We can only hope 
that he will not place this province in this position again. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Hosts Special Olympics 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Last 
Friday the member from Saskatoon Eastview spoke about a 
very important exciting event — The Special Olympics. Later 
on that same day our Premier was pleased to attend the kickoff 
of that weekend’s activities and the opening ceremonies. 
 
For the Special Olympians the opening ceremonies was a 
culmination of years of hard work and disciplined training; and 
because the games are held only once every four years, the 
opening ceremonies and the ensuing competitions were even 
more exciting for all the athletes, the spectators, and the 
volunteers involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though the Special Olympics are about athlete 
competition they’re about giving Special Olympians the 
opportunity to be part of a team, to be dedicated to their 
endeavour, and to achieve success. And the Special Olympian’s 
mission statement attests to this. It uses sports to assist people 
with a mental disability to become all that they can be — 
physical, mental, social, emotional — and to become accepted, 
respected, and productive members of society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Premier and all members I again 
want to offer my congratulations to Co-Chair, Angie Ginther, 
and the organizing committee who have succeeded in putting on 
a world-class event. Most of all, I want this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, to congratulate the athletes on their accomplishments 
and to wish them luck in their future competitions. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Bladworth Elks Club to Host 2003 Provincial Elks 
Men’s Curling Championship 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to talk about a remarkable achievement by the Elks Club 
in my hometown of Bladworth. This past Tuesday, Elk clubs 
from around the province met at Kindersley for their Annual 
Provincial Elks Association Meeting. There Bladworth bid with 
another town to host the 2003 Provincial Elks Men’s Curling 
Championship. And my regrets to the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar. The other town being Biggar, Bladworth beat 
out Rosetown. 
 
So I’m pleased to announce that Bladworth Elks Club won the 
right to host this event, which will be the second time for these 
gentlemen as they hosted this event in the winter of 2000. 
 
I would like to congratulate the members of the Bladworth Elks 
who did a fine job of making a presentation which won the 
judges over. I’d like to thank Doug Ames, Neil Palmer, Lyle 

Kowalski who is the exalted ruler of our branch, and also 
Mayor Jim Cross of Davidson, who made a great presentation 
about the excellent facilities and services in Davidson where the 
event will be held. I know that this event will be successful as 
the last event and perhaps even bigger this time around. 
 
As a member of the Elks myself, I know that we’ve a fine group 
of gentlemen who have done a lot for our local community and 
our province. 
 
I would ask the members join me in congratulating the Elks 
committee of Bladworth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Passage of Parental Leave Legislation 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Yesterday, Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor gave Royal Assent to the amendments to 
The Labour Standards Act 
 
Because these amendments were so time-sensitive, I want to 
thank all members for their understanding and co-operation. 
The media, of course, focus on the gladiator arena of question 
period. More often than not though, we co-operate for the good 
of all of our constituents. 
 
In particular, I thank members on behalf of the many birth 
mothers and primary caregivers of adopted children who now 
have their jobs protected for the full 52 weeks. As well, birth 
fathers and spouses of primary caregivers are now eligible for 
37 weeks of job-protected parental leave. 
 
This is the kind of thoughtful, progressive, family oriented, 
compassionate policy for which our province is known across 
Canada. We have been called Canada’s social laboratory, a term 
which gives me a great sense of pride. And I know I’m not 
alone. We are not the first province to align our legislation with 
the federal amendments, but it is more than appropriate that we 
join. 
 
As I said last Friday on second reading, the reason for this Bill 
is profoundly simple. The first year of a child’s life is critical to 
his or her psychological and physical development and parents 
deserve every opportunity to share in the joy of all of those 
firsts — first smile, first step, first words and on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday was a good day in the legislature, and I 
was proud to be a part of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Political Fundraising 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there certainly has been a lot of talk lately about political 
donations and the fundraising practices of various political 
parties in this province and, in fact, throughout the country. As 
we all know, in this day and age, you really can’t have a strong 
political party without a strong fundraising base. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I recently had a look through the financial returns 
of the various Saskatchewan political parties. One page in those 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1837 

 

returns really caught my eye. Under the section detailing 
contributions from other sources such as sales of tickets, rallies 
or other fundraising functions, both the Saskatchewan Party 
and, surprisingly enough, the NDP (New Democratic Party) did 
fairly well, each with six figure support. And the Liberals, 32, 
not 32,000 — $32. 
 
If political support can be borne out in fundraising, I think we 
have to say that Liberal Party members have turned a 
thumbs-down on the coalition. 
 
Now I would hope that the Liberals do the right thing and give 
the member from North Battleford his rightful portion — 10 
bucks — and the outgoing leader who’s suing for back pay 
should be given his rightful portion of the remaining $20, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rawlco Communications Makes News 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Rawlco 
Communications has been making news as well as reporting it 
this session. There was a substantial donation to the SIFC 
(Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) College of 
Commerce in Saskatoon earlier this winter, and Rawlco is a 
major partner in the Saskatchewan Dream program, the 
program which celebrates the accomplishments of 
Saskatchewan businesses and individuals. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there are two more newsworthy items 
worthy of attention, particularly I guess the attention of you and 
myself, because they originate in our city of Prince Albert. 
 
First, Jim Scarrow, a long-time fixture on the airways of Prince 
Albert, has just been named Broadcaster of the Year by the 
Western Association of Broadcasters. You and I and everyone 
else in Prince Albert have been listening to Jim on CKBI since 
1964, and I gather that he has been employed for 47 years by 
Rawlco. Not only is he a broadcaster and now general manager 
of Rawlco’s two stations in Prince Albert, he’s also been an 
active citizen involved in our community. Our congratulations 
to Jim on a well-deserved award. 
 
Now earlier I said, Mr. Speaker, two stations. Well now we 
have to make that three. As of yesterday, Rawlco has launched 
a new FM station at 101.5 FM, for everyone’s information. This 
is good news for Prince Albert. I think it’s a very true sign of 
confidence the private sector has in Prince Albert and in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Father’s Day 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This weekend will 
mark a special celebration for families everywhere. That’s 
because this Sunday, Mr. Speaker, is Father’s Day. 
 

There’ll be those who will be honouring their fathers in many 
ways this weekend. They’ll hold backyard barbecues, they’ll 
take him out for supper, make him his favourite breakfast, help 
him out with weekend chores, and generally just find countless 
ways to say thanks, Dad; we love you; you’re the best. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides food, there’ll be gifts like tools and shirts 
and ties and socks and all kinds of electronic gadgets that may 
or may not have a remote control. There’ll be funny cards, 
sentimental cards, or romantic cards. And even cards for dads 
that come from the family pet. 
 
But in the midst of these celebrations, Mr. Speaker, we must not 
forget these families whose fathers are no longer with them. 
They will be remembering Father’s Day this Sunday, but 
instead of marking the day with gifts, they’ll be marking it 
quietly with a wreath of flowers. While these fathers may no 
longer be there, they’ll never be forgotten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to fathers everywhere from all members of this 
House, our sincere appreciation for all that you are and all that 
you’ve done. A father’s love, honour, courage, and commitment 
knows no bounds and has impacted our lives in many positive 
ways. 
 
Thank you, dad. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Athletes Excel at Provincial Track Meet 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, Pat Mitsuing and Richard 
Ben of the Makwa Sahgaiehcan First Nation have proven to be 
another Saskatchewan success story. These two athletes 
travelled to Yorkton to compete in the high school provincial 
track and field competitions earlier this month. 
 
Pat competed well all weekend, Mr. Speaker, but the highlight 
for him, and possibly of the whole meet, was the junior boys 
high jump. When only three competitors remained at a height of 
1.80 metres, Pat was one of them. He cleared this height on his 
first attempt and watched the other two jumpers miss. He had 
clinched first place but he had wanted to continue to see how 
high he could jump. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when he finally did miss three in a row, the bar 
was at 1.92 metres meaning his final clearance height was 1.90 
metres. All this from a young man who stands only 1.74 metres 
tall. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to mention that Richard Ben who 
was not about to let Pat be the only medallist from the Makwa 
Sahgaiehcan First Nation. His size and extremely fast arm 
helped him bring home the bronze medal in the senior boys shot 
put. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members to join with me in 
congratulating these two fine young athletes and all those who 
participated in high school track and field throughout our 
province. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1838 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Health Care Settlement 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
There was a collective sigh of relief from the general public 
across the province this morning when they heard the good 
news that a new contract proposal has been reached between 
SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations) 
and CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees) members. 
 
Family members of long-term care patients especially were glad 
to hear that the health care needs of their relatives would once 
again be met by the people most capable of meeting their needs. 
 
Our understanding is that the deal reached is a three-year 
contract consisting of a 9 per cent wage increase over the term, 
more money for employee pension plans, and an additional $4.5 
million to pay for overtime and extra shifting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to this House if the 
wages, pensions, and overtime money has been already 
allocated in the provincial budget, and if it hasn’t will the 
minister assure health districts that the money will not have to 
come out of their existing budgets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what I would first like to say 
is thank you to all of the people of Saskatchewan who have 
supported what has happened in this week as we’ve resolved 
this issue. And that goes to the workers who were inside 
helping out, those workers who were bargaining, those who 
were volunteers that came to help families, and the out-of-scope 
people who did very, very good work. 
 
What I would say to the member opposite is that the bargaining 
has gone on within the framework that we have within our 
overall budget, and the plan is that this will be part of our 
budget planning, so it is part of what we’re doing. 
 
The other thing I would say is that it was pretty disappointing to 
me that the member opposite would get up and try to take credit 
for some of the things that went on this week given, given the 
attitude that they had around this particular incident. 
 
And so I guess what I would say to the member is let’s get on 
board to work together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this is the second health care 
strike in three years. After the 1999 nurses’ strike, the 
government said workplace issues should be addressed. Yet 
today we can talk to any registered nurse in the province, and 
you’ll hear that many of the concerns they expressed about 
workload, understaffing, and other issues in the workplace have 
not been dealt with. 
 
So it begs the question whether anything will really change for 
CUPE workers because of this agreement. I assume that the 

extra $4.5 million for overtime and extra shifting is part of this, 
but allowing and paying for more overtime does not necessarily 
mean less workload when there are no more staff available to be 
hired to carry that load. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain what workload issues are 
to be addressed in this contract? And more importantly, how in 
the world does he plan to deliver the extra workers that are 
going to be needed to live up to those commitments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to start out with 
the premise that at least on this side of the House, we would 
plan for working with the workers to get more money for this 
particular option. We know that in the budget that those people 
ran on in ’99, it would have been a zero amount. And we would 
have had many, many more problems. 
 
What we are going to be doing, and will continue to do, is allow 
those workers to bargain with the employers around all of these 
issues. They’re continuing to do that. These moneys relate to 
operational issues; they relate to some of the other kinds of 
costs that have been identified around the workplaces. They are 
continuing to work on those ones. Let them do that job without 
interference from this place. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, it took a 
six-day strike by CUPE workers in this province before the 
government put forward $4.5 million targeted for extra shifts 
and overtime costs. We can assume now that the same offer . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we can assume now that the 
same offer will be made to the SEIU (Service Employees’ 
International Union) union which is also presently negotiating 
with SAHO for a new contract. 
 
One has to wonder, if the government has more money for 
pension and millions more to contribute for workload issues, 
why didn’t they even put more of this new money on up front 
so they could have averted a strike altogether? This is most 
likely what will happen in the SEIU strikes. Why couldn’t it 
have happened in the CUPE strike? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister was prepared to put up more money 
to deal with the pension and workload issues, why wasn’t this 
done earlier in the negotiations in the interest of averting this 
past six-day strike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House 
will allow the parties to bargain. What we know from earlier in 
the week that there were so many issues that it was even very 
difficult for a very experienced mediator, Mr. Ready, to identify 
those ones which could be solved. 
 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1839 

 

After some very extensive discussion with the parties, those 
kinds of issues were narrowed down to the point where the 
resource questions could be answered. 
 
That’s what’s done. That’s how you resolve these matters. And 
I would ask the member to participate in the community and 
allow for people to solve these problems at the bargaining table, 
where they should. That’s what we’re going to support on this 
side of the House. I ask the member to do the same. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Langham Senior Citizens Home 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Health. Since 1995 the Langham Senior Citizens Home has 
been operating with 28 beds — 17 which are publicly funded by 
the Saskatoon District Health Board and 11 that are private care 
beds. 
 
In December, 1999 the home applied to the Department of 
Health for a personal care home licence for eight new beds in 
their facility. The home has a substantial waiting list and a good 
record of care and co-operation with the health district. The 
management company responsible for the home is considerably 
frustrated with the 18-month delay in any response from the 
Department of Health to their application. 
 
Mr. Minister, will the . . . Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain 
why it’s taking so long to make a final decision and what is the 
present status of this long-term care home expansion 
application? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The districts 
work together around planning the kinds of care that’s in their 
community, but there are also issues around personal care 
homes and how those homes fit together with long-term care 
facilities. There’s some very difficult principles that we are all 
working on together around the kinds of questions that the 
member raises. 
 
And we will continue to look at that because it does relate to the 
issue between private hospitals and publicly funded hospitals. 
Because of that, this will take a while longer and it will be part 
of the discussion of the Fyke report. It’s also part of the 
discussion that the Romanow Commission is looking at. 
 
So what I would say is that this is a broad issue that we’re 
looking at very carefully. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, the waiting list situation for 
long-term care home beds in Saskatchewan is serious. In 
Saskatoon the closing of one aging facility has led to public 
protests and considerable concerns about where the residents 
will find a bed. 
 
In Langham we have a facility that combines public and private 
beds and has been operating successfully . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — In Langham we have a facility that combines 
public and private beds and has been operating successfully in 
the community for many years. This is an excellent example of 
how one facility can provide a valuable service to the health 
system, while at the same time helping health districts deal with 
their fiscal boundaries. 
 
There’s a strong demand in Saskatchewan for more long-term 
care beds that will allow more people to stay in communities 
where they have spent their lives. The delay in dealing with 
Langham Senior Citizens Home by the Department of Health is 
unacceptable, given the problems in our health system and the 
need for workable solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to dealing with this 
application immediately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what I will commit to is 
dealing with this particular issue, which is a very broad issue, 
very thoroughly and as part of our overall review of the system 
of health in Saskatchewan. So what that means is that we will 
continue to look at that particular situation and all of the issues 
around long-term care. 
 
What I would say though is that this government has committed 
to working on many integrated facilities where long-term care 
has been organized with the help of the local communities and 
the health districts, and we’re going to continue to work with 
communities right across this province as we provide the 
service that these people require. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, on May 25 the Saskatchewan 
Party asked the minister of Liquor and Gaming about free trips 
to the Bahamas and other alleged violations of the liquor and 
gaming Act by Liquor and Gaming officials. 
 
The minister said the matter was under investigation by a 
retired judge and when that review was complete, she would be 
delighted to share it with the members of the Assembly. 
 
The NDP House Leader backed up that promise. He said, and I 
quote — using his best Don Cherry pose — “When the results 
are complete, they will be made public.” 
 
Now the NDP is breaking that promise. The minister has read 
the report, Mr. Speaker, but she’s refusing to release it. She’s 
refusing to release it. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. The members will 
allow the member to put the question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And as Mr. Speaker 
knows, imitation may be the best compliment you’ll ever get. 
 
The minister has read the report but she is refusing to release it. 
Obviously she’s trying to hide something. Mr. Speaker, what is 



1840 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

the NDP hiding? And why are they breaking their promise to 
release that report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And yes, Mr. 
Speaker, I had said many times before —as my colleague has 
said — when the review is complete, actions that I would take, 
the results, the conclusions of that review would be made 
public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would want to release the full report. That has 
been always my position, Mr. Speaker. I will release the report 
subject to any possible further investigations that would rule out 
that possibility for me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let’s wait for the review. The terms of reference say that Justice 
and the Attorney General’s department should look at these as 
the member opposite suggested. Let’s wait. And it would be my 
intention subject to that, that that would be our intent to do so, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It will be interesting, Mr. Speaker, to 
compare today’s answer with her answer in Hansard on May 
25. All the extra paraphernalia she threw in wasn’t there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is now saying that Justice Wakeling’s 
report may need to be turned over to the Department of Justice 
for further investigation. But before that happens, before it 
happens, Liquor and Gaming officials will get to review a draft 
copy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what sense does that make? The minister referred 
to this investigation as an independent investigation on several 
occasions. Since when does a judge give a draft copy of an 
independent investigation to the very people that he’s 
investigating, Mr. Speaker? 
 
To the minister: why would SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority) officials get to review a draft copy of 
Justice Wakeling’s report before it goes to the Justice 
department, particularly when it’s SLGA’s officials that are 
being investigated? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, retired Justice Wakeling 
has been contracted by SLGA to follow up on the allegations 
made following another process that was in place, as the 
member opposite full well knows. 
 
Mr. Wakeling had terms of reference that were handed over on 
two occasions to the members opposite, and had been tabled in 
this House. One of those is to say that those . . . the review 
when completed would be looked at by the Department of 
Justice. 
 
But since it’s a contract by SLGA to make sure that the terms of 
reference are met, Wakeling is giving the report to say have we 
met all of the requirements that you asked. It’s no intent . . . 
and, Mr. Speaker, I would not want the members opposite to 

infer that Justice Wakeling would change his report on the 
advice of SLGA officials. 
 
But we have a contract and the complete terms of reference 
must be made and completed for that to be a complete report, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We have no 
concerns about Justice Wakeling fiddling with that report. We 
have a concern about that minister fiddling with it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — This whole thing, Mr. Speaker, smells. The 
NDP’s Liquor and Gaming Authority have put together a long 
track record of incompetence, mismanagement, and cover-up. 
 
For years they looked the other way while millions were being 
misspent by SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority). 
Then they fire their lead investigator for providing evidence to 
the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). Then they fire 
another employee, Mr. Speaker, who said Liquor and Gaming 
officials were breaking the law. And now the NDP is refusing 
to release the judge’s report on those same allegations after both 
the minister and the NDP House Leader promised it would be 
released without it being fiddled with. 
 
My question is for the Premier: how long will the Premier put 
up with this? Will the Premier demand that his minister live up 
to her promise and release that report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, that member opposite has 
a long list of totally incorrect information on how SLGA has 
been handling many of the affairs related to SIGA and other 
events that have occurred. 
 
As a point in fact, Mr. Speaker, in the Provincial Auditor’s 
report, he said in a new industry where we need to work 
together in partnership to make sure all of the controls and 
procedures in place, he believed that the organization was doing 
a good job in making sure those were in place. And he 
encouraged them to continue on the course of action that they 
were taking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now to come forward and to totally twist the kind of history 
that that member is trying to do does a great disservice to 800 
hard-working men and women in the Authority. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, to somehow suggest on one question that 
Mr. Wakeling will change his report on our advice or SLGA’s 
advice, he’s backtracking again, Mr. Speaker. What we’re 
saying, when we see the results of that report . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Political Donation by the Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 1998 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1841 

 

and 1999, the Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority donated 
thousands of dollars to the NDP and the Liberals. In his Fall 
2000 Report, the Provincial Auditor said political parties should 
not be accepting donations from SIGA. 
 
The NDP did promptly return this money; however, the 
Liberals decided to keep it. They say that they have no intention 
of paying it back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor says, and I quote: 
 

Liquor and Gaming should ensure SIGA follows Liquor 
and Gaming policies for political contributions. 

 
That means the minister is responsible to ensure the Liberals 
return this money. Mr. Speaker, what steps is the minister 
taking to demand that the Liberals return these improper 
donations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
House that the role of the government and the role of 
government members is to respond to questions with respect to 
policy and with respect to programs. If that member has some 
concern with respect to the actions of the Liberal Party, then she 
should contact the president of the Liberal Party of 
Saskatchewan or the Liberal Party of Canada, have it cleared up 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Provincial Auditor says SIGA, a government department, 
should not be donating to political parties 
 
An Hon. Member: — Agency. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Or agency, whatever. However, the Liberals 
have decided to ignore him. The federal Liberals say that 
they’re keeping this money, and the provincial Liberals deny 
that they got any money in the first place, even though their 
own financial statements clearly show that the provincial 
Liberals received an improper donation of $1,779 from SIGA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost every day of the 1996 session the Liberal 
member from Melville got up in this House and demanded that 
other parties return what he called improper political donations. 
And now the auditor himself is saying that the Liberals received 
improper donations. The Liberals are refusing to return this 
money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Municipal Government: now 
that the Liberals have been caught accepting improper 
donations, why is his party ignoring the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite has difficulties with the operations of the Liberal Party 
of Saskatchewan, or the Liberal Party of Canada, I would 

suggest that she would contact the presidents of either of those 
organizations. 
 
But while she’s doing that, Mr. Speaker, what she might do is 
ask the PC (Progressive Conservative) Party or turn around and 
look around herself with respect to the PC metro fund, how 
they’re accounting for their expenditures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, SLGA is 
responsible for SIGA. And now, Mr. Speaker, you can almost 
understand why the Liberals would want to keep this money 
after the Liberal leader raised a grand total of $32 in the 
fund-raising event all last year. Really, Mr. Speaker, most 
eight-year-olds make more than that in a bike-a-thon. 
 
But the fact remains, the auditor has declared SIGA donations 
to political parties to be improper, and they should be returned. 
 
My question is to the Premier. Mr. Speaker, the Premier has 
two Liberal members in his cabinet who are ignoring the 
Provincial Auditor and the law. He has the Minister of Liquor 
of Gaming who is refusing to enforce the law. 
 
Is the Premier going to take action or is he going to sit back and 
do nothing? Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier going . . . doing 
to demand that the Liberals return these improper donations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this is an example of 
just how ludicrous the actions of this opposition have been. 
Here we have an agricultural community in this province in 
some pretty serious difficulties. We have a major report with 
respect to . . . and study on the future of health care in this 
province, and people are concerned about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an economy in this province that has 
been growing. They won’t recognize it. 
 
But do you know what the question is? The question is what 
about the Liberal Party? What about the Liberal Party’s actions? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is about credibility of this opposition. I 
suggest they focus on the issues the people of Saskatchewan 
really care about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Control of Gopher Population 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RM (rural municipality) of Turtle River has 
declared a state of emergency. Farms in the RM have been 
overrun by thousands of gophers. The RM says the problem is 
that the government-regulated gopher poison does not contain 
enough strychnine to do the job. Gophers have become a 
serious problem in many other areas of the province as well. 
 
I understand, Mr. Speaker, the Department of Agriculture has 



1842 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

been drafting an application to the federal government to 
increase the amount of strychnine in gopher poison. Mr. 
Speaker, has this application been forwarded to the federal 
government and when does the minister expect an answer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to answer 
this question on this tough little rodent because this little 
character has been creating a great deal of havoc in 
Saskatchewan all right, without any question. And he’s not 
alone in terms of creating havoc in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that we have had a 
conversation with the federal Agriculture department, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we’ve done is we’ve also talked to the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) because 
what we’re interested in doing here is seeing if we can enrich 
the chemical that’s being applied today to destroy some of the 
gophers. And we’ve asked SARM if we might be able to use 
some of their staff, their rat control people across the province. 
We’ve had the discussion with the federal government about 
getting that kind of permission. We’re going to be educating 
some of the people who work for SARM on the process of 
administering it. 
 
And we should hope to have that program in place within the 
next couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again, the NDP government is slow off the mark. The 
Saskatchewan Party has been raising this issue with the former 
minister of Agriculture, the current minister since last year. And 
the NDP is now taking action. 
 
The Alberta government saw this problem coming earlier this 
spring. They applied and have been approved to use a higher 
percentage of strychnine since April. Meanwhile, the NDP 
didn’t do anything until the problem reached a crisis level. And 
now the approval from Ottawa isn’t expected for another 
several weeks like the minister said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why was the NDP so slow to act on this very 
serious problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member opposite that this process we have in check in our 
view. It requires the conversation and a change in process with 
the federal government. We’ve completed that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite and to the 
Saskatchewan Party that when you talk about process in this 
province . . . and they need to listen, they need to think about 
process. 
 
In this province, Mr. Speaker, today, we know what these 
people would do. Today the question’s around health care, Mr. 

Speaker. We know that in this . . . on this province today, if 
these people were in government, we would have seen no 
additional expenditures, Mr. Speaker, in health care. We’d have 
seen, Mr. Speaker, today a decline. Mr. Speaker, we would 
have not had a process where we had today. Workers who 
would have been legislated back to work in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, which the member from Melfort talked about, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And this group of politicians, Mr. Speaker, are out of gas. 
There’s no credibility on that side of the House. On this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, we work for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people. On that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
they take us back to another 10 years in their process, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 228 — The Election Amendment Act, 2001 
(Financial Disclosure) 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to move first 
reading of Bill No. 228, The Election Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I’ve received a 
report . . . Order, please. Members of the Assembly, I’ve 
received a report from the Saskatchewan Legislative Library for 
the period ending March 31, 2000, and I hereby table the report. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 22 — The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
spend a few moments to discuss, maybe to a little further extent 
than we’ve had an opportunity before, to discuss Bill No. 22 
called SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency). Here’s an indication, Mr. Speaker, of some real 
frustrations in all part of Saskatchewan, including urban and 
including rural. 
 
It was recognized some time ago that there had to be some 
consistency within the assessment and reassessment process 
within this province. That has moved forward into something 
called the SAMA and what we’re seeing now is a great deal of 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1843 

 

frustration over how this is being interpreted and how it’s being 
implemented across Saskatchewan, in fact to the point where 
the frustrations are causing probably as many calls to my office 
as any issue at this particular time. 
 
It’s causing a great deal of frustration for many of the 
organizations that depend on property-based taxation because 
they certainly perceive the unfairness of the current regulations, 
and so moving forward with amendments, I think will be 
welcome. But we have to make sure that the right amendments 
are in place if we want to try and correct this situation and not 
continue to cause this level of frustration in all levels of 
municipal government. 
 
It was determined back in 1997 when reassessment was 
instituted, that this was going to certainly make a bit hit on . . . 
and a big change on assessment or on property taxes. And I 
think, generally speaking, although people were very unhappy 
about it, they realized that maybe something had to be done and 
they accepted it even though it was a very large taxation 
increase for most people. 
 
But the theory was, Mr. Speaker, that of course this would 
move ahead and we would have less of a change or less of a 
direct hit each time there was a change. This has not been the 
case. We’re finding now that there is many, many shifts that are 
causing huge discrepancies in the tax bills that are being 
required to be paid based on the assessment of this organization. 
 
The level of frustration has risen to the point where many of the 
RMs in my particular part of the country, and communities 
generally, are trying to get an outside assessment of their 
regions and reassess for their responsibilities. Granted it has to 
work within the guidelines of the SAMA regulations. But the 
fairness of the assessments have certainly been questioned and 
people have gone . . . or municipal governments have gone that 
extra step to get a private assessment done so that it can be in 
comparison. 
 
I think the problem stems from the fact, Mr. Speaker, that the 
perception of fair market value has been somewhat questioned 
compared . . . when SAMA puts the fair market value 
assessment or fair-market-value-based assessment in place 
compared to what is really the fair market value as perceived by 
the owners of that particular piece of property that the 
assessment is applied against. 
 
There’s certain things that I think have to be done. One of them 
is to . . . if you’re going to remain with fair market value, well 
then it should be based on something that is more reflective of 
the current situation and not a hypothetical fair market value. 
 
If we could actually suggest it go one step further and have the 
assessment based on the value of the property in terms of 
revenue generating or how that property would be able to be 
assessed against its potential for generating revenue, that would 
be a very large step forward and I think that would be 
acceptable. And once we got into that kind of an assessment, 
then I think we would be going down the right road and we 
wouldn’t be seeing the frustration levels that we’re seeing now. 
 
(11:00) 
 

For instance, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been getting indications from 
businesses such as hotels that their assessment is going to jump 
over 400 per cent in this coming year. That is a very large hit, 
and you know when that happens that those businesses are 
going to have to reflect that reassessment and their tax based on 
that reassessment, into their operations. That is going to be a 
huge hit for them in terms of the continuing economic value and 
economic activity in trying to sustain that kind of a 
reassessment. 
 
The result of all this, Mr. Speaker, is that the government is 
going to have to make sure that there is a consistency in this 
reassessment; and it’s not only a consistency which was the 
objective of SAMA to begin with, but the consistency has to be 
certainly between locales but it also has to be within the 
consistency of what is fair and equitable in terms of ability to 
pay the taxation based on this reassessment. 
 
The current assessment is certainly being perceived as it’s 
outdated, it’s outmoded, and we have to encourage through 
amendments such as this to get it to a state where there is some 
confidence. 
 
You must remember that when we’re dealing in taxation and 
assessment for taxation, we’re really sending signals out as part 
of the bigger economic development, economic strategy, and 
economic confidence in our ability to compete in this province. 
And we have to make sure that it’s competitive, consistent, and 
not out of line with, both within our province, but certainly with 
outside of our province. Because that’s where investments 
really have to come from and we are competing in a bigger 
picture than we ever have before. 
 
So it is very important that we look at not only the . . . we 
should be looking at how it’s done but we should also look at 
some of the other signals that lean to the confidence in the 
system. 
 
And that confidence really is being questioned because there are 
things that have come up, that have been noticed so far. And 
maybe some of these are assumptions by the reasons for some 
of these new amendments, but some of the things would be a 
provision in the Act or in the amendments for SAMA to ensure 
that its books, records, and accounts are kept in such a way that 
money granted to SAMA is used for the purposes intended. 
 
But when I see that kind of an amendment coming in, I begin to 
immediately think about why would that amendment go in if in 
fact that wasn’t the practice all along. If that wasn’t, then I can 
certainly understand why there isn’t the confidence in the 
system, and if in fact other items within that Act are leading to 
areas of suspicion or leading to areas of non-confidence so that 
people would prefer to have an independent auditor. 
 
We also see other things in there. For instance, the provision for 
SAMA to appoint an auditor to examine its books. I would 
assume that would be a pretty standard requirement under any 
operation. And if in fact it is required now under the Act, has it 
been in place all along? And if not, why would an agency such 
as SAMA not be required to have an auditor? Why was it not an 
operating practice to have that in place before? 
 
There are other things that are a little disconcerting, Mr. 



1844 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

Speaker, with this particular Act that’s in place. We also notice 
things like the . . . some of the requirements now under this 
provision are going to, for instance, be reported to the minister. 
Those reports are also going to be distributed to SARM, they’re 
going to be distributed to SUMA, (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), distributed to the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). 
 
All of those organizations certainly have a direct interest in this 
kind of an Act because their ability to generate revenue based 
on assessment is very important. I would really wonder why 
that has to be there; not questioning it in being here now, but 
why wasn’t it there before? It would be an indicator that the Act 
wasn’t generating what it should have been doing, and again it 
gets back to the idea of confidence in our system so that taxes 
are fair. 
 
It would appear too that the decision-making power might be 
shifting away from legislation and the legislature into 
regulation, which is in fact, as you know, at the prerogative of 
the Executive Council to make these regulations. 
 
That is a bit of a disturbing trend and I would want to make sure 
that when we’re questioning this Act as it goes forward into 
committee, that we’re able to explore some of these concerns 
that I’ve outlined and try to determine if in fact we can have the 
confidence and relay that to the industry generally that is 
needed on a tax-based . . . property-based revenue system for 
the province. 
 
So with the basis of exploring these questions that I have, Mr. 
Speaker, I would move that this Act now move into committee. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 24 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 24 — The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe I was talking 
on this Bill a couple of weeks ago and I still have a few points 
I’d like to make on it. 
 
One of them, Mr. Speaker, previous to this Bill, municipalities 
had to apply for ministerial approval if they were to sell, lease, 
or otherwise dispose of land at a price less than the current 
market value. As well the money received through such sales 
had to be held in a capital account. Now it seems that this 
approval is not needed and that the money raised can be used at 
the council’s discretion. 
 
I believe that this is a step in the right direction as long as 
councils respect these newly acquired funds and guarantee that 
they will be used to the best benefit of the taxpayer. 
Accountability must always remain front and centre. 
 
I firmly believe that local government is the most accountable 
and effective form of grassroots democracy that we have here in 
our province. The current government of this province could 

take a few lessons from the local government in listening to its 
people, taking appropriate action when needed. 
 
The councils across this province are very effective and I give a 
tip of the hat to them for their hard work and dedication. The 
people on these councils know full well what kind of problems 
are out there, such as our most important drinking water 
concerns here in Saskatchewan. 
 
They’re doing all that they can to protect their citizens, and all 
they need is a government who listens, who supports, and who 
takes action of their behalf, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t believe 
we have that kind of government today. 
 
There are a few other aspects of this Bill which I would want to 
mention and make comment on. We see that municipalities are 
now given greater authority in enforcing nuisance orders. This 
is especially important in small communities where the beauty 
of the town or village is affected by such things as abandoned 
vehicles, long vacant and old housing, and a host of other 
things. Hopefully this will encourage many residents in smaller 
communities to make a greater effort in allowing their 
community to look attractive. 
 
As well, local government now does not need approval when 
closing a municipal street which would make sense at whatever 
angle you looked at this issue. There are many times when due 
to unplanned problems or emergency, streets need to be closed 
immediately and permission by the minister is just not practical. 
 
There’s also a provision here which removes requirement from 
municipality to submit traffic bylaws which mirror The 
Highway Traffic Act for their approval. I served on village 
council for many years in my hometown of Bladworth and I can 
say that of course there are times traffic issues which are unique 
to each community and must be dealt with, with the proper 
traffic bylaws; of course these bylaws must most importantly be 
enforceable. For in every respect a traffic law is put in place to 
protect the residents — both as pedestrians or motorists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also addresses a critical area of municipal 
funding in regards to short-term and long-term debt, which it 
seems that . . . and it seems that municipal governments need 
more flexibility. It is no longer necessary for a particular 
municipality to obtain approval from the municipal board when 
entering short-term debt obligations for operating purposes. As 
well, cities will have the right to create long-term debt without 
approval from the municipal board, providing the debt amount 
is within set limits. 
 
While it seems to make good sense to give local governments 
more financial flexibility, there are a few considerations that we 
must take into account. Short-term debt obligations are of 
course necessary to meet operating requirements and this would 
be understandable to the taxpayer involved. However we need 
to be very cautious about any borrowing guidelines as the need 
for a look at financial plans is not lost on the councils involved. 
 
In the area of long-term debt, even though there are limits set, it 
cannot be assumed that each time any municipal government 
needs to borrow money, say for a large project or an emergency 
expense, that this is not a situation where once again the 
provincial government has off-loaded more expenses onto the 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1845 

 

same local governments. 
 
We must ask the question as to whether or not this present 
provincial government wishes to use this part of the Bill so as to 
defer the financial responsibilities to local government 
expenses. How often have we seen local governments 
concerned about the infrastructure and their high expenses, so 
they ask the province for help, and they do not receive any, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It seems this government has to wait for a serious situation such 
as North Battleford to take action to assist local governments; 
and even then, as we’ve seen lately, still very little seems to be 
done. I’ll be watching closely to see if this part of Bill No. 24 is 
just not another off-loading opportunity for the government. 
 
There will also be no municipal board approval needed for 
cities who wish to invest money in a particular fund of their 
own choosing. Once again the desire to streamline the role of 
local government — in this case the government of a 
Saskatchewan city — needs to be tempered with a caution as 
we all know that there are many ways to invest money these 
days, but some investments have a higher risk than others. All 
you have to do is ask SaskTel that. 
 
The responsibility to the taxpayers in this instance must be the 
benchmark by which a council must act responsibly. Certainly 
the Act contains the definition of what category a council can 
invest in. But even in this case there are certainly risks 
involved. 
 
These amendments include a clarification when it comes to 
railway land assessment: railway-owned land and the 
right-of-ways are correctly assessed and the land is no longer 
leased to its third party, will now be assessed separately. These 
clarifications should clear up any misunderstandings between 
the former tenants — in this case the railway companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know how high freight rates are these 
days making it very difficult for farmers to realize a profit after 
they pay these higher rates, we want to ensure that the railway 
companies are paying their fair share of taxes back to local 
governments so that at least in this way farmers’ dollars are 
returning to provide service for all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment also includes a clarification which 
will permit boards of revision to increase or decrease 
assessments on appeals. The appeal process in regards to 
assessments is a very important part of The Urban Municipality 
Act. And we must always ensure that any individual has a right 
to be heard in regards to their annual assessment and any 
disagreements that may as a result come from this assessment 
process. Local councils must realize that each set of 
circumstances must be considered in the assessment appeal 
process and that fairness shall be applied in every instance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with regards to the municipal administrators, it 
looks like the new Board of Examiners will be established and 
overseen by SUMA and the Urban Municipal Administrators 
Association. This new board will certify municipal 
administrators and this will also be applied to the rural . . . 
municipal legislation. While the minister will no longer appoint 
this group, it still must be stated that this is a self-regulating 

board created to review the qualifications of any new, potential 
municipal administrator. 
 
It is important that we have the most qualified people in our 
local government today given the complexity of the laws which 
it must act under. I would hope that any regulations that are to 
be followed during the certification process are open and 
accountable, and that they treat each applicant fairly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will conclude with a look at the financial 
statements portion of this Bill, an amendment that outlines the 
rules of accountability for urban municipalities. The same 
municipalities must prepare the financial statements according 
to the public sector accounting principles which are established 
by the Canadian Institute of Chartered Accountants. There’s 
also a requirement that the auditors are members of the 
professional accounting association and further, that the 
minister may request information regarding the financial affairs 
of a municipality and that compliance is mandatory. 
 
(11:15) 
 
While it would help to any council not to have to bother with 
provincial government approval, it must be stressed that this in 
no way relaxes the responsibility of the council to be careful 
with taxpayers’ money. This amendment sets out which 
municipal records must preserved and of course for how long 
they must be preserved. 
 
All in all, Mr. Speaker, the amendments contained in this Bill 
should assist the council do a job of governing responsibly and 
effectively. 
 
However it’s something under Committee of the Whole we 
should look at, and this Bill as I mentioned and spoke on 
previously, has many, many amendments, and I know myself I 
have many questions, and members opposite also have many 
questions, Mr. Speaker, on this. 
 
So with that I will move this Bill to Committee of the Whole 
where we will hopefully spend a considerable time going 
through amendment by amendment on it. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 23 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Osika that Bill No. 23 — The Rural 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I do 
believe that we are now into The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, Bill No. 23 and I would like to make a few 
comments on that Bill and the explanatory notes that have been 
provided by the minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is indeed an extensive Bill when we look at 
the explanatory notes that were provided when the Bill was 
introduced in the House. We note that there are over 33 pages 



1846 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

of explanatory notes that deal with each of the sections that are 
being proposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other point to note is that Bill No. 23 has 46 
clauses in it and it affects a wide range of sections of the current 
Rural Municipality Act of 1989. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in comments made by the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs at second reading, he stated very clearly that there were 
two primary themes that were going to be looked at in terms of 
all the changes that were being proposed in Bill No. 23. And the 
two themes centred around the fact that there was to be a 
removal of legislative impediments to voluntary municipal 
amalgamation. 
 
And the second theme was that there would be the removal of 
the province from decision making and involvement in a 
number of areas that are clearly within the jurisdiction of local 
councils. Both of those ideas we applaud, and recommend that 
we must move in those areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though, the question of restructuring is one that 
has been before council members in this province for a number 
of years. We’ve had discussion between rural municipal 
councils. We’ve had discussion between rural and urban 
municipal councils. And for many years, Mr. Speaker, I heard 
. . . members’ responses to this was that there were 
impediments. There was the inability to actually move forward 
on some of the ideas that they had with restructuring. 
 
So while this Bill looks at the impediments and I want to 
compliment the people on the round table for producing the 
report that was entitled Impediments to Voluntary Restructuring 
— that was the name of the report — and it tried to identify the 
issues, the concerns that individual members of rural and 
smaller urban centres saw as problems. And in that report, Mr. 
Speaker, it identified a number of concerns and I know I’ve 
heard from many smaller centres as we’ve seen boil-water 
orders issued for many small rural communities, hamlets, and 
villages. 
 
There has been a tremendous amount of concern from rural 
sectors, from the rural municipalities about the liabilities that 
would be faced if, indeed, there was going to be amalgamations 
and restructuring of those facilities. Mr. Speaker, the concerns 
that are expressed by a number of people about whether or not 
there are incentives, whether or not there should be voluntary 
amalgamations, are not addressed in this Bill. It provides a 
framework so that the impediments — as we see them, the legal 
impediments — are removed and there would be the ability for 
restructuring and the creation of municipal districts. Those are 
clearly stated in the Bill and they are what people are looking 
for. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there has to be more to it than that. There are 
many communities that are concerned about financial liabilities, 
about the need to move forward, and very little is offered in the 
way of incentives for municipalities to look at. 
 
And I recall discussion between school boards that have 
restructured, that have amalgamated, that indeed there was a 
tremendous amount of concern that the department — in this 
case, the Department of Education — as to whether or not they 

were providing incentives. 
 
So I think the same is true for both municipal districts that will 
be coming . . . or through urban centres and rural centres. What 
kind of incentives are there for them to move forward and 
ensure that amalgamations take place? And above all, they must 
be voluntary. And I think that’s the point that is made in this 
Bill. 
 
Another key change, Mr. Speaker, is that — and it is supported 
by not only the Saskatchewan Urban Municipal Association and 
the Rural Municipal Association, but also the rural 
administrators of the province of Saskatchewan — is that 
they’ve reached agreement in creating an urban and rural board 
of examiners. And that is necessary because, as we look at the 
new type of municipal district that may be created, it will 
require that the information that is provided to the 
administrators, those people that will be dealing with the new 
tax systems with new kinds of levies, they must fully 
understand that the approach being taken is consistent across 
the province. So those are excellent ideas and that section of the 
Bill does not seem to be of any difficulty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, consolidation of services is being done currently 
by many municipalities. We see villages and we see RM 
councils that have created fire protection agreements, where a 
fire department in one urban centre is providing — through a 
shared agreement — they’re providing assistance through all 
the rural people to other urban centres. So these are kinds of 
things that are going on already. 
 
And the understanding might be that there could be the need to 
form one municipal entity. And that might be a combination of 
a couple of RMs and a couple of small hamlets and villages. So 
the Bill, as we see it, seems to suggest that this will allow this to 
happen without any impediments. And we compliment the 
minister for listening to the people that were on the round table. 
 
One of the concerns, Mr. Speaker — and I’ll end with raising 
this concern because we haven’t had a clear definition, and 
we’ve talked to a number of people and we’ve had different 
interpretations — is the section that is going to deal with 
residency. 
 
The proposal in the Bill is that there will be a clarification of 
residency to ensure that a person who has two residences in the 
province of Saskatchewan, they would have to declare one as 
primary. 
 
And I guess the example that I want to propose right now, Mr. 
Speaker — and we’ll await the minister’s response in 
Committee of the Whole — is that if a person lives in an urban 
centre and has a residency there, and also lives on a rural 
setting, in a rural municipality, on a farm setting for a period of 
time, both of these are residences; they are lived in for a period 
of months in both cases. The understanding is that they will be 
allowed to vote in both elections: the urban election, in a city or 
a town or whatever the community may be, and the other side 
of the coin was they will be able to vote in the rural municipal 
election. 
 
Now the clause that is raised says that it wants . . . that this 
section is to bring it into line with The Local Government 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1847 

 

Election Act. And there seems to be some uncertainty as to 
whether or not that’s correct. 
 
We understand, right at the moment, that if a person owns 
property in a number of RMs, that that person is able to vote in 
those RMs where they are the owners of property. However, 
this will change it to indicate that they will have to declare their 
residency and then will vote only in the RM where they are a 
resident. 
 
The question then, as I’ve indicated, Mr. Speaker, if they live 
for a period of time in the RM and for a period of time in an 
urban municipality — both of course controlled by The Rural 
Municipality Act and one by the urban Act — where will they 
be voting? Or in fact, will they be allowed to vote in both? That 
needs to be clarified. Because right at the moment 
administrators, individuals are saying, we’re not sure. 
 
And the member from Moose Jaw raises a concern, and I want 
to talk a bit about resort communities. Because that has been an 
issue that has been faced by this government for a number of 
years, where people who have a residency here in the city of 
Regina for instance and also have a cottage out at a resort that 
they live in for maybe four, five, or six months of the year, the 
concern is that whether or not they have a say in the local 
affairs of that resort community. 
 
And the taxation levels are high. We’ve had . . . I’m sure the 
member has also received many letters and petitions from 
individuals reminding this government about the amount of tax 
distribution that was — redistribution — that was done as a 
result of SAMA. And yet there doesn’t seem to be the ability 
for the person or persons involved to have a direct say in the 
election by the ability to vote. 
 
And this is of great concern to a number of individuals as to 
whether or not they have a . . . They are the taxpayers in a 
particular community — large amounts of taxes — yet they 
don’t have a say in vote. 
 
So those are questions, Mr. Speaker, that we will pose to the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs during Committee of the Whole 
as we discuss all of the clauses. And as I’ve indicated, 46 
clauses, Mr. Speaker, I think will take us a fair amount of time 
to get through, but we look forward to the answers that will be 
provided by the minister in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 25 
 

The Assembly resumed the debate on the proposed motion by 
the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 25 — The Northern 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s again 
a pleasure this morning to rise and speak on Bill No. 25, an Act 
that is bringing about some tinkering changes, so to speak, to 
the northern municipal districts of the province. 
 
The Northern Municipalities Act has been touted, certainly by 

the Minister of Municipal Affairs, as having some significant 
changes to the way governance will take place in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And as we’ve gone through the Bill and had some discussion 
with the municipal governments of northern Saskatchewan as to 
their pleasure or displeasure with this Bill, we certainly find that 
there is some pleasure with it. They see some good sides to this 
but also a great deal of concern, I guess, Mr. Speaker, a great 
deal of disconcernment that this Bill doesn’t go far enough in 
some areas, and is actually maybe hiding some things that 
they’re talking about in the North, certainly when it comes to 
areas of self-determination and economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the concerns that we have heard on this 
side of the House as we meet with the leaders from northern 
Saskatchewan is concern over the growth of economic 
development. Now the governments of the North, those who 
work on a day-to-day basis with the people of northern 
Saskatchewan in helping to provide a better standard of life, a 
higher quality of life, one of the areas, the biggest area of 
concern is the lack of economic development. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, their concern actually goes around the 
whole concept that the northern communities are suffering 
dramatically in economic development and are actually 
regressing — regressing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Now one of the areas that of course is causing a great deal of 
concernment on this side, Mr. Speaker, is that in the two sister 
Bills to this Act, Mr. Speaker, this Bill No. 25, The Northern 
Municipalities Act, is that the minister is looking at removing 
barriers, removing barriers, Mr. Speaker, so that communities, 
urban or rural — or two are rural — can take it upon themselves 
to take a look at bringing about efficiencies. Efficiencies to 
reduce governance, efficiencies that can be achieved through 
the restructuring of delivery of services on a voluntary basis, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
They want to do this on a voluntary basis. They want to be able 
to have local determination, self determination so to speak, so 
that when changes are looked at, when efficiencies can be 
achieved, that they would be the driving force. 
 
Unfortunately this Act, Bill No. 25, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t speak 
to that at all. In fact, Mr. Speaker, there is a small change to this 
that is going to be a great deal of concern to northern 
municipalities. In the past, as in with other legislation 
surrounding municipalities, is that when they looked at 
self-determination in providing efficiencies through efficiency 
of scale, any changes that had to be brought about had to be 
looked at and done through an order in council by the 
Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Nowadays of course in the South, the urban and rural 
municipalities are not going to have to go through that 
significant process. It’s going to be much more streamlined. But 
— but, Mr. Speaker — northern municipalities they are not 
being provided with that opportunity. 
 
In fact the only streamlining that is done is that any changes to 



1848 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

boundaries that may take place in northern Saskatchewan, any 
realignment that may take place will be done strictly — strictly 
— Mr. Speaker, through the office of the Municipal Affairs by 
the minister himself. Now here’s a member from Melville 
who’s going to have control, significant control, over the lives 
and governance in northern Saskatchewan that we have a great 
deal of concern about. 
 
Now why is it not feasible for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan to have the same ability for governance and 
self-determination as those municipalities in the South? Does it 
mean that this government is going to continue along the path 
that the people of northern Saskatchewan are second-class 
citizens, that they do not have the ability to know and 
understand their own ability to govern? Or is it just that there is 
such a fear in this NDP government of the ability of northerners 
to be able to govern themselves that they need to be able to 
maintain this massive control? 
 
So we have a lot of concern, Mr. Speaker, about this. And I 
think it’s important that we have a hard look at this government 
and why they would want to do that. 
 
Sometime, I guess, during the month of August when this 
finally gets to the Committee of the Whole, then maybe we’ll 
have a chance to speak to the minister about the reasoning of 
why they would want to prevent the people of northern 
Saskatchewan from having the ability of self-determination; so 
that what we can have here, for the people of Saskatchewan . . . 
the people of Saskatchewan will be able to ask this government 
why they are coming up with such a simple little Bill and it 
goes pages and pages here of dancing in circles in order to 
provide very little opportunity for the people of northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There are though, Mr. Speaker, a couple of little areas here that 
are going to be of benefit to government in northern 
Saskatchewan, to those municipalities who are looking to have 
some ability to control the way they do business. They are 
strictly very small housekeeping matters, although when I was 
reading the statement that the minister made during the 
introduction of this Bill, he called them significant. We call 
them trivial. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is that all it’s doing, Mr. Speaker, is 
allowing government in northern Saskatchewan to be able to 
finally catch up to their cousins in the South that have the 
ability to be able to operate with some autonomy separate from 
this government so that they can, you know, provide more 
simplified and effective governance at the local level. 
 
One of those areas, Mr. Speaker, is the ability of governments 
in the North to finally be able to provide high-quality delivery 
of services through their hiring processes. Now of course we 
heard at one time, in the year of 2000, the former minister of 
Municipal Affairs actually mention at one time that the 
department was looking at allowing small municipalities the 
opportunity to go back to a system that was in place in the early 
part of the previous century where they could hire unqualified 
people to manage the affairs of their municipalities. 
 
We have no idea where that came from. Certainly we never 
heard that in our travels throughout the province. We never 

heard that in our travels in northern Saskatchewan. And now I 
see that finally, finally after many, many decades that this 
government is finally allowing the people of northern 
Saskatchewan the opportunity to be able to participate in some 
small degree the same as their cousins in the South. Those 
governments in southern Saskatchewan, whether they be urban 
or rural, to provide high-quality service that is so much 
demanded by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the governments of northern Saskatchewan 
are duly elected. One of the towns that we visited were 
vehement in their explanation to us of the importance of 
governance in northern Saskatchewan. Northern Saskatchewan, 
they take their governance so seriously, Mr. Speaker, that last 
year, in the fall of 2000, when municipal elections were taking 
place, urban municipal elections, the town of La Loche actually 
had 54 people — 54 people, Mr. Speaker — be nominated for 
the position of town council. Eleven positions they have there, 
Mr. Speaker, 54 people applied for that. 
 
They take governance in northern Saskatchewan seriously. 
There are some issues that they feel very strongly about that this 
government is not addressing in any way, shape, or form. And I 
would like to talk about two of them here for a brief few 
minutes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of those areas is economic development. The people of 
northern Saskatchewan feel quite strongly that they have the 
ability to be directive in their own way to provide economic 
development, economic growth; that the people of northern 
Saskatchewan have the ability for self-determination in 
ensuring that high-quality, high-paying jobs are going to be 
available for their people. 
 
So what do we know about so far about economic development, 
Mr. Speaker? Well we know that since this government was 
returned to power in 1999, there’s actually 5,000 people, 
workers unemployed, more unemployment than there was 
previous to the election in 1999. Five thousand people have lost 
their jobs in northern Saskatchewan since September 1999. 
 
Now that’s not to say that they were transferred to another 
sector — that took place to a certain degree already, Mr. 
Speaker. But what we have to understand very clearly, and we 
received that from StatsCanada, is that this government has 
reduced job numbers for people in northern Saskatchewan by 
5,000. That’s far too many, Mr. Speaker. To think that this 
government, this NDP government has the ability to create jobs 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But the people of northern Saskatchewan have been very clear 
to us, Mr. Speaker, that they do have a plan. They have a plan 
that would provide for economic development. The local 
governments in northern Saskatchewan actually have the ability 
to be able to do job creation, to work with their communities, to 
work with independent businessmen in order that high-quality, 
high-paying jobs can be created. 
 
The second area that I wanted to speak about that is not in this 
Bill — and that’s why we have a great deal of concern that this 
Bill doesn’t go anywhere near far enough; this is very light 
housekeeping, Mr. Speaker — is in the area of property 
management. 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1849 

 

Now in northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we found out to 
our dismay that the people in northern settlements and northern 
villages do not actually have the right — they do not have the 
right, Mr. Speaker — to own their own lots. You can live in a 
town or a settlement in northern Saskatchewan and not have the 
right to own the lot that the house is sitting on. 
 
In fact, in fact, it’s even worse than that, Mr. Speaker. You’re 
not even allowed to own the house that you’re in. You have to 
lease that house from the department, and you have to lease the 
lot that your house is sitting on from the Department of 
Municipal Affairs. 
 
This kind of discrimination against northern Saskatchewan is 
going to have to stop and it’s going to have to stop in the very 
near future, Mr. Speaker. It is this lack of vision and this lack of 
trust in the people in northern Saskatchewan that is preventing, 
is preventing the governments and entrepreneurs in northern 
Saskatchewan the ability to provide their citizenry up there the 
ability to create wealth-creating jobs. 
 
But these questions that I have raised, Mr. Speaker, that have 
been brought to us through our ability to research and our 
ability to communicate with the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, the returns that we have from the people of 
northern Saskatchewan when we talk to them about their 
concerns or their pleasure and displeasure with this Bill, will 
probably best be addressed if this Bill went to Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 12 — The Water 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want today to 
address a few aspects of this Bill. It’s of important concern to 
the residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
Bill No. 12, which contains amendments to The Water 
Corporation Act, which would prohibit the movement of bulk 
qualities of water from a watershed with the exception of a 
transfer between watersheds within the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue of water in our province has — and as 
we all know — been front and centre with regards to the North 
Battleford contaminated drinking water situation. We see here a 
perfect example of how we cannot take our water here in 
Saskatchewan for granted. This Bill will hopefully safeguard 
our provincial water from being moved from our province to 
other areas such as United States, for example, a country that 
does not take its water for granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are clearly worried 
about our valuable water resources being transferred out of the 
province, especially in the light of the current trade agreements 

in effect across North America. 
 
As we see, all the members have seen this summer, on both 
sides of the House, dry conditions throughout the province. So 
it also stresses the need for protection of our water resources. 
 
We must work closely with local conservation development 
boards who work hard to provide watersheds for water storage 
and proper drainage of water during heavy runoff and rainfall. 
 
All aspects of our water must be considered each time we make 
a major decision, such as the one talked about here in Bill 12. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our agriculture industry, which includes both grain 
production and livestock production, relies heavily upon our 
provincial water resources. There are many irrigation projects 
around our province which not only assist local grain producers 
but also allow for the development of varied new crops which 
have great potential in this province. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I cannot include the potato 
development process because this government has 
single-handedly sliced, diced and hashed and mashed many 
hard-working potato growers in their money-losing 
spud-and-dud company. But I will put my hats off to the private 
producer growers of Saskatchewan who are working hard to 
compete with their own government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know dry soil conditions exist 
throughout much of Saskatchewan, despite spotty rainfall in the 
last couple of weeks. It would be fair to assess these conditions 
as near drought-like in nature. With this kind of concern people 
are very worried about their water supply for their cattle and for 
their land. And in extreme cases, on farms where surface water 
has disappeared and well levels have dropped, there is concern 
about a lack of water even for drinking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When all these factors are combined with the North Battleford 
situation, you get into a situation where under no circumstances 
will people of Saskatchewan tolerate any suggestion of selling 
our water outside the province. 
 
(11:45) 
 
And as the member for Cannington pointed out in this House on 
May 24, there is, in this legislation, no mention of bulk water 
sales in the legislation — it just says no movement. And as you 
very well know, Mr. Speaker, this government sometimes can’t 
be believed and trusted on some things. So when they say no 
sale . . . or they don’t mention no sale, does that mean that they 
are considering possibly selling water? We don’t know. 
 
But many people have their doubts on this side of the House 
and throughout the province. And Sask Water has a history of 
entering into commercial enterprises which never seem to work 
out for the benefit of hard-working Saskatchewan taxpayers, 
you know. So we do not rest easy with vague promises from the 
minister when the legislation itself does not directly speak to 
the issue of water sales. 
 
This Bill talks about only the transfer of water from one 
watershed to another. But again there’s a lack of definition upon 
closer inspection. Does this mean simply from one watershed to 



1850 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

another or can it mean that a creek can be diverted if water is 
needed elsewhere or if other measures are needed to help the 
drought stricken area of our province? Again, I would like a 
clear definition of just what that is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I have spoken with various representatives from the 
conservation development authorities and local water control 
boards that would be in favour of this legislation, providing that 
it guarantees our right to keep our water in Saskatchewan and in 
the control of the Saskatchewan people. 
 
So again, we realize that provincial residents expect the utmost 
care in their valuable water resources. They want to hear about 
the status of their water resources on an ongoing basis so they 
can be reassured that there is abundance of water for agriculture 
and, most importantly, for safe drinking water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I must stress also to the members opposite that the people of 
Saskatchewan want to guarantee that their precious water 
resources will not be sold down the river, if you will, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Conservation development boards want to be reassured that 
their hard work, that what they are doing to manage water in 
their local jurisdictions, will result in securing the future of that 
water. The people in these boards deserve congratulations for 
the water management efforts and at times in the past have 
witnessed the shortcomings that have been a part of Sask Water, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
As we look at Bill No. 12, we wonder whether or not they have 
addressed the issue of local disputes between the transfer of 
water and watersheds either on public or private land. I have 
several instances mentioned to me by local governments and 
private citizens of situations where the movement of water, one 
way or the other, between two parties have been complicated 
rather than solved by the intervention of Sask Water officials. 
 
In many cases where Sask Water has been requested to address 
water problems, a long delay in sending out an official in the 
first place has resulted in a worse problem. In cases where Sask 
Water has sent an official, the results of this report are often 
delayed or inconclusive resulting in further hard feelings 
between the parties involved. 
 
So if Sask Water wants to make changes like those in Bill 12, it 
needs to be followed up by a proper dispute mechanism, 
whereby the lack of water in a drought situation or an 
abundance of water on a wet year will be dealt with quickly and 
effectively. 
 
I would invite the members opposite to talk to any RM or 
farmer about the effective management of water in this province 
and they will not give Sask Water a passing grade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, if Sask Water cannot manage its own 
affairs, such as Sask Valley Potato Corp., cannot settle water 
disputes in some cases without resulting to court action, and 
claim little responsibility when their drinking water goes bad, 
then I think we should take a long look at whether or not Sask 
Water is doing their job for the people of Saskatchewan. If they 
can’t handle how water is managed in our province, perhaps 
you should give more authority to the hard-working people and 

their conservation development boards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if they can’t keep their potatoes over winter without 
throwing thousands of pounds of them away in huge piles then 
maybe they should get out of the potato industry, Mr. Speaker. 
And if they aren’t taking an active role in the quality of our 
provincial drinking water then maybe we should be wondering 
if we need Sask Water and all their overpaid managers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It is difficult to concede that Sask Water has guaranteed in Bill 
12 that water will not be sold out of the province when the 
legislation itself does not specify that. If that is what they claim, 
then why do they not state it clearly, Mr. Speaker? How are we 
to take seriously that they assume that they will not sell water 
outside of our province? All we need to do is look at the 
massive piles of rotten potatoes at Broderick to realize that their 
money losing ventures continue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here they claim that it is normal that up to 25 per cent of the 
entire potato crop is normally rotten in the spring. Well I’ve 
asked private producers in that area and they said if they had to 
base their profit on only 75 per cent of their crop, Mr. Speaker, 
they wouldn’t be in business. The same potato producers are 
telling me that if you’re throwing out 25 per cent of your potato 
crop it is a result of poor harvesting procedures and poorer 
storage procedures. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, again I have a problem with the accuracy of 
this Bill when it comes to the selling of water outside of our 
province. I can tell you one thing, if Sask Water continues to 
lose millions of dollars in the potato industry, they just may 
become desperate enough to sell our water for US (United 
States) dollars to cover these millions of dollars of taxpayers’ 
money that was lost, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to talk for a moment on the impact of water 
transfer on the environment of Saskatchewan. Clearly the 
movement of water from one watershed to another — be it from 
a river, a lake, creek, or man-made structure such as a dam — 
will have an impact on wildlife including waterfowl, and fish 
populations, and the vegetation which grows in and around any 
environment encompassing the water. 
 
We must also include wildlife such as deer populations who 
may migrate as a result of the loss of water from one area to 
another. Such an unnatural migration could result in a new 
environmental situation for wildlife that they’re not suited to, 
and could affect their population in considerable numbers. 
 
And when we look at Bill 12, we see that Sask Water could 
have still some more authority in the transfer of water given 
perhaps emergency situations like the drought conditions or 
excessive runoff conditions which are a fact of life here in 
Saskatchewan. I would hope that the officials would always 
bear in mind the consequences of water movement on both 
wildlife and vegetation, if the circumstances arrive, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There is little debate about the importance of the major dams, 
which have been built in Saskatchewan over the past 50 years. 
Indeed these dams serve a useful purpose in preserving our 
water in times of need, while providing much needed 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1851 

 

power-generating facilities at certain locations which help to 
provide power across Saskatchewan. 
 
Many dams have the extra benefits of providing a recreational 
water body, which is in the case at Lake Diefenbaker, in my 
constituency of Arm River. The Gardiner Dam facility provides 
power for many areas of our province, while tourists and people 
on holidays can enjoy the lake for fishing, boating, sailing, and 
the benefits of the tourist industry in the surrounding 
communities such as Elbow and Loreburn. 
 
So we must carefully preserve all existing major dam structures 
in our province and keep a watchful eye to the future to see if 
there are other areas that could be potentially developed to 
further conserve our precious water resources. 
 
Saskatchewan people have a tradition of being prepared for 
adverse weather conditions for we live in a land of changing 
weather patterns, which can be directly . . . which can directly 
affect our survival, such as in agriculture. 
 
For these reasons Saskatchewan people have endorsed the 
construction of major dams so as to conserve our water, thereby 
being prepared for what mother nature may have in store for us. 
 
Clearly these structures are some of the most important water 
storage facilities that we have. Also important to consider are 
the hundreds of smaller dams across our province, which also 
store water for the benefit of Saskatchewan people. 
 
In my constituency, an example of Blackstrap Lake which was 
built by the construction of a dam at the west end of the lake. 
There is also examples around the province of diverting a 
natural flow of water into a natural area which can contain 
water for many purposes. 
 
A lot of the work done in the conserving of water has been done 
by the many dedicated people of our conservation and 
development boards. These boards have a solid track record in 
handling our provincial water at the local level — which 
includes handling high water conditions and drought conditions 
also. 
 
Once again I must state that we need to take a clear look at the 
mandate of Sask Water versus giving C&Ds (conservation and 
development area authority) more authority and control, what 
they already have responsible and doing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another aspect which should not be overlooked 
when we consider our water resources, are the agreements we 
have with other provinces such as Alberta and Manitoba. We 
must ensure that the flow of water through our shared river 
systems and natural drainage zones, are treated fairly so that all 
provinces can benefit by what mother nature provides for us all. 
 
And while it is important to do this, it cannot be overstated that 
provincial interest in our water must have the priority when it 
comes to negotiate any changes in the flow and general 
dynamics of the natural water patterns. 
 
I ensure that with a spirit of co-operation in mind, that there 
should not be any problems arise . . . should not be any 
problems that arise that discussion cannot solve. I have every 

confidence in our fellow Canadians to ensure that our water 
resources are looked after to the benefit of us all. 
 
In conclusion of that, Mr. Speaker, I cannot stress enough need 
for a clear statement in Bill 12, which addresses directly the 
issue of selling our water out of province, especially across the 
US border. I believe that by not speaking to this issue directly, 
it may leave the door open in the future for the sale of water 
outside of Saskatchewan. If this Bill achieves what the minister 
claims it will achieve, then I do not have any reservations about 
the Bill the way it is, except to say that my confidence in Sask 
Water to maintain the legislation contained in this Bill is not 
that high. 
 
I will wrap up by encouraging the members opposite to take the 
concerns of the Saskatchewan people in regards to their water 
very seriously, and exercise the most care in the handling of our 
water resources in now and the future. 
 
With that I will move this Bill to the Committee of the Whole, 
where I will question the minister if he intends to sell water 
outside of the province. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 31 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 31 — The 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Amendment Act, 2001 
be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’ll just 
take a couple of moments this morning, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
speak on this Bill No. 31, The Saskatchewan Heritage 
Foundation Amendment Act. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
there’s some positive changes within this Bill and I think we 
probably won’t have much problem watching this one pass 
through. 
 
Some of the changes that we’ve noticed in this Bill, we note 
that the change was brought in to provide for continuous service 
for individuals who have been of particular assistance to the 
Heritage Foundation Board. And I guess, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that many people that have an interest in this area are very 
knowledgeable about this and it would be a shame to cut their 
tenure short, shorter than it needs to be. And I think we need 
those people in place. I think this Bill is addressing that to a 
degree. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another part of the amendments also being 
made, where orders in council for approval for financial 
commitments is required, is raising the ceiling amount from 
10,000 to $50,000. And I believe what this will do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is reduce the red tape and make this process a lot more 
efficient. 
 
So many of the changes that we see in here, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think we feel are positive. We are encouraged by the 
direction that this Bill takes but we will have some questions to 
be answered in Committee of the Whole. So at this time I would 
let this Bill move to Committee of the Whole. 



1852 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Office of Northern Affairs 
Vote 45 

 
Subvote (EC10) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I have with me the 
assistant deputy minister, Alayne Bigwin. And I also have the 
executive director for corporate services, Brian Cousins, and 
also Donna Dumont. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome this afternoon, and welcome to your 
officials. I know that some had to spend a little extra time 
getting here today, and we certainly appreciate that. 
 
We know that they are certainly quite busy in the affairs of 
northern Saskatchewan and it’s important that we get a little 
time to be able to talk to you about the department and how 
things are going there and how well things are going. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, to the minister, this will be our second go 
around this year. It’s an excellent opportunity for you, and I 
thank you for that. It’s not often that Northern Affairs has a 
chance to come up for estimates. We had a chance last year, 
although we only had one. We know that the House adjourned 
in short order last year. We certainly know that the government 
in their excitement to get out of here, the press was not very 
good last year, and didn’t want to spend any more days here 
than they had to. 
 
But this year we’re getting two chances, and certainly my 
pleasure to welcome you and your officials here for an 
opportunity to be able to discuss how things are going in your 
department. 
 
The last time, Mr. Minister, when you and your officials were 
here discussing your budget, we were talking about how 
economic development is working in northern Saskatchewan. 
Now as I mentioned in debate earlier, we certainly have found 
out — and your department is well aware of this — will know 
that when meeting with the people of northern Saskatchewan, 
they are certainly well aware of it. 
 
We have met with many delegations. We have met with many 
elected representatives from the North and they’re certainly 
highly, highly concerned, Mr. Minister, over the loss of 5,000 
jobs in the last two years in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a great deal of concern to all of course because we know 
that the jobs, creation of jobs and the maintenance of jobs, is 
highly important to the success of Saskatchewan. 
 
The last time you were here with your officials, Mr. Minister, 

you spoke about investment opportunities in northern 
Saskatchewan. Things are changing, as we know, that in the 
near future the Cluff Lake uranium mine is going to be closing. 
The price of ore, uranium ore, is down in the world right now, 
and certainly in the short term. 
 
We see prospects of course for opportunity for uranium maybe 
to rise, depending upon how world governments decide to use 
uranium as a fuel source to provide energy. But in the short 
time of course it’s providing us with some concern when we 
have a mine such as Cluff Lake closing. It’s a low-grade ore 
there, we know that, and it’s certainly not profitable to be 
involved in it right. 
 
I guess as we continue on the track that we spoke about before, 
last month, Mr. Minister, is that we got into some dialogue and 
some questions and answers going back and forth on economic 
development in northern Saskatchewan; investment 
opportunities that could and should be taking place. You 
mentioned that the government is very involved in the 
promotion of economic development in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
You spoke that this government and your department feel very 
strongly that this government needs to take a lead hand role in 
that, in economic development. You spoke about this 
government’s, you know, more personal involvement in 
economic development in northern Saskatchewan. Using a new 
arm, so to speak, that’s been created and that would be the 
northern branch of SOCO, the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation. 
 
And I wonder if you might help me, Mr. Minister, explain some 
of what your department is involved in, in working with SOCO 
in the advancement of economic development and economic 
opportunities in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, in regards to the question related to 
SOCO, I would say that historically SOCO has been basically 
doing a lot of work you know throughout the rural areas, the 
urban areas, and the South. And this past year, a special effort 
and decision was made by the SOCO board — which I happen 
to sit in — to try and get a northern component to SOCO. And 
in that decision, there was a recognition that as the mining 
sector strategy was there, that there was a new strategy arising 
in regards to forestry. 
 
And in order for Northerners to partake in regards to the 
economic development on forestry, we needed to have some 
loan monies available at a larger rate, at a larger amount level 
than what we had available in the Northern Development Fund. 
You will recall that I said in the Northern Development Fund, 
people can get a loan of up to a quarter of a million dollars — 
$250,000. 
 
When you’re setting up a mill — for example, the last one that 
was done with Wapawekka Lumber, with Weyerhaeuser and 
Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation, along with Montreal Lake Band 
and the Lac la Ronge Indian Band — the amount on that mill 
was $22 million. Of that, the financing went like this: 
approximately 4.9, you know, from the First Nations split up 
three ways; 5.1 from Weyerhaeuser; and the rest was accessed 
from the public sector financial institutions to a tune of 12 
million. 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1853 

 

Now when you get into that type of capacity and that level of 
financing needs, you need something more than a quarter of a 
million in order to then get some, what we would call seed 
money to be able to then place alongside private sector funding, 
etc. So SOCO operates around the range over 250,000, 
sometimes for 100,000, sometimes 700,000, sometimes just 
over a million. 
 
So SOCO provides a mechanism like that for all over the South, 
and we thought it was important that that be available into the 
North, given the new initiatives that were taking place by the 
private sector and also the co-operation with government on 
forestry development. As such, that’s how the SOCO plan came 
into being. 
 
They’re also looking at the developments on the mining. There 
is the developments on the silica sands. I know that the Alberta 
oil companies were interested in accessing the silica sands from 
here because they were getting it from the States and it would 
be closer in from our area to Alberta. And they were utilizing it 
in regards to, you know, getting more of the oil from the 
ground. There is a technical explanation that was given to me in 
regards to how they use that fine sand to get, you know, a better 
and more effective return on the oil. 
 
And so those types of actions that are taking place right now is 
local forestry, mining. There will be other proposals that will 
take place because we have a northern worker in SOCO right in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now getting back to your initial comments, it is true in general 
that the price on uranium could be better. There was a bit of an 
improvement earlier on, you know, this year. There was 
probably a little bit of a better feeling in the air vis-à-vis the 
industry. 
 
We’re still on a fairly good rate. We started out in the early ’90s 
with approximately 500 people working in the mines and we 
have approximately 1,000 people working in the mines, and it 
fluctuates. It did go down to about 850 and hovering around 
900 now, Northerners working, of which over 80 per cent are 
First Nations and Métis people. 
 
So it’s been a tremendous success story. I really take my hats 
off to the Cameco and COGEMA and a lot of the northern 
developments — like the Kitsaki Development Corporation, 
NRT, you know, going on its 15 years, Northern Resource 
Trucking. You get Mudjatik Corporation, you know, from 
northern Saskatchewan with the Dene people around Patuanak 
and surrounding area. 
 
So that you see the large-scale excellence in regards to the 
one-third, you know, of world’s development of uranium taking 
place in northern Saskatchewan. And seeing the excellence on 
NRT from the La Ronge Band being a world-class 
transportation company. As a matter of fact, the biggest in the 
world on land transportation like that on uranium ore. And I 
think that in that sense it’s been a highly success story. 
 
And also the workforce. We’ve got in from about 500 to 900 
workers. And a lot of the people and their families are very 
happy with good-paying jobs. There are some salaries that are 
over $20 an hour and in that case they are very, very, very . . . 

they’re a lot better than the minimum wage-type jobs so that the 
job levels . . . the amount of money that they get on their 
paycheque is very important. 
 
Totally the paycheque on the contracts to the businesses is 
about $200 million. That’s up from the $20 million when we 
got into government. We were about $20 million on the 
business corporation contracts and the wages. We’re now 
hovering at $200 million. 
 
So it’s been a tremendous success story, not only in provincial 
terms, but national terms and international terms. So I take my 
hats off again to the uranium industry workforce and to all the 
people involved in the trading programs and everything that 
made that work. 
 
So I’ll be making some more other commentaries to your 
questions. So those are my comments from your initial 
questions. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. To 
the minister: I was interested in your comments that 
development of a northern arm for SOCO; that SOCO has a 
northern representative in the North working with the people up 
there in order to be able to have a better first-hand knowledge of 
the requirements of the people in northern Saskatchewan and 
their investment requirements. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Now you talked about SOCO and the success it’s had in some 
areas of the province. You referred specifically to the 
Wapawekka mill situated at Prince Albert — the investments by 
Weyerhaeuser, the 51 per cent that’s owned by Weyerhaeuser, 
the 49 per cent that’s owned by the three different First Bands. 
 
You spoke about also that SOCO, in order to operate in the 
North such as it had in the South, you had to restructure how 
lending takes place in northern Saskatchewan. You spoke about 
the department being able to only . . . having limits of up to 
$250,000 to help out businesses in northern Saskatchewan, and 
that SOCO is going to be able to provide an opportunity to 
expand that investment because certainly their ability to . . . for 
lending, Mr. Minister, is of a higher level than what your 
department takes control of directly. 
 
So I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you would help the House 
to understand, and certainly those of us on this side of the 
House, how the three First Nations involved in Wapawekka 
Lumber — the three First Nations of Lac la Ronge, Montreal 
Lake, and Peter Ballantyne — were able to put together their 
financing, and who is all involved in helping them with their 
financing for their portion of Wapawekka Lumber. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — A lot of that will be private information 
you know from their own companies. There is a certain degree 
of confidentiality that they do have in regards to who they 
borrow from. 
 
We know that the different bands will have different records, 
and different historical accesses, to finance capital — you 
know, whether internally in the province or elsewhere. 
 



1854 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

So those types of things are done on their own selves because 
they’re own individual corporations, and I don’t have that 
information you know with me. But I do know that they were 
able to access private capital, you know funding, in addition to 
the moneys that they get you know from our funding. 
 
And we know that there was . . . it’s a little bit more easier 
accessed by people with let’s say a newer level of development. 
An existing band like La Ronge Band for example, they already 
have quite an outstanding record, and they’re able to access 
financing anywhere at even better prices you know across the 
country. So you know that’s a record that they do have. 
 
A newer company may have a tougher time, but they already 
have a fairly good record of that. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
the minister, certainly we can appreciate on this side of the 
House the value of your statements when you indicate that how 
agencies are able to attract financing for their projects, and 
certainly when they attract financing from the private sector 
those of us on this side of the House always like to applaud 
those kind of initiatives. 
 
We’re certainly well aware that the Lac la Ronge Indian Band 
has an excellent track record as compared to many Indian bands 
in this province in their ability to create business and to create 
wealth and to be able to attract financial support from the 
private sector in their initiatives. And so we applaud that and 
certainly it needs to be lauded on a large scale. 
 
And there are also other First Nations out there, Mr. Minister, 
who are in the same situation. They are able to, through a long 
history of an excellent business track record, become very good 
business partners of financial institutions and their ability to 
attract, as you have mentioned, better rates of interest when it 
comes to advancing money so that they can develop new 
projects. 
 
And I understand then from your answer, Mr. Minister, that I 
need to clarify, in a much better method, the type of question I 
was asking. You indicated that the SOCO has been a long-time 
investor in southern Saskatchewan. We know that the mill at 
Wapawekka is south of the so-called northern boundary, but the 
three First Nations are not, Mr. Minister. And you indicated that 
some of the investment for that mill came from SOCO. You 
mentioned that this afternoon and I guess we’re just curious as 
to — on this side of the House, Mr. Minister — what kind of a 
commitment SOCO has in helping with the financing of 
Wapawekka Lumber? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — As far as I know, in this particular 
instance I don’t know of any funds from SOCO that were 
utilized in this particular project. 
 
I did not know of any specific funds that were utilized by 
SOCO on this project. I thought that there was just a . . . for me 
if I can recall, you know a start-up, particularly with Montreal 
Lake Cree Nation, I thought that there was work through the 
Northern Development Fund. 
 
We do have from time to time, I don’t think it is . . . for the year 
in consideration, I think it was the year before when that 

happened. So the facts that are in front of me are the only ones 
that we did this past year you know for . . . It would have been 
the proper question — remember last year you didn’t have, you 
know, sufficient time to ask a lot of the questions — and that 
would have been a question to ask at that time you know last 
year. So I don’t have a record for that. I only have the record for 
this year. 
 
But my understanding is that SOCO did not have any money in 
that regard. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
the minister. SOCO’s involvement in northern Saskatchewan — 
as you mentioned earlier, you mentioned it last time when you 
were here with your officials — that you want to expand 
SOCO’s involvement in northern Saskatchewan. You 
mentioned it again today. And certainly that we have been 
talking about Wapawekka Lumber, it is a large forestry 
operation in Saskatchewan, and it’s an excellent initiative. 
 
In order to better utilize the wood products that we have in 
Saskatchewan we know that we have a lot — a lot — Mr. 
Minister, of old-growth timber that either needs to be used or its 
going to be lost. One of the great fears of course in northern 
Saskatchewan is that we’re going to lose some of these 
opportunities because forest fires on old-growth forest can be 
significant and very devastating, and we need to take advantage 
of many times while — you’ll have to pardon the pun — while 
the irons are in the fire. 
 
I guess at this time we’ll just change a little bit here and move 
farther north into the northern boundary. We know that 
communities in the northwest and in the northeast have been 
exploring opportunities for forestry development in the North. 
We understand clearly that the Department of Northern Affairs 
is significantly involved in helping these communities to some 
degree to be able to access the technical abilities that are 
available out there so that these communities can have the 
economic development that is necessary in the North. 
 
One of those is in the northwest, Northwest Community 
Futures. We know that a group of the communities have banded 
together in order to look at, on a larger scale, Mr. Minister, their 
ability to be able to work in a collaborative method in order to 
put together the type of larger-scale economic development that 
they feel is necessary to work towards advancement of 
economic opportunities in that part of the country. 
 
Now for quite some time they operated, we understand, in 
so-called isolation. They were . . . not because of where they 
lived but because they were doing it themselves. They wanted 
to take control of their own destiny. Now we understand that 
Northwest Community Futures has taken on as some of its 
board members, members of your department. 
 
I’m wondering how many members of your department actually 
work with, directly, with the Northwest Community Futures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, we have a staff person that works 
directly with the Northwest Communities. And it was quite a 
historic first in Canada. This whole idea of helping people get 
training and getting jobs, very, very important, but we needed 
people to get into business development. 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1855 

 

But the new, brand new thing with the Northwest Communities 
was this. Many people have been talking about resource and 
revenue sharing, you know, as an issue for many years. And we 
thought that the highest instrument the province has in regards 
to business development on a larger scale is what historically 
has been called a lease agreement. Now a lease agreement 
generally only goes to large-scale companies, historically. We 
have seen that with Cogema, we’ve seen that with Cameco, 
we’ve seen that with Weyerhaeuser, etc. 
 
And what we have done in this particular case with the 
Northwest Communities is this: that not only are they going to 
be involved in the whole aspect of training and jobs and 
ownership on business, they’ll be into the forest management 
agreement. This is a first in Canada. 
 
In the central region we will have Lac la Ronge Indian Band 
along with Zelensky Bros., their partner. Then we’ll have on the 
west side, we will have Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation, their 
partner, with the corporation Mee-Toos. 
 
And we also have the existing situation with the Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council and their lease agreement, and their partnership 
under Mistik, and their interrelating partnerships with Millar 
Western and so on. 
 
And coming back to the Northwest Communities. What was 
needed was to get some monies in place so that the 
development could move on. And I’d like to report to the 
member that we had a . . . we have a pre-operational funding for 
the Northwest Communities. And we have $125,000 
contribution from the Centenary Fund as part of the 650, you 
know, that supports the northern forestry development. They 
will also benefit from an aerial inventory survey for 350,000. 
 
Separate from the Centenary Fund, from Northern Affairs and 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management), we are trying to get a community relations work 
and there was 737,500, you know, for that development. And I 
understand, as you said, that they were also able to access some 
dollars, you know, in the federal programming, you know, for 
the development. 
 
So our people have been working with them very, very closely 
at each step of the way dealing with the consolidation of the 
communities; getting the business plan moving; getting this 
next stage, you know, of development moving; and right now 
they are of course doing some very important strategic 
negotiations. And our people are very, very pleased with the 
progress that have been made. 
 
There are still some outstanding challenges, you know, that are 
out there and they’re always there for any business. But I think 
that the structures that we’ve laid down, that for the first time in 
the history of Canada we have a whole northern area of the 
province, having a partnership with Northerners is a very 
important point. 
 
And that the Northwest Communities wanted to be in because 
it’s composed of Métis people and First Nations people in those 
communities. And having that approach was very, very 
important for all of us. Because there’s also an Aboriginal 
people living in those communities as well. So it’s a partnership 

on a community approach that we have utilized in that sense. 
 
So I would think that the initial progress has been made, we will 
move forward, we will see the new planning that comes through 
that process. And I’m sure that as we look into the future, I’m 
excited about what the possibilities are. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
the minister, certainly we should be on the edge of an exciting 
time in northern Saskatchewan with the opportunities that are 
available up there. You mentioned, reiterated again with 
uranium mining in the North, and certainly we know that there 
are some precious metals up there that are of a great deal of 
need for and want for in the world. And some rare earth 
elements up there too, that are also of significant value and of 
want to many parts of the world. 
 
But of course, Northwest Community Futures is dealing right 
now, at the beginning, almost exclusively with forestry. They 
see that as an original, first step to be able to get something 
going for economic development, to provide high-quality, 
high-paying jobs for people of their communities in the North. 
So that the standard of living needs to be and can be improved 
in very short order. 
 
Certainly we’ve heard from communities up there that . . . those 
communities that are not exclusively First Nations or Métis type 
of background, Mr. Minister, that the unemployment rate is not 
only unacceptable, in many cases it’s disastrous. And you spoke 
about, you know, having a member of your ministry working 
and sitting on the board with Northwest Community Futures, 
and the opportunities that your ministry is providing to them in 
order to help them out in financial measures with some of the 
work that needs to be done. 
 
We certainly understand that when you’re putting together 
prospectuses, that technical expertise will probably be required 
in some of these communities. There are business acumen 
already up there, so we would assume that the ability to look at 
expanding businesses and to provide technical expertise to their 
communities is probably there to some degree. But any time 
that an organization in the North can have an opportunity to 
acquire further technical expertise is probably being welcomed 
in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But we’re hearing, Mr. Minister, that these northern 
communities have on their own accord been courting, so to 
speak, business investment from the private sector, businesses 
that would like to be able to operate in northern Saskatchewan, 
to be able to work with the people of northern Saskatchewan in 
creating jobs, in providing world-class businesses that could 
develop the forest industry. 
 
On this side of the House, we’re curious as to how the 
government perceives your department, SOCO, which is also 
part of the Department of Economic Development, which 
Northern Affairs is also . . . being able to work hand in hand 
with private enterprise in the expansion of the forest industry in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I would say that we’ve got a . . . The 



1856 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

initiative by the private sector has been quite tremendous. I 
looked at the example that I gave earlier on with Weyerhaeuser 
and working with the three First Nations and we provided a bit 
of seed funding for one of them. But on . . . I mean 
developmental funding on one of them. 
 
I might add on the question of the northwest communities as 
you looked at it, the person that we have doesn’t sit on the 
board. They have their own independent board, their own 
corporate board that deals with their own business matters. And 
so we just provide support for them. 
 
We did monies where they hired a forestry consultant 
management-type person. Then they’ve got a person that is 
right now, they’re doing some negotiations taking place, you 
know, a targeted strategic approach on it. So they are obviously 
working with the private sector. They themselves are a private 
sector corporation. They’re more of a community type of 
private sector corporation, but they themselves are a private 
corporation. 
 
So over the long run you will see these partnerships develop 
and they’re pretty excited about it. There’s challenges, like I 
said, in regards to the accessing of finance capital over the long 
run, the usual concerns that they will have on development of 
forestry expertise. 
 
And I might add that we put in $859,000 of new money this 
year just to target on the forestry sector so that we had a focus 
strategy. We got 2,500 people going to school in the North on 
post-secondary — 2,500. When we come into government we 
had approximately a thousand. It’s now 2,500 people. 
 
Now we’re targeting some money strictly into the forestry 
sector because we knew that the multi-party training plan we 
had in mining was such a national-level success — it won an 
award — so we’re using the same model on multi-party training 
to get at the forestry sector training. 
 
So the concerns of the northwest communities being a 
corporation is to develop partnerships with other private 
corporations as well as to develop a proper training plan. So the 
similar sorts of concerns that they do have are much the same 
ones as other corporations except that, in their case, the need for 
the financial capital side on the development side will be very, 
very important for them. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
the minister, those of us on this side of the House have always 
firmly believed and agreed with you, Mr. Minister, in the area 
of post-secondary training, that the province has a significant 
responsibility to ensure that when industry is out trying to 
develop in this province that a skilled workforce is available for 
them to access; that a skilled workforce is in place to be able to 
provide the expertise that these corporations are going to need 
in order to develop, Mr. Minister, the economic opportunities 
that could and should be available. Of course we’re talking 
about northern Saskatchewan today and there is significant 
opportunities in the North. 
 
Now you spoke about the need and the success, training of up to 
2,500 people with the skills that are necessary to work in 
northern Saskatchewan. But you know we’ve been talking 

about the northwest in this session of questions and their 
abilities to be able to get economic opportunities going in the 
forestry sector. If there are 2,500 people trained to go to work, 
Mr. Minister, we need to have 2,500 jobs out there. And while 
posturing is going on in trying to reach lease agreements, land 
use agreements for forestry management, these people who are 
trained and ready to go to work are not working. 
 
I’m wondering I guess, on this side of the House, what your 
department is doing to expediate the process so that 
communities in the North can take their own initiatives forward 
to work with corporations out there such as, well Ainsworth 
Lumber comes to mind, Carrier Lumber comes to mind, has 
been mentioned in this House, as companies out there who are 
interested in working in northern Saskatchewan, working with 
the people of northern Saskatchewan to set up business 
opportunities that will provide the means for communities to 
move ahead and provide the wealth necessary to significantly 
reduce the unemployment rates in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
So we’re wondering here on this side of the House, how has 
your department been able to facilitate the process in order to 
expediate lease agreements, because we feel it’s mandatory that 
something be done in the very, very near future rather than have 
the process continue to drag on as it has for the past several 
years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — In regards to the lease agreements, we set 
up the structure in getting the lease agreements. That was phase 
number one. 
 
The second phase is something that is dependent in regards to 
the private sector partnership that evolved. When that private 
sector partnerships evolves — that’s when I was saying that 
there was some strategic negotiations taking place right now — 
when that evolves and that is done, then announcements would 
be made. 
 
But you’ve got to pay due respect to the business corporations 
because they make decisions based on market conditions. You 
know, they base decisions in regards to the availability of the 
workforce, and all those items are being negotiated, you know, 
within those agreements. 
 
We are a little bit better off than in the initial phases of mining, 
on the forestry sector. Because northern Saskatchewan 
workforce has been around for a long time on the mining . . . on 
the forestry sector. I remember my father, when I was growing 
up in the ’50s, operating a sawmill. And a lot of our people 
have been involved in operating sawmills over the years. 
 
And during the ’70s when there was a lot of development on the 
forestry side, we had an expertise system that evolved on 
training on the job. So a lot of the people learned on their own 
initiative, and also with the initiative of the private sector on 
getting the training-on-the-job programs of that era. 
 
Then we even had . . . I used to be a community college 
principal in the late ’70s, and we used to have specific programs 
that were targeted, for example, on, at that time, the utilization 
of the chainsaws. Now we have, you know, more advanced 
equipment that is being utilized, but there is still room in that 
capacity for safety training, those types of things. 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1857 

 

So that occurred in the ’70s and now we’re moving further on 
and I see, you know, training programs. I go and watch the 
mills that were operating in the North, the sawmills and how 
they do the training, right in there on the site. 
 
So there is training on the job-site information taking place, in 
addition to the 859,000 that the colleges will do, because there’s 
always that aspect of the other training by the colleges. And I 
think that, with due respect to the colleges, I think that they will 
. . . they have proven their success story in working with the 
mining companies. And we will see that evolve in the forestry 
side as well. 
 
So I’m quite optimistic that we will . . . You’re always a little 
bit behind in the training on certain sectors because I have 
found, as a person who has been involved in training, 
sometimes the business strategy, which has a timeline, changes. 
So you may train something and all of a sudden you have a little 
bit of a glut on the training or maybe you might be behind. So 
those types of things will sort themselves over the long run. 
 
But we are indeed putting, you know, substantial amounts of 
money on the training and as well there will be the tremendous 
skill development that’s already in there by the private sector 
themselves, when they train their own people as they move into 
the job positions. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, to 
the minister, you spoke about the ongoing training that’s taking 
place and certainly a significant part of it of course has been 
geared towards the mining sector. But as we’re both well aware, 
that once you train a heavy equipment operator, they can 
virtually move from one sector to the other with a lot more 
fluidity than what you’ve indicated here. 
 
I want to adjust the questioning here a little bit back towards the 
involvement of SOCO and the Department of Northern Affairs 
in helping the communities in northern Saskatchewan — be 
they Lac la Ronge Indian Band, although we know that they’re 
certainly in the type of solid financial situation that they are 
able to work with the private sector, financial institutions to a 
larger degree — but I’m wondering, and those of us on this side 
of the House are also very curious, in the situation of Northwest 
Community Futures, if they want to become involved with a 
private sector business to expand into the forest industry, what 
you have heard, Mr. Minister? 
 
The ability of these northwest communities to become financial 
partners in the business, and if that’s their . . . the direction that 
they’re seeking to be a financial partner; what is going to be 
their ability to be able to access finances in the private sector or 
are they going to have to be dependent to higher costs, financial 
resources from SOCO, or just what is the status as you work 
with those communities, Mr. Minister? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — There are other possibilities that come 
into play. On a larger-scale effort, we will also . . . we have the 
Northern Development Fund; and for the record, I’d like to put 
that in because it should be as part of the estimates here. 
 
We did loan approvals by industry, you know, throughout the 

North last year. We put in $1,492,895. Out of that on the retail 
trade sector we had $102,300; on the construction side we put 
in three projects for $347,300; on the transportation side we had 
five companies were approved for $528,600; other services 
were 50,245. On some of the questions you raised we had four 
companies access $464,450 in this year in review. 
 
So the other thing that we know is that we got the $250,000 
chunk up to a max there. Then at a higher level we got SOCO. 
If we get into a major project taking place, we also have access 
— no different than just down the street here on the Co-op 
upgrader with regards to CIC (Crown Investments Corporation 
of Saskatchewan) or in Lloydminster, you know, with CIC — if 
a major development you know takes place in the North there is 
a possibility for CIC involvement as well. 
 
So those types of things come to be part of the negotiations. 
And when those things are brought into play and the business 
plans are put into place for that to occur, it is only then that we 
can make decisions on that. But I’d just like to report to you 
that those are the three levels that we’re looking at so we’re not 
stuck at you know even higher levels of capital requirements. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, welcome 
back . . . I’m not supposed to say that. 
 
To the minister: you mentioned that you’re still in the early 
stages of looking at how forestry development is going to be 
finalized in northern Saskatchewan, and certainly after four 
years of your department being in place we’d like to have seen a 
lot more progress than what we have been hearing from you 
today. 
 
But those of us on this side of the House, one of the progresses 
we like to see in business is that those people who want to 
become actively involved in the promotion of business in 
northern Saskatchewan have the opportunity to be able to go 
out and access financial resources from the private sector. 
 
I’m not sure, Mr. Minister, I’m hearing from you that that is 
going to be an opportunity. I would like, and those of us on this 
side of the House would like reassurance that SOCO is not 
going to be the only player in the game for financing in 
northern Saskatchewan for many of the communities out there. 
 
We know that if they could get into the private financial sector, 
it would be a little more advantageous for repayment terms. We 
know that business plans would have to be rock solid — it 
doesn’t matter whether it’s for private sector funding or public 
sector funding. 
 
So we’re wondering, Mr. Minister, if part of the package, in 
order to have a land use agreement for private sector companies 
in the North and for communities in the North, is that the 
government would have to be in some sense a player in the 
game, financially speaking. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Like I mentioned, we had put in some 
money developmentally. The specific example that you gave 
me was the Northwest Communities. And we have put in some 
money already in that capacity on a developmental scale. And 
that’s with the Northern Development Fund. We used the 
Centenary Fund as well to do the surveys, etc. I’ll give you 



1858 Saskatchewan Hansard June 15, 2001 

 

back those figures that I’ve given you previously. But we also 
have provided dollars from the Northern Development Fund 
before on a developmental scale and will continue to do so. 
 
On a larger amount, we are looking at SOCO and also CIC to 
do further developments. When those are sorted out, those are 
announced at the time that they are sorted out. But I am just 
letting you know that the North, which I’ve been not getting, 
you know, that much from the SOCO fund, now has examples 
that we can point to on the mining sector and now proposals on 
the forestry. 
 
Possibly, any new proposals that might come in, the people now 
know that they got a worker in La Ronge that can work with 
them on SOCO. They’ve got workers that they can work with 
on the Northern Development Fund and they have already 
started meeting with CIC as well. 
 
So overall, I think that the first step is to make sure that an 
entrepreneur wants to get up on their own two feet and get 
private sector funding. Obviously, that’s the same is true for 
people in the North. And they will try and access that and as 
much as possible. 
 
I’ve given you the Wapawekka Lumber case where, of that 22 
million, you know, that was there, you know, 12 million was 
the banking system and various parts of it, plus, you know, the 
Weyerhaeuser and their own finances when the 5.1 and the 4.9 
and the access by the bands. So you will see those sorts of 
configurations taking place. 
 
A large role will always be played by the private sector, you 
know, on the banking side. But we also know that from a 
developmental view, government has to play a role and that’s 
the point you’re making, and I agree with you. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair of 
Committees, to the minister, from this side of the House we’d 
like to be able to wrap-up this area of estimates if we could 
today, Mr. Minister, because we understand that it’s 
inconveniencing your department to be able to bring your 
officials in. But I think it’s . . . you know, it’s important for us 
to understand SOCO’s role in forestry in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And you have mentioned that, yes, you’re looking at it, but I 
guess we need to understand is the reasons that your department 
and Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation is looking at 
investment in northern Saskatchewan, specifically in the large 
sector of forestry. We’re sort of hearing and knowing that some 
big players in the forest industry have had talks with 
communities in the North about being able to develop 
large-scale operations that would provide hundreds of jobs in 
each of those communities. 
 
And we’re wondering then, Mr. Minister, when you look at 
partnerships in northern Saskatchewan, and of course the 
communities want to become significant players in order to reap 
the benefits. So maybe if we could have the opportunity to wrap 
this up, if you could, you know, explain very clearly to us so 
that we don’t have to bring this back again — keep going over 
and over it again — why it is that these communities cannot 
access private funds? Or is it that they’re not even trying and 

they’re just . . . that SOCO is going to be the only player in the 
game when it comes to financial resources? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The example I used right from the 
beginning was that many of the companies in the North access 
private capital. They’ve already been doing it and they will 
continue to do it. I gave you the case where La Ronge Band can 
access capital from across Canada already. 
 
So the different levels of businesses will be able to access, you 
know, at different levels. Newer businesses, of course, always 
have a tougher time. They have a tougher time in rural areas, 
they have a tougher time in urban areas, and they have a 
tougher time in the North to access, you know, the capital 
requirements. 
 
But when you’re into a major development you will need 
support and I made it very clear to you that government will 
support through the Northern Development Fund, through 
SOCO, and through CIC. And I think I made that relatively 
clear. 
 
Of course I cannot divulge the confidentiality, you know, of 
businesses and corporations, as you fully appreciate, in regards 
to negotiations that they do have. I leave that to the business 
sector. That is a rightful place for it. 
 
And on SOCO, the estimates for SOCO come in with Economic 
and Co-operative Development. I’ve only made . . . answered 
your questions on SOCO, you know, to accommodate your 
questions. But we don’t deal with them in the Northern 
Development Fund at all. We just have been operating as a 
partner, you know, with our staff and a SOCO person. And 
that’s the reason why I was accommodating the questions under 
SOCO. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair of 
Committees, to the minister . . . And you mentioned quite 
clearly that SOCO is an arm of Economic Development. 
 
But I guess we might as well let you know upfront and honestly 
that we’re not going to have the wool pulled over our eyes. So 
are you — you are an arm of Economic and Co-operative 
Development; so therefore as an arm of Economic 
Development and . . . Economic and Co-operative 
Development, working with SOCO is simply part of your 
mandate. 
 
And because that, you have developed a northern branch to 
SOCO that is a part of Economic and Co-operative 
Development; as is Department of Northern Affairs, is a branch 
of Economic and Co-operative Development. And if you’re 
working very closely with communities in northern 
Saskatchewan, that they would go . . . they go hand in hand, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
So just as a final question for today. Does the Northwest 
Community Futures have any opportunity for private financial 
access? Or is it too hard for them to access and therefore the 
only opportunity they are going to have if they want to become 
a partner in a large-scale expansion of the forest industry, 
SOCO is going to be an active player? Or is it the desire of 
Department of Northern Affairs, which is an arm of Economic 



June 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1859 

 

and Co-operative Development, which also has SOCO under its 
mandate to rather use SOCO as its financial institution rather 
than the private sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Right now they’re doing negotiations. 
And the northwest communities will be doing the negotiations 
on the financial side of it, and I cannot make any discussion on 
that. That is the business of the northwest communities. 
 
What I can tell you is that obviously they are talking about 
financing, and they would like to get the financing. But it is 
their business as to how they will access it over time. We have 
done our role with the Northern Development Fund, and all I’m 
saying is that anybody — whether you’re from the South, from 
the rural area, or from the North — you have to apply to SOCO, 
have it analyzed through their regular processes of due 
diligence, and that . . . that’s how it’s done. 
 
So it doesn’t come to Northern Affairs. It goes to the expertise 
within SOCO. They have their own board. It’s a provincial 
board, it’s not a northern board, and they tackle that issue at that 
point in time. 
 
But that’s their decision making. It’s not a decision making of 
Northern Affairs. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Thank 
you today for bringing your officials in. Certainly you have 
successfully avoided as many questions as possible. You say 
that these applications would go to SOCO. You are the Minister 
of Northern Affairs, you are also the deputy Chair of SOCO so 
you are fully well-aware of the hand in glove that goes on 
between SOCO and Northern Affairs, as we are on this side of 
the House. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, we’ve probably spent as much time on this as 
necessary. I want to thank the minister for his time, and thank 
his officials for coming out today, and we’ll move this along. 
 
The Chair: — Committee members, in order to deal with this 
subvote, we would need leave to proceed past (EC01) to 
(EC10). Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Subvote (EC10) agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move this House be 
now adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until Monday at 
1:30 p.m. I wish everybody a good Father’s Day weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:00. 
 


