















































Hansard: April 03, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 321 
 April 3, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I have the duty to present a petition on behalf of the 
people of Cypress Hills. It concerns the EMS (emergency 
medical services) development project and the implications 
arising out of that for the people of that area. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by people from the 
community of Gull Lake, Hazlet, and Webb — all in the 
Cypress Hills constituency. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
conversion of paved highways to gravel. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest, Moose Jaw, Hearne, and Claybank. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of 
people concerned about the state of the hospital in Swift 
Current, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from the city of 
Swift Current, from Stewart Valley, from Shaunavon, from 
Wymark, and from Mankota. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens in southern 
Saskatchewan who are concerned about their ambulance 
service. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Gladmar, Lake Alma, 
Goodwater, and Ceylon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
today also rise with a petition to stop further cuts at Assiniboia 
Pioneer Lodge. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these are from throughout the whole 
constituency of Wood River, including Assiniboia, Mazenod, 
LaFleche, Rockglen, Glentworth, Willow Bunch, Shaunavon, 
Flintoft, and Limerick. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. These are petitions of citizens of the province on the 
following matters: 
 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
Plans to revert highways to gravel; and 
 
The level of services and care at Pioneer Lodge in 
Assiniboia. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the following 
question: 
 



322 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

To the minister responsible for Northern Affairs: how many 
times has the Northern Forestry Strategy Committee met, 
and what was the per diem paid to each individual 
committee member. 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
give notice that I shall on day no. 16 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: for each of the cities of Regina, Saskatoon, 
Moose Jaw, and Prince Albert, and for each of the 
provincial electoral constituencies outside these four cities, 
how many video lottery terminals are in each; how much 
revenue and net income did the government collect from 
video lottery terminals in each during the 2000-2001 fiscal 
year; how much of this video lottery terminal revenue went 
back into each, through grants to organizations during the 
2000-2001 fiscal year; and how many people from each 
attended gambling addiction counselling? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Crown Investments 
Corporation: what are the details of all out-of-province 
investments made by CIC or any of its Crown subsidiaries? 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 16 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Sask Water: does the Saskatchewan 
Valley Potato Corporation send shipments of potatoes to 
Prince Edward Island; was a shipment recently returned 
due to freezing; if so, when was this shipment sent and 
when was the freezing discovered; to whom was the 
shipment sent; what was the value of this potato shipment 
upon leaving Saskatchewan; how much will the 
Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation lose on this 
transaction? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s a pleasure for me today to introduce to you and through you 
to all members of the Legislative Assembly, a group of 
students. There are 33 of them sitting in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, and they are immigrants and refugees that study in the 
English language program of the Saskatoon Open Door Society 
and they’re learning English. 
 
And the Saskatoon Open Door Society, I might say, Mr. 
Speaker, is a non-profit organization in Saskatoon that exists to 
welcome and assist refugees and immigrants to become 
informed and effective participants in Canadian society, and to 
integrate them into the Saskatoon community where I and my 
colleagues from Saskatoon certainly are happy to have them. 
 
And I want to just remind all of us, Mr. Speaker, that the motto 
of our province — and it appears several times in this room — 
is, translated into English: “from many peoples, strength”. And 

that is the strength of Canada and Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
that we have people from so many places. And every time an 
immigrant comes to Saskatchewan and Canada, it makes us a 
little bit richer and a little bit stronger. 
 
And so we want to welcome the students here today and also, 
Mr. Speaker, their teachers, Don Campbell and Donna 
Zaleschuk; and also Bob McNaughton is here, a volunteer. And 
I hope I haven’t missed anyone. And I’d ask all members to join 
with me welcoming the students here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also would like to echo the words of the Minister of Finance 
and welcome the group from the Saskatchewan Open Door 
Society here, to the chambers today. 
 
They do just some outstanding work throughout the province 
and, I know, in Saskatoon. So from this side of the House also, 
we’d like to give you a hearty welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to the 
Legislative Assembly a group of five agricultural specialists 
from Mongolia who are spending the next four weeks in our 
province and who will be here until April 12. Our guests, Mr. 
Speaker, are seated in your gallery. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group of agrologists is visiting Saskatchewan 
and studying zero and minimal tillage practices and chemical 
weed control at the University of Saskatchewan and at the 
Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Arts and Technology. 
They’re studying in Saskatchewan because Mongolia and 
Saskatchewan are similar in climate and topography. 
 
The group’s Canadian study tour is sponsored under the 
Canada-Mongolia Zero-and-Minimum-Tillage Training Project 
which is funded by the Canadian International Development 
Agency, CIDA, and executed in a partnership between Alberta 
and Saskatchewan companies. 
 
The project is facilitating the introduction of Saskatchewan 
agricultural technologies and practices, proving once again that 
our agricultural industry is at the leading edge of technology 
development and implementation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce the individuals and ask them 
to rise as I do, and you’ll have to forgive me with some of the 
pronunciation. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. T. Sukhbaatar, who 
is the director of Tisi Agrosant Company Limited; Mrs. B. 
Sanjaakhand, vice-director of Urgatsiin Undraa Company 
Limited; Mrs. C. Narankhuu, executive director of Altan Boroo 
Company Limited; Ms. C. Delgermaa, agronomist-manager of 
the Mongolian Farmers and Flour Producers Association; and 
Mr. T. Turmandakh, agricultural consultant with Monconsult. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce Ms. Verna Mitura of 
Regina, president and senior economist with Mitura Economic 
Research Incorporated; and Augustine Ebinu from the Sask 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 323 

 

Trade & Export Partnership, who are accompanying the group 
this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all the members to join me in welcoming 
our friends to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
join with the Minister of Agriculture on behalf of the official 
opposition and welcome as well the guests from Mongolia, the 
Ag specialists who are looking at zero tillage and a number of 
other practices in Saskatchewan. 
 
Many of the members on this side of the House have direct 
experience with zero tillage and conservation methods, being 
involved in the agriculture field as we are. And you would also 
know that in Saskatchewan, Saskatchewan has a reputation for 
being leaders in the whole area of dryland farming on a 
worldwide scale. So we certainly do have a lot of information 
that we can provide to the guests. 
 
And I want to take the opportunity to welcome them, and good 
luck in your trip here to Saskatchewan, and we wish you the 
very best. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the House, Sylvia Quiring, 
who’s sitting in your west gallery. Sylvia is my constituency 
assistant and does a remarkable job of looking after me and 
making sure I’m at my appointments on time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that you along with many of my 
colleagues will reassure her that looking after me is a full-time 
job. I ask all members to offer a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
an honour today to introduce to you and through you to other 
members of the Assembly, 19 students sitting in the east 
gallery. The students are grade 7 and 8 students from the 
Viscount Central School in Viscount and they’re accompanied 
by their teacher, Ms. Jamie White. 
 
It’s an honour to have you here today. I’m glad you made it 
through this snow and I’m looking forward to meeting with you 
later. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Cancer Survivor Leads Relay for Life 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I proudly rise in this 
Assembly today to give well-deserved recognition to Tristin 
Vincente from my hometown of Bladworth. He’s also my 
next-door neighbour. 
 
This remarkable 10-year-old boy is a cancer survivor. Tristin 

yesterday in Saskatoon had the honour of being captain of the 
first team registered for the relay for life. This relay is to be held 
June 1 and 2 at Griffith’s Stadium. This event raises money to 
help the Canadian Cancer Society support cancer patients. 
 
Tristin’s mother, Carol Vincente, said that when he first heard 
about it, the first thing Tristin said, he had to put a team in. She 
said her family is so grateful that things have turned out so well 
for Tristin. She adds that Tristin having cancer has showed 
them how to really appreciate life, to always have hope. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been good friends with the Vincente family 
for years and I am very proud of Tristin and his remarkable 
efforts on behalf of our kids who are presently stricken with 
cancer. 
 
I wish Tristin the very best in the upcoming Relay for Life and 
hope that everything goes well for him in the future. Today we 
honour the courage of this young man and his mission. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

20th Anniversary of Saskatoon Open Door Society 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, it is a truism that Canada is a 
nation of immigrants. For most of us we need only to go back 
two or three generations to find, as the Old Testament said: 
 

The heart of a stranger in a strange land. 
 
Because of this basic fact of our national and provincial 
character, I was very happy to attend a significant anniversary 
celebration last Saturday at Aden Bowman Collegiate in my 
constituency of Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
The celebration was in honour of the 20th anniversary of the 
Saskatoon Open Door Society. Our Premier officially kicked 
off the festivities and the day gave the Open Door Society the 
opportunity to make its very valuable work known to the public 
which might not otherwise be aware of what it does. It also was 
a chance to sample some exceptional food and witness some 
good entertainment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatoon Open Door Society serves 1,500 
newcomers to Canada every year and has approximately 300 
clients at any given time. This includes settlement services to 
200 government-sponsored refugees annually. 
 
The Society has five program areas: reception and outreach, 
employment, volunteer development, language training, and 
children’s programming. The role of the Open Door Society is 
to make newcomers Canadian, a role it performs effectively and 
with dignity. 
 
I am proud that our government provides funding for the 
Saskatoon Open Door Society. And I congratulate executive 
director, Dawn Martin, and her dedicated staff for their ongoing 
work. And welcome all members and staff to the Leg. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



324 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

Provincial High School Wrestling Bronze Medallist 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Melfort’s Theresa Lynn competed in the provincial high school 
wrestling meet on March 23 and 24 in Regina. 
 
As this was Theresa’s first competition at the high school level, 
her goal was to place in the top six. Theresa exceeded her 
expectations by bringing home the bronze medal and is now 
preparing for the Canadian Amateur Wrestling Association 
Championship, April 5 to 7 in Saskatoon. 
 
We applaud Theresa for her achievement. Mr. Speaker. Please 
join with me today in congratulating this young woman and 
wishing her success as one of the representatives of our 
province on the national level. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

CommunityNet 
 

Mr. Addley: — The province of Saskatchewan is strong, Mr. 
Speaker, and this budget is a great example of that strength. It is 
essential that our province embrace the technology of the future 
to lead Canada and the world along the superhighway of 
success. 
 
Future, Mr. Speaker, is a word seemingly shunned by the 
opposition. It appears the members opposite are content with 
looking into the past with no real regard for the future of 
Saskatchewan people. Mr. Speaker, the members on this side of 
the House are looking into the future and listening to the people 
of this province. And they’re telling us they see a Saskatchewan 
that is plugged in, embracing technology and ensuring that its 
citizens have the tools they need to thrive in the global 
economy. This all begins with our youth, and therefore with the 
CommunityNet program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
CommunityNet will be Saskatchewan’s newly paved, smooth 
on-ramp to the information highway. This program will, more 
than anything else, connect our education system to the future, 
opening doors of learning and opportunity never before 
available to our students. I am proud of this government and its 
commitment to looking into the future, making Saskatchewan 
an even better place to live. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Northern Saskatchewan Junior Achievement Awards 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. Last week was the Northern 
Saskatchewan Junior Achievement awards and I’m pleased to 
inform hon. members that the North Battleford junior achievers’ 
company called Grassroots was named company of the year. 
 
David Savill, a grade 12 student at North Battleford 
Comprehensive High School won the Most Valuable VP of 
Marketing Award. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the third year running that the North 
Battleford company has won this award. The program is 

providing valuable experience in education and 
entrepreneurship for young people. 
 
The skills they are learning are our best guarantee of a bright 
future for them and for all of our province as a vibrant place to 
live and work. 
 
Congratulations to the winners and to the North Battleford 
Rotary Club for sponsoring this worthwhile event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Expansion of 911 Service 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Or let me rephrase that. More good 
news for Saskatchewan people who can read, Mr. Speaker. 
Sometimes that’s a very important distinction. 
 
It was reported this morning on the CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) that as of next week another part of 
this province is set to join the 911 network. Already enhanced 
911 service is provided to 60 per cent of all land-line telephones 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And our province will be totally 
covered by the end of next year. 
 
The part of the province to be covered next week, 104 
municipalities in the southeast, including Weyburn and Estevan. 
Let’s see, Mr. Speaker, next week. And next year, Mr. Speaker, 
I believe those qualify as deadlines, Mr. Speaker, I believe even 
the members opposite could understand that. And I say for 
those who can read, they would have known that. 
 
Something else, Mr. Speaker. Notice I said 60 per cent of all 
land-line phones. The 911 system is a land-line system, not a 
cellphone system, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t take a rocket scientist 
to know that if you dial 911 on a cellphone you will be bounced 
to the nearest cell tower, whether it be in Regina, Weyburn, or 
Scobey, Montana. Then your call will be routed to the nearest 
emergency service provider. 
 
Good news, Mr. Speaker, and from this side of the House, 
accurate information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Caronport Hockey Team Off to Kazakhstan 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Caronport Midget A Cougars will be leaving Thursday for an 
international hockey tournament in Kazakhstan. This Cougar 
team of 19 players, along with coach Jim Magee, assistant 
coach Barret Kropf, and manager Paul Nicholson, will be 
attending this tournament in celebration of 10 years 
independence for Kazakhstan. 
 
Mr. Kropf helped organize the tournament and signed an 
agreement for a reciprocal tournament with Golf Stream and 
Hockey Ministries International when time and resources allow. 
 
This is the first tournament of its kind. This tournament is also 
supported by the NHL Players Association goals and dreams 
fund to sponsor, along with the Caronport Cougars, at least 50 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 325 

 

disadvantaged children in Kazakhstan. 
 
We wish the Cougars well in this endeavour and all that 
organized the tournament. And I’m sure all the members will 
agree that this will be a great learning experience for them as 
well as a sporting experience. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Rural Entrepreneurs 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday this 
Assembly heard good news about the growth of small-town 
Saskatchewan and how people of those small towns are creating 
jobs in manufacturing, in construction, in mining, and in 
petroleum. This is proof that the entrepreneurial spirit of rural 
Saskatchewan’s people continues to flourish and continues to 
create opportunities for many small communities. 
 
And one of our Saskatchewan residents has decided to celebrate 
the many successes of our rural entrepreneurs. A new book 
chronicling the achievements of 18 of Saskatchewan’s rural 
businesses was recently published. The author of the book, Al 
Scholz, profiled businesses that not only survived the downturn 
in agricultural sector but generated wealth. 
 
Scholz includes a diverse group of businesses, proving just how 
successful Saskatchewan people are at creating new and 
innovative economic opportunities. This book is a testament to 
those achievements. 
 
Scholz’s book is appropriately titled Don’t Turn Out the Lights. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this government has confidence in the 
people of rural Saskatchewan and we won’t turn out the lights 
and we won’t double the cost like Alberta did. We will continue 
to support our rural entrepreneurs. 
 
And I ask that all members of the Assembly join with me in 
congratulating both Al Scholz and all the rural entrepreneurs of 
Saskatchewan. Their contributions to our province will continue 
to be encouraged and supported. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Open and Accountable Government Questioned 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to share with my colleagues in this Assembly an example 
of this so-called open and accountable government. Mr. 
Speaker, a written question was put forth to this NDP 
government on Monday, March 26 — a question that all 
residents of Saskatchewan are entitled to ask. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, this question was indeed brought forward on behalf of 
all the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
Unfortunately on Monday, April 2, the good citizens of 
Saskatchewan found out just how open and accountable this 
NDP government is. An NDP government that has a great deal 
of discomfort when they have to tell the taxpayers of this 
province about its inside workings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every citizen of this great province has the right in 
a democratic society to have access to its government — a 

government the people elected. Mr. Speaker, the taxpayers of 
this province also have the right to know how this NDP 
government is using monies collected from families across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We hear the members opposite spout off on openness and 
accountability. Well, Mr. Speaker, we now know just how open 
and accountable this NDP government has become. 
 
This government is about secrecy, and that is unfortunate. If 
this NDP administration is so hush-hush about one small detail, 
the question, Mr. Speaker, is: what else is this NDP government 
hiding from Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Municipal Governments 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Government. Mr. 
Speaker, the mayors of Saskatchewan cities spent most of last 
Friday blasting the NDP’s budget. Here’s part of what 
municipal leaders said about the NDP’s treatment of cities, and 
I quote: 
 

Six mayors of major Saskatchewan cities angrily 
denounced the Calvert coalition government’s budget. 

 
Mr. Speaker, normally the minister would have to go to a 
Liberal convention to find rejection like that. 
 
The mayors say the minister is ignoring their interests. Most 
mayors are saying that a property tax increase was almost 
unavoidable, thanks to the NDP’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the Minister of Municipal Government 
supporting an NDP budget that ignores cities and towns and 
villages while driving property taxes up, at the same time 
making government larger? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
question from the member opposite. And I will agree that while 
our unconditional revenue-sharing transfers have remained 
stable in the last few years with municipalities, we have 
consulted with them as to what their priorities are, Mr. Speaker. 
And I outlined them yesterday. 
 
But I just want to remind the member opposite that in addition 
to those transfers of funds there are numerous other programs 
for targeted projects that the government has participated in and 
helped to fund. For example, North Battleford has had funding 
from various programs to help enhance their transit for disabled 
services. 
 
Centenary Fund: this is happening in all the communities 
throughout this province, Mr. Speaker, and I could go on and on 
and list all the good things that are happening. 
 
One thing that’s not happening is people out there are not 



326 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

trash-talking Saskatchewan like the opposition. They’re saying 
this is a great place to live. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, the funds that the minister is 
talking about today is just another example of where that 
government gets to pick and choose winners. We’re talking 
about funding for every municipality in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Saskatchewan Party moved an 
amendment to the budget that would allow municipalities to 
hold the line on property tax hikes this year. We are proposing 
to increase municipal revenue-sharing grants by $30 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Melville doesn’t have to support 
a property tax increase for his constituents. The member from 
Melville may be outnumbered in the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) cabinet but he’s not outnumbered in the legislature. 
 
If the Liberal MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) — 
both of them — supported the Saskatchewan Party amendment, 
we could stop the NDP’s plan to pay for hirings of 570 new 
government employees and, by that, driving up property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Municipal Government do the 
right thing? Will he vote against the NDP’s plan to drive up 
property taxes as much as $30 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I really can’t understand why 
there’s so much negativism on the other side of this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, picking winners and losers? I can’t believe that. I 
have the list of . . . It’s not winners and losers, Mr. Speaker. 
Every community in this province is benefiting from the money 
that the provincial government has been putting into municipal 
infrastructure until the federal government now has agreed to 
participate and will even put in more money into the various 
programs that include communities like Estevan, Humboldt, 
Lloydminster, Moose Jaw, North Battleford, Prince Albert, 
Regina, Saskatoon, Swift Current, Melfort, Maple Creek, 
Shaunavon, Vibank. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are all kinds of communities that do benefit 
by the participation of this government’s injection of monies 
into those communities under various programs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 (14:00) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
that minister wants to hear negative talk, he only has to go back 
to Melville. He’ll hear all the negative talk he wants to hear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the Minister of Municipal Government 
doesn’t understand the question. Maybe he just doesn’t get it. 
He doesn’t have to go along with the NDP’s budget to force 
property taxes up while growing the size of government. We 
don’t need another 570 government workers and we certainly 
don’t need another property tax increase. 

Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party moved a motion that would 
stop the NDP from spending $30 million to hire new 
government employees and instead use that money to increase 
revenue-sharing grants to municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister support the Saskatchewan Party’s 
attempt to stop the NDP’s property tax increase? Will he vote to 
increase municipal revenue-sharing grants in this budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I am truly disappointed that 
the members opposite would attack opportunities for people to 
work in this great province, into all the great communities we 
have throughout the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those employees . . . I wonder if the mayors and the leaders of 
all those communities would be happy to hear the members 
opposite say, we don’t want those people working in your 
towns and your villages and your communities. Because that’s 
where those people will be working, Mr. Speaker. On our 
highways and in my department, in one particular area, where 
we will have museum gallery guides. We will justify the good, 
hard work that those people will put into making sure that our 
communities are real good places to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just want to quote something from a great 
editorialist, Mr. Bob Hughes, who said in his article of March 
22. He said: 
 

Too many taxes in this province are always pointed to as 
the broom that is shooing people out of Saskatchewan and 
into Alberta. There is a mirage that in Alberta nobody has 
to pay taxes, that the very moment you cross the provincial 
border you become rich. 

 
Well that’s the trash talk that those members opposite are 
saying to the people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
believe that minister is disappointed, but I think he’s 
disappointed in the influence that him and the Leader of the 
Third Party seem to have on that government’s decisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s really pretty simple. On Friday we will vote 
on whether or not Saskatchewan taxpayers can afford another 
property tax increase. The Liberal MLA from Melville can 
continue his role as a puppet for the NDP and go along with the 
government’s plan to increase property taxes or the minister can 
force the NDP to back off its property tax increase by 
supporting the Saskatchewan Party’s budget motion. It’s not a 
motion of confidence in the government; it’s not a motion that 
will defeat the whole budget. It’s simply a way of stopping the 
NDP from raising property taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister has a simple choice — will he support 
the NDP’s property tax hike or will he support our motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker. I want to once again remind 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 327 

 

the member of the influence that the . . . my coalition partner 
and I have had on this particular budget, Mr. Speaker. And if 
the members opposite will recall that the Liberal members had 
promised to make an investment into roads, into highways, into 
tax cuts, and those influences have been felt and reflected in this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The taxes are being reduced and, Mr. Speaker, there will be 
some augmentation to municipalities with $3.7 million to grants 
in lieu of tax programs. The government does support 
municipalities through the unconditional grants and the targeted 
programs, Mr. Speaker. And the people in the communities 
appreciate that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Additional Police Officers 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 
In the 1999 election campaign the NDP made many promises to 
the people of Saskatchewan. But with each and every passing 
day people are realizing that there is no way many of these 
promises will be kept, and the NDP government is now 
admitting it. 
 
They promised to hire 500 more health care providers; instead, 
they fired nurses. They promised to reduce waiting lists; 
instead, some of our surgical waiting lists have grown to be the 
very longest in the country. 
 
And yesterday, just yesterday, the Finance minister admitted 
that the NDP’s target to create 30,000 new jobs is unreachable. 
They must have included the 10,000 fictional forestry jobs in 
their original number. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: what excuse do you offer to the 
people of Saskatchewan for failing to deliver on these 
commitments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Just before I ask the Premier to respond, I’d 
ask members to phrase their questions through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Premier, we all remember the last 
provincial election campaign in Saskatchewan. And we all 
remember the commitments that were being made at that time. 
 
We recall that the members opposite committed to freeze at the 
rate of inflation any new funding for health care in the province. 
What does this budget do, Mr. Speaker? Eleven per cent — is 
that not correct? — eleven per cent increase in health care 
funding. Now how can the Leader of the Opposition stand in 
this House criticizing this government for these kind of new 
resources to the programs that people want in the province of 
Saskatchewan. I don’t understand how they can do this, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Premier is 

deflecting attention away from the matters that I’m bringing to 
his attention. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another election promise that the NDP 
government is behind on is the promise to add 200 police 
officers to our RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) and 
municipal police forces over four years. Last year the budget 
allowed for 25 new officers; this budget only adds another 20. 
That’s not even a quarter of the commitment that the NDP 
government made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, justice figures from Statistics Canada show that 
the provincial police officer numbers have decreased. High 
retirement rates and budget cuts have affected the numbers of 
police officers on the streets. But this government could help 
the situation by making good on their election promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: he is almost halfway through that 
four-year plan, why has he not committed more resources for 
police forces as he promised in the 1999 budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the public of 
Saskatchewan must be amazed when they listen to the Leader 
of the Opposition on a daily basis, and his colleagues — 
amazed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We set goals and we achieve our goals, Mr. Speaker. We’ve set 
goals for this government and this term. 
 
But note the contradiction, Mr. Speaker. When we provide new 
resources to provide men and women to go out and work on the 
roadways of Saskatchewan, what do they do? They criticize it. 
When we provide new resources in this budget to increase the 
number of social workers in our province working with the 
children at risk in our province, what do they do, Mr. Speaker? 
They criticize it. When we provide more resources to provide 
firefighters to fight the fires in the forests, we bring this budget 
in, what do they do? Criticize it. 
 
Next thing they’ll be criticizing us for the new resources that 
we’re putting into police services across the province. 
Unbelievable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier is ducking the issues. He’s not answering the questions. 
The NDP promised to put 200 more police on the streets in four 
years. This is a commitment that police forces across the 
province are planning on. They have to count on your word but 
your word’s not been good. 
 
They’re looking ahead at their own operations, their own 
retirement rates, and they’re making their own project and 
budget plans. And they’re expecting help from your 
government but they are learning, as are the people of 
Saskatchewan that this is a government that is not true to its 
word. This government is breaking its election promises on 
waiting lists, on jobs, on access to health services, on taxes, and 
yes, now on policing. 
 



328 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier: when and how does 
he intend to add another 155 police officers to keep the promise 
that he and his government made to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I repeat: this government 
sets goals, this government achieves goals. 
 
What is so interesting about the Leader of the Opposition and 
his party, somehow social workers being brought aboard to 
work with at-risk children, highways workers being brought on 
to patch the highways, health care workers, forest fires — these 
are all, somehow, in his language, bureaucrats. 
 
But now he’s saying, now he’s saying, that the police officers of 
the province are not civil servants, are not public servants. Of 
course they are, Mr. Speaker. And the next thing, next thing you 
know he’ll be calling them bureaucrats, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re not about to take our advice, Mr. Speaker, on building 
Saskatchewan from a party that does nothing but bring this 
province down, preaches doom and gloom all the time. This is a 
government, this is a party that believes in Saskatchewan and 
we’re working with Saskatchewan people to build 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Recently I asked the 
government a written question about the January dismissals of 
four management employees of the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. A few days ago I received the response of the minister 
who said, WCB is an arm’s-length, independent body of the 
government and the question should be directed to them. 
However when the media recently asked the WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) about the reasons for the terminations, 
they refused to comment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister is close enough to WCB to have 
recently paid $150,000 in severance to CEO (Chief Executive 
Officer) John Cameron upon his resignation. Is it just a 
coincidence that shortly before Mr. Cameron’s departure, four 
other top executives were fired? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour must regularly be briefed 
on the going ons, going on in the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. Why were these four people terminated from their 
management positions, and did they receive severance 
packages? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the member 
opposite’s edification, it’s Stan Cameron, not John Cameron. 
You might want to get some facts a little more accurate. 
 
The fact of this situation, Mr. Speaker, is the Workers’ 
Compensation Board is a well-operating . . . well-operating 
machine, if I can describe it that way, that provides 

compensation to injured workers and it provides protection 
against lawsuit to employers. It is run at an arm’s-length 
distance from the minister, Mr. Speaker, as it should be. And 
I’m delighted with their actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister has just 
confirmed there’s one set of rules for the government’s friends, 
and another set for the rest of people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an internal memo to all WCB staff dated January 
31 states, and I quote: 
 

Our decision to end employment in these instances were 
made in the interests of the soundest future for the entire 
organization. 

 
It goes on to say: 
 

We were guided in our actions by the values that were 
chosen by all of us for our organization. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these people held the positions of manager of 
financial resources, benefits and compensation administrator, 
director of client services, and unit manager. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how is it that four people in management positions 
of this level are all released on the same day just weeks before 
the CEO left the organization? And why did these people 
compromise the sound future of WCB? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, it is true that there are four 
management people that left the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. What just astounds me is the members opposite and their 
continual attack of civil servants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is civil servants work for this administration. Some of 
them are working in Workers’ Compensation. Civil servants 
sometimes leave the employ of government. It is not right for 
government to be commenting on potential severance that civil 
servants may have received. And, Mr. Speaker, I want to add in 
this instance the severance, I can assure you, is within the 
normal realm of what is the standard of the industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, last year the NDP government 
hired industrial relations consultant, Jim Dorsey, to review the 
policies of the Workers’ Compensation Board. The review was 
supposed to be released months ago, but either the government 
has put it on a shelf to collect dust or the minister is deliberately 
withholding it from the public. 
 
It’s very suspicious, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP has had the 
Dorsey report for months now, a report reviewing the 
operations of WCB, and in the meantime, CEO and four other 
management officials have either left or been terminated. 
 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 329 

 

What is the Minister of Labour hiding? He won’t answer a 
written question and he’s delayed the release of the Dorsey 
report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Labour, why are you 
withholding the release of the Dorsey report and will you table 
it in the legislature immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member also to phrase his 
questions to the Chair, through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What the 
members opposite don’t realize, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
Workers’ Compensation Board properly adjudicates and 
handles more than 36,000 claims of injured workers last year — 
more than 36,000. 
 
The Workers’ Compensation Board is always looking for ways 
to improve their service delivery. 
 
With respect to the question about the Dorsey report, I’m 
delighted to say it’s in my possession. I’m delighted to say it’s a 
good report, and it is in the process and will be tabled in due 
course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Safety Net Options 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions are for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, despite all the tough talk from the Minister of 
Agriculture, he has now done a complete about-face and signed 
on to CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program). The minister 
huffed and puffed and then he caved right in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all recognize that CFIP is a terribly flawed 
program, but maybe the minister could have gotten a better deal 
for Saskatchewan if he had actually put forward an option on 
the table before the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance) didn’t work and CFIP won’t work any 
better. But right now, that’s the only program there is because 
the NDP has not come up with any alternatives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like the minister to tell us what alternative 
safety net options did he propose on behalf of Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as you know and the 
member opposite knows, that for several months this 
government had been saying that we need to redesign the 
Canadian Farm Income Program. We’ve said that all along. 
 
And for the last six or seven months the member opposite, the 
agriculture critic, and the entire Saskatchewan Party have been 
absent for any agricultural debate. Don’t see them anywhere 

with farm organizations. Don’t see them speaking with farm 
groups. Don’t see them with farmers, and we don’t see them 
talking to Mr. Stockwell Day either, whom they supported. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that group of men and women over there are 
bankrupt of ideas for Saskatchewan farmers, are bankrupt of 
ideas, Mr. Speaker, of helping the Saskatchewan rural 
communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government is about helping 
Saskatchewan farmers. This government has just invested 85 
million more dollars for safety net programs in this province, 
for conversion programs, and . . . (inaudible) . . . for transition 
programs because we’re about Saskatchewan agriculture and 
farmers. And you abdicated that responsibility fully. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would also ask ministers in their responses 
to direct all remarks through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, the minister clearly has no new 
ideas in agriculture or he would have put them forward. But he 
does have a Farm Safety Net Committee that he set up a 
number of years ago. The committee has met six times in the 
last three years at an average cost of over $10,000 per meeting. 
That’s about $60,000 for six meetings, and what the NDP have 
to show for it? Absolutely nothing. No new ideas, no new 
proposals for a better safety net, and no choice but to sign on to 
a flawed program that doesn’t work for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Farm Safety Net Committee has held six 
meetings in the last three years. What recommendations have 
they made to the minister and what has he done with those 
recommendations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to the member opposite that in the 
last six months I’ve met with the Farm Safety Net Committee 
on three occasions. Just last Friday is the last time that I met 
with the Farm Safety Net Review Committee. 
 
And the Farm Safety Net Review Committee has said to me 
what I’ve said to the member opposite: we should not be in 
CFIP. We should not be signing this agreement — we should 
not be signing this agreement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, they have said we don’t have any choice. We don’t 
have any choice, Mr. Speaker, because we don’t have the 
money that we would get through the Canada/Saskatchewan 
assistance program. That’s why in fact, Mr. Speaker, we signed 
the agreement. 
 
And what do the members opposite put forward? That they 
want to get on an airplane or on a bus or on a train and 58 of us 
are going to go to Ottawa and we’re going to try and lobby the 
federal government for additional money, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
their intention of what they want to do. 
 
Well I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that taking 29 members 
from that side to Ottawa to lobby for farm support programs is 
about as helpful as taking a hand grenade to a firing squad. 



330 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 213 — The Recall of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Act 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move 
first reading of Bill No. 213, The Recall of Members of the 
Legislative Assembly Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask leave of the 
House to make a ministerial statement. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted to revert back to ministerial 
statements? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Measures to Control Foot and Mouth Disease 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House this afternoon to address the 
issue of foot and mouth disease. As we’re all aware, well aware, 
this highly contagious disease has struck Great Britain, Ireland, 
Europe, with devastating consequences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the livestock industry in Saskatchewan is very 
important to our economy and to our province. Saskatchewan 
livestock producers are concerned about the transmission of 
disease to North America, Canada, and to Saskatchewan. 
 
Foot and mouth disease is a highly communicable viral disease. 
The virus can be transported by footwear and on clothing. It can 
be transported in the human nasal passage and it can be 
transported in the food products such as meat and cheese. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Government of Saskatchewan is working in 
co-operation with the Canada Food Inspection Agency or CFIA 
of the federal government in an effort to prevent the 
transmission of foot and mouth disease to this province. 
Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food is assisting with the 
dissemination of information to producers, travellers, and to the 
public. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan is also updating its Foreign 
Animal Disease Eradication Support or FADES. The support of 
FADES agreement is to identify the arrangements whereby 
federal, provincial, and local agencies will help the CFIA to 
eradicate the foreign animal disease outbreak in Saskatchewan. 
The FADES plan is intended to provide CFIA with the support 
it requires from federal, provincial, and municipal governments 
to ensure a coordinated efficient and effective eradication of an 
outbreak in Saskatchewan. 
 
The effective eradication of foreign animal disease will require 

co-operation of resources from all levels of government. 
Emergency Preparedness Canada and Emergency Planning 
Saskatchewan provide an organizational structure and 
arrangements for assistance and procedures to follow 
emergency operations. Emergency Planning Saskatchewan 
provides a prompt and coordinated response by the Government 
of Saskatchewan to emergency and disasters. 
 
A meeting is currently being scheduled with producer 
organizations to talk about foot and mouth disease, and foreign 
animal disease preparedness. Saskatchewan Agriculture and 
Food and CFIA will present this information to Saskatchewan 
producer organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial veterinarian with Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food’s food safety and animal health unit is 
recommending that proper precautions must be taken for 
Saskatchewan residents returning from countries which are 
experiencing an outbreak, Saskatchewan producers or having 
foreign guests visiting their farms. 
 
These precautions include: declaring all meat, dairy, and other 
animal products that you are bringing back to Canada. If you 
visit a farm while abroad, make sure that your clothing and 
footwear you wore during your visit is free from soil and 
manure, and clean and disinfect your footwear. Dry cleaning of 
the clothes is also recommended. 
 
If you don’t live on the farm, you should not visit a 
Saskatchewan farm for 14 days after returning to Canada. 
Livestock owners and producers are advised to exercise caution 
before admitting visitors onto their farms. 
 
If visitors must come to the farm in Saskatchewan they should 
take additional sanitary precautions, such as washing and 
disinfecting all personal effects and equipment that have 
accompanied them. It is particularly important to clean and 
disinfect your footwear. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial veterinarian has advised the 
prevention of this disease reaching Canada and Saskatchewan is 
very much the responsibility of each individual who travels to 
Britain, Europe, and returns to Canada. I am told that some 
travellers on return to Canada from Britain and Europe are 
burning their shoes and refraining from visiting farms for a 
minimum of 14 days. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial veterinarian also says that it is the 
responsibility of Saskatchewan producers to be proactive in 
preventing this disease. Foot and mouth disease is epidemic in 
many countries of the world, including: India, China, parts of 
South America, Africa, and Asia. Therefore, it is important that 
farmers take the necessary precautions when having foreign 
guests visit their farms. We have successfully kept 
foot-and-mouth disease out of Canada for now almost 50 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association and the 
Saskatchewan Stockgrowers Association are reminding cattle 
producers that the risk of introducing foot-and-mouth disease 
into Canada is minimal as long as proper precautions are taken. 
 
Mr. Carl Block, Chair of the Canadian Cattlemen’s Association, 
animal health committee, has said that the most important 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 331 

 

precaution is for all of us to take the first . . . is to take the threat 
of this disease seriously and that visitors who represent Canada 
should not attempt to smuggle meat or other agricultural 
products into Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some Saskatchewan high school students in rural 
communities have already cancelled their Easter vacation trips 
to Britain and to Europe. We know these students must feel 
extremely disappointed. We know they planned their trips and 
saved their money and they worked hard over the last two or 
three years to advance their tours. To these young people let me 
say I admire your dedication to your communities and to your 
families. I admire your sense of responsibility to the larger 
community, the province, and to our country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is an old proverb that says; an ounce of 
prevention is worth a pound of cure. I feel that that old adage is 
most important at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge all residents of Saskatchewan to be vigilant 
in preventing the spread of foot-and-mouth disease. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — With leave, to respond to the minister’s 
statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we would 
like to join with the Minister of Agriculture on this very 
important issue, the issue of foot-and-mouth disease. This is a 
great concern to all livestock owners and should be of great 
concern to all people of Saskatchewan. And we are hearing 
from many of those folks in our constituencies who are 
livestock producers, with regard to the devastating effects a 
disease like that would have to the Canadian livestock and 
specifically the Saskatchewan livestock industry. 
 
All of us have watched in horror I believe at the problems that 
are experiencing . . . they are experiencing in other countries 
around the world. I understand there are some 40 countries now 
that have been affected by this outbreak. Local people are 
paying attention to the concerns and we certainly appreciate 
that. And many precautions are being taken to avoid the 
outbreak here. This awareness is a good step. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have spoken recently to the Canadian 
Cattlemen’s Association, their district office in Calgary, and 
they believe that a national public awareness campaign would 
certainly be a good first step in addressing some of the concerns 
that they have. 
 
The next step is certainly to maintain the confidence that we 
have in the food, agriculture, environmental safety measures 
that Canada and our province have already in place. We have an 
internationally strong reputation for disease control in North 
America and we want to do everything we can to certainly 
maintain that. 
 

There are literally billions and billions of dollars of commerce 
and trade at risk here and I don’t think anyone can 
underestimate the concern in that regard. Canada does have 
some of the most stringent food safety livestock regulation 
environmental protection systems in the entire world, and we 
certainly can be thankful for that. 
 
The awareness of this disease can help us, but more stringent 
methods may be necessary to ensure that we do not see this 
move into our country. There is government responsibility and 
there is certainly personal responsibility. 
 
We support the livestock industry, and everyone certainly is 
aware of their concerns in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, school groups, as the minister has said, have 
decided to withdraw from the opportunity to travel abroad in 
some cases. We believe that this is a precaution, and a very 
responsible precaution. 
 
We also believe that any international traveller that may be 
contemplating trips in the next little while would want to take 
every precaution they possibly could to ensure that we don’t see 
that here, in our country. There will be many individuals who 
will travel to Europe and not undergo the scrutiny that these 
school groups may be involved with right now. 
 
We would certainly encourage the federal/provincial 
governments to make sure they communicate with the producer 
groups and the public at large to ensure the awareness of this 
highly infectious disease. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Prime Minister of Great Britain has said 
recently, and it should be of note to us here, in Canada: 
 

The foot-and-mouth outbreak only affects a small minority 
of the country directly. However, where it has struck, it has 
struck with a profound and disturbing impact on the 
communities concerned. 
 
Britain is open to business. I would ask that the media, in 
reporting this important issue, not simply focus on those 
areas where the disease is rife but also to reflect accurately 
the fact that the vast majority of the country has no 
foot-and-mouth disease and that even in the worst affected 
areas, most tourist activity is ongoing. 

 
So we certainly are of the belief and we would hope that all 
governments throughout the world are taking the necessary 
precautions. 
 
The issue is most certainly of consumer confidence that we 
have to keep in mind in this area as well. 
 
So our thoughts are joining with the minister this afternoon. Our 
thoughts are — and best wishes — are with the livestock 
producers of this province, and that all international travellers 
use the most available methods and precautions that they 
possibly can to ensure that we do not see something of this type 
in Canada 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



332 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a privilege to rise today and support our eighth balanced 
budget. It’s a privilege to rise and support the budget that is the 
first budget of our new Premier. And, Mr. Speaker, to rise today 
to speak against the amendment of the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I heard last evening from a member opposite that 
there is no vision, and we have no vision. I’m just wondering 
where they’ve been when they’ve heard all of the visionary 
statements put forward, first in the Throne Speech, and then in 
the budget. But just to refresh the memory of the members 
opposite, here’s what our budget and our vision is about. 
 
Our budget is about a vision of our province where all 
Saskatchewan people enjoy a high quality of life. Where we 
seize the future with confidence and a spirit of innovation, 
keeping Saskatchewan the great place it is to live, work, raise a 
family, and prosper. 
 
That’s our vision, Mr. Speaker, and the document clearly 
speaks to the ways that we’ll go about doing that, first in a 
Throne Speech that outlines the vision statements and the 
values we will use to attain those, and then with the budget that 
now puts the meat to the bones, Mr. Speaker, so to speak. 
 
The statement used most often is we’re connecting to the future, 
putting our values to work to build our economy and our 
province and achieve our vision. 
 
Just a few of the values that I wanted to state again, that clearly 
we have articulated on this side of the House first and foremost, 
would be the value of pride and a positive attitude in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
That has been achieved, Mr. Speaker, by continuing to utilize 
the values that are threaded throughout all of the work that we 
do on this side of the House. We do it in co-operation and in 
partnership. 
 
So none of the work that you would see before you, Mr. 
Speaker, has come here by accident; it’s come here after 
consultation or discussion with partners in community. And 
certainly many of the measures contemplate the values of 
co-operation that have put our province in leadership 
throughout this country. 
 
Another value, Mr. Speaker, that you will see that we use on 
this side of the House through everything we do, would be the 
value of compassion. Mr. Speaker, it’s not a caring that comes 

with the two-tiered system of anything that’s been proposed 
time and time again by the members opposite. It’s not a we care 
if you can afford to pay your way, and we don’t care if you’re 
poor and you’re outside the system, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
two-tiered compassion. 
 
Everything we do on this side of the House is based on looking 
at those who are greatest in need in our communities, and trying 
to give them the same opportunities as everyone to bring 
themselves into programs and services that will lead them to be 
active members of the economy — not one for the rich and not 
one for the poor — a raising of everyone to the level where 
they’re active participants in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That leads us to the value of community. In everything we do, 
Mr. Speaker, from now the new office of Rural Revitalization 
to the initiatives in the budget that we’ll be looking at 
throughout this province, helping to uplift community. 
 
We’ve heard far too often the value expressed opposite is the 
value of division. Let’s pit rural against urban. Let’s pit one 
force in our community against the other and keep them 
fighting, and that way we’ll be able to continue to tear down 
Saskatchewan and talk negatively, as these members do day 
after day after day in this House. 
 
Laced through all of this, Mr. Speaker, is the value of fiscal 
prudence and responsibility. Now I thought about that and I 
said, well why would we want to say time and time again to 
people — and sometimes they’re really tired of hearing of it, 
particularly in the members opposite, although they don’t take a 
page out of that book — but why would we want to do that? 
Mr. Speaker, it’s to protect the future of our children and our 
grandchildren. We don’t practise fiscal responsibility today 
without the view of tomorrow. 
 
So when you hear the members opposite stand up and say, as 
they have in the past in a right-wing philosophy kind of way 
and their value way — we don’t care about debt, we don’t care 
if we owe money to the banks; we’ll hang the children of our 
future with mortgages to pay far into the future; we want it now. 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not our philosophy. Our philosophy is a 
far-reaching, far-seeing view of our province well into the 
future and providing the stability for our children and their 
children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — When I looked at the budget then, Mr. 
Speaker, in the eyes of someone who would want to stand and 
tell their constituents that their issues matter, I talked about — 
in the return speech, the Throne Speech — the number one 
issue that people talk about in my constituency would be taxes. 
And you know, I saw this raised in many constituencies in the 
recent days past. 
 
First in Elphinstone, where people talked about, in Elphinstone, 
a certain member that was running for the party opposite was 
saying that Saskatchewan people have seen nothing new in the 
way of tax reductions from this government. Mr. Speaker, the 
people there didn’t believe him because they’ve also heard year 
after year of the measures we’ve had in our budgets to reduce 
taxes and to target tax measures to spur the economy in certain 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 333 

 

areas. 
 
And I guess just to remind people here today and the people in 
my constituency, I wanted to run through a quick overview of 
May 1992 budget. Child tax reduction for low-income families 
increased 25 per cent to $250 per child. The small-business 
corporation income tax rate was reduced from 10 per cent to 9 
per cent. There was a phase-out announced of the E&H 
(education and health) tax on direct agents in manufacturing 
and processing to spur the economy on in that area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
In March of ’93 there was a further reduction of the business 
corporation income tax rate from 9 per cent to 8.5 per cent. 
There was a removing of the E&H tax from 1-800 telephone 
services. There was a manufacturing and processing tax credit 
equal to 8 per cent of the value of eligible equipment acquired 
by Saskatchewan small business, again to help our 
manufacturing and processing industry. 
 
There was a further reduction in the E&H tax on direct agents 
used in manufacturing and processing from 5 per cent to 3 per 
cent. Takes us to 1994, when a direct agents E&H tax was 
totally eliminated, and we continued the reduction of the 
small-business corporate income tax rate to 8 per cent. 
 
Now why were we continuing to work on the small-business 
corporate income tax rate, Mr. Speaker? Because anyone in my 
community would tell the members opposite that’s a major 
engine to economic growth and development in this province. 
And so it’s been a consistent value and a consistent vision that 
we would help that engine of our economy. 
 
1995: finally balancing the budget for the first time. You can 
appreciate the stress and the strain that these members went 
through as members of government, being saddled with $1 
billion over-expenditure each and every year before we got 
here. 
 
Now it takes a lot of work and a lot of talking with our 
communities, as I mentioned, in the values of partnership and 
co-operation to get to a balanced budget. And, Mr. Speaker, we 
thanked our communities for helping us to achieve that because 
that was our key to economic freedom for the future of this 
province. 
 
Then there was a reduction of the fuel tax on aviation turbo fuel 
from 7 cents to 3.5 cents. That was on a trial basis for one year. 
And then for commercial and business purposes, 3.5 cents per 
litre. 
 
There was a non-refundable 9 per cent investment tax credit to 
apply to capital purchase in support of manufacturing and 
processing activity in Saskatchewan. And it could be applied 
against a corporate income tax. There was a reduction in the 
corporate income tax rate for manufacturing and processing 
firms from 17 per cent to as low as 10 per cent. 
 
There was the elimination of the deficit surtax for lower income 
earners, and the reduction of the surtax for others up to $150 per 
taxpayer. 
 
In 1996, again continuation of some of those measures. And we 

announced the review of Saskatchewan’s tax system for 
fairness and effectiveness with findings that would be 
announced for 1997. 
 
1997: the reduction of the provincial sales tax from 9 per cent to 
7 per cent. The extension of the PST (provincial sales tax) 
exemptions to include certain medical devices that were 
purchased by individuals, in addition to children’s clothes and 
books. That was a gesture I really heard from people they 
appreciated, Mr. Speaker, particularly those in lower incomes 
who were raising their families, and had purchases for school 
and other things, Mr. Speaker. And continuing. Personal 
income tax cut of up to $300 per family. 
 
Now this theme is developing here. The members opposite say 
there’s been no tax initiatives by this government; we haven’t 
done anything to help people in the area of taxation, says the 
members opposite. 
 
1998: Mr. Speaker, we balanced the budget in ’94 and ’95 and 
reduced taxes in every budget since, including 55 million per 
year income tax reduction introduced in ’95. 
 
We also fully implemented in 1996 the rate in taking 6,000 
lower-income people off the tax rolls and benefiting all 
Saskatchewan taxpayers. We reduced the income tax rate from 
50 per cent to 48 per cent of basic federal tax. 
 
(14:45) 
 
In 1999 we cut taxes for families, and every year since 1995 in 
a sustainable, affordable, responsible fashion. And in 1999 it 
was announced, another sustainable . . . Now this is a very 
important word when we talk about tax cuts, Mr. Speaker — 
sustainable — so that we could do them and they would 
continue in this province. Not just say, well we’ve given you 
something today, but we’ll take it away tomorrow because, 
oops, we’ve done our voodoo mathematics and it doesn’t make 
sense and we have to put it back. 
 
There was a further benefit. As of midnight that night, they cut 
education and health tax from 7 per cent to 6 per cent. That was 
the lowest rate in 12 years, Mr. Speaker. That’s 3 percentage 
points off the sales tax in three years. And that was $300 
million back in the hands of families, businesses, 
municipalities, educational institutions, school boards, and 
health boards, right across this province. 
 
Now it was clear. The pattern is there, and it’s very misleading 
and unfortunate that members opposite can’t talk about the 
measures that have been taken in this province to have tax 
fairness, tax competitiveness, tax simplicity, and progressivity, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I wanted to compare that, compare what we’ve been doing 
in the area of taxes because most recently what we’ve said to 
the provincial taxpayers is that we would de-link from the 
federal system. We didn’t hear that from the members opposite. 
We didn’t say that they would want to de-link from the federal 
system. We didn’t hear them say, let’s adjust our own system to 
the circumstances of Saskatchewan. But we did that, Mr. 
Speaker, we de-linked from the federal system to address our 
own issues and our own initiatives. 



334 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

We did that, not by consulting with people in Calgary, Mr. 
Speaker. We did that by consulting with communities and 
families and seniors and low-income people right across this 
province. The result — we have a system that is competitive, 
it’s fair, it’s progressive, and it’s simple, Mr. Speaker. 
Consistently we supported strategic, economic sectors 
throughout our budget proposals and this budget is no different. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other thing about this budget that I really 
appreciate in the area of taxation is that we have now been able 
to incorporate professionals. In this budget, we will be 
recognizing the importance of attracting and retaining key 
personnel in our business and professional communities. I’m 
standing, Mr. Speaker, and supporting this budget because we 
will now permit all regulated professionals to incorporate their 
practices. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, another thing to note in 
this budget and talking about our tax system is that our tax 
reform measures will also include indexing to avoid bracket 
creep. And that’s also a very important part of allowing for our 
measures to stay in place and to continue to be fair and 
progressive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve talked about, in the past, removing 6,000 
people who had crept into the system who could least afford to 
pay taxes in this province. In this budget and the measures that 
have been announced in our income tax system, we will remove 
55,000 individuals from the tax rolls, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want people in this province to know what I’ve heard from the 
members opposite for tax measures. I’ve heard what others 
have said just in this House. The snake oil salesperson comes 
along and says, have we got a deal for you. The members 
opposite say, have we got a deal for you. We’re going to cut 
taxes. We’re going to increase services on the face of the earth 
— by the way, without any more employees — but we’re going 
to increase all of those services. Don’t know how they’ll get 
done, but we’ll increase those services. And you know what? 
All the while, the balanced budget will remain in place. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members in Elphinstone didn’t believe 
that story. The members in Riversdale didn’t believe the 
bulletin boards, Mr. Speaker. And in reality, when I was out on 
the streets in Riversdale and talking to people in Fairhaven, 
when the candidate of the party opposite came to their door and 
said the NDP has done nothing to reduce taxes in this province, 
you know, Mr. Speaker, they didn’t believe them. And they also 
didn’t believe them when they said they could do even more, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And why? Because they promised a 20 per cent reduction in 
personal income tax and they said they would remove the gas 
tax, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to tell the members opposite that 
in Saskatchewan we remember what major tax cuts like that 
would do to programs and services in this province. 
 
And even their own economist, Mr. Speaker, said you’d have to 
be very careful in what you’re doing, because you would 
understand that if you reduce taxes in a flat measure like that, 
without any credits in place, without any of the kinds of things 

that we’ve put into place, Mr. Speaker, even their own 
economist told them that their announcements or 
pronouncements that they could create jobs out of that tax cut 
and it would somehow cover the losses that they incur doing 
this, Mr. Speaker, would not come about. 
 
In fact, the kinds of jobs they would have to create, Mr. 
Speaker, we know from economists across this country, cannot 
be done in this economic times. What does that mean? That 
means then, unemployment, Mr. Speaker — more people 
unemployed in this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not what we believe in on this side of 
the House. We believe in jobs and in growing the economy and 
a sustained tax reduction that makes sense for the people of the 
province. 
 
Vision, Mr. Speaker? Well their snake oil tax reduction is not a 
vision. Tell me what your real goal is? Unemployment? Of 
course it is. Mr. Speaker, their tax reduction did not talk about 
some of the things that have been implemented here. 
 
They did not talk about a universal child tax credit. During this 
fiscal year, we will put in place an increase to the child tax 
credit from $1,500 per child to $2,000 per child. 
 
We have tax credits, Mr. Speaker, that will help with the 
education portion of taxation. We have tax credits in place for 
seniors. We have tax credits in place for caregivers. We have 
tax credits in place for medical supplies that are needed to be 
purchased. Nothing about any of that from the members 
opposite. 
 
So if they’re talking about their vision for taxation is a vision 
that people should buy into this province, Mr. Speaker, the 
people in my constituency are not buying. They’re supporting 
this budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Who else is supporting this budget because of its tax measures, 
Mr. Speaker? Well let’s look at the business section of The 
StarPhoenix today. What is the business section saying, Mr. 
Speaker: “High marks for the Saskatchewan budget.” That’s not 
even from the people who would just support me or a small 
group of people in my constituency — although they’ve already 
told me that, Mr. Speaker — this is from the Scotiabank 
economic section, and from the TD (Toronto Dominion) Bank 
and here’s what it says, Mr. Speaker. And I quote: 
 

The provincial government delivered a “prudent” budget 
last Friday that offered some tax cuts along with a balanced 
budget, says Scotiabank’s economics arm. 
 
Scotia Economics senior economist Mary Webb said the 
province’s $64-million surplus, generated from oil and gas 
revenues, didn’t offer a stable platform for major tax 
reductions. 

 
This is not me speaking, Mr. Speaker. This is a senior 
economics person from the Bank of Nova Scotia. And what’s 
she saying? In essence, she’s saying their tax measures were not 
work. They’re not stable. They would produce an instable 
economy in this province by spending every single penny we 
have on tax reduction and more. That is not sustainable. 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 335 

 

You know though, Mr. Speaker, this is really interesting 
because the Alberta wannabes are talking about spending every 
single dollar and blasting the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
And what do I read today, Mr. Speaker? Well Mary Webb also 
noted that in Alberta, what she says is, seeming to be always 
touted as the moving target for Saskatchewan’s economic 
policy — I wonder where she might get that idea from — she 
says, that Alberta government has always had a rainy day fund. 
Even the Alberta government, Mr. Speaker, has always had a 
rainy day fund, it only makes sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk to people in this province, if they have 
the capacity to put some money aside in a savings fund, they do 
that. They’re prudent people, Mr. Speaker, and they can’t 
understand why people opposite would say spend everything 
and who cares about what happens tomorrow. 
 
We put some money aside in savings accounts to help us adjust 
when times are more difficult in our families’ lives. And we 
even put savings account monies aside, Mr. Speaker, heaven 
forbid, for our children so that they might have a better quality 
of life than even that we’ve enjoyed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We don’t hang them with mortgages and bills because we want 
everything now; in essence, that we greedily will gobble up 
every dollar that we can today and even more and then borrow 
so they don’t get a chance to provide programs that make sense 
for them. They’re paying the bills that the members opposite 
would create. 
 
Well Mary Webb from one bank is not alone. Derek Burleton, a 
senior economics person with the TD Bank who handles 
provincial analysis used the same word — prudent — to 
describe this budget. 
 

Definitely a good grade on this one, said Burleton in an 
interview. 

 
Mr. Speaker, a good grade on this budget and we’re standing up 
and supporting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the members opposite are going to stand up and say, 
unstable tax cuts — you didn’t provide those. They’re going to 
stand up and say that they’re going to vote against tax credits; 
they’re going to vote against universal tax credits for children, 
tax credits for seniors. They’re going to vote against — Mr. 
Speaker, get this — they’re going to vote against a budget that 
spends all of the tax cut . . . gas tax money on the roads in this 
province. They will stand up and vote against that. 
 
This budget provides money that we take in from the gas tax 
100 per cent to the highways in this province and more, Mr. 
Speaker. And they’re going to stand up and vote against that. 
 
Well maybe that’s why lately we haven’t heard the snake oil 
salesman often talk about their vision. What we’ve heard 
mostly is crocodile tears. Every day in this House, boo hoo and 
what’s awful about Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s all we 
hear from the members opposite. 
 
Well that’s the area of taxation, Mr. Speaker, and that’s a very, 
very important area for my constituents. 

But there are other areas that are equally important. The area 
next that I would like to talk about and cover is the area and the 
vision that we have for education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has been said opposite about education, and 
the critic stands up and talks and talks about what are you going 
to do here and what are you going to do there. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, our vision for education is very clear and we speak out 
very clearly in the budget document. 
 
Education doesn’t start at school, Mr. Speaker. Really the future 
of our children starts with a pregnant mom. And this budget, 
Mr. Speaker, includes early childhood initiatives that start 
pre-birth in working with young moms, with moms in the 
society that are more at risk because of the lack of opportunities 
or chances they’ve had. 
 
And then it goes on to birth, when we will have an intensive 
screening program to identify those families and infants that are 
at risk. From there, it goes to the child action plan and early 
childhood initiatives, Mr. Speaker . . . Deputy Speaker. 
 
And then education in a formal sense begins in the school years. 
We’ve just had a task force report, and interesting, the member 
opposite, the critic for Education, says and you should follow 
that bold report. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s what this budget is 
beginning to do. And she’s going to stand in not too many days 
from now and vote against it — isn’t that visionary, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(15:00) 
 
She’s going to stand and vote against expansion of community 
schools in this province and expanding the community school 
idea into the high schools. Well that’s what SchoolPLUS 
contemplates, Mr. Speaker, and we’re going there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SchoolPLUS talks about integrated services in our 
province and that’s where this budget goes, Mr. Speaker. It 
talks about more integration of services for health and social 
services and justice. It’s an integrated strategy, Mr. Speaker, 
and who’s going to stand up and vote against it? The opposite 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, including the critic for 
Education. 
 
Well education doesn’t just stop at K to 12. In this province we 
know that post-secondary education is very important to this 
province, Mr. Speaker. And this budget has record funding for 
education and skills training including — get this, not 
everything is gloom and doom, Mr. Speaker — we have a 
ministry for youth who will pay attention to the needs of the 
young people in this province and not drive them out by the 
gloom and doom and the crocodile tears of the members 
opposite. 
 
Why would you stay when you hear your moms and dads over 
there telling you how terrible this province is? They should be 
ashamed. They’re the leaders in their communities talking about 
their province like that and driving young people out of this 
province. I would be ashamed to talk like that to my children, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Post-secondary education will increase in this budget, Mr. 



336 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

Speaker — 232.5 million for the university sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must have hit a sore spot over there. Imagine the 
crocodile tears that they must be sharing in their communities 
about the opportunities for young people to have them barking 
out like that across at me, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an increase of $9.2 million including 1.25 million 
for expansion in the area of computer sciences. We’re 
connecting our students to the future, Mr. Speaker — 78 million 
to support Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology which is an increase of over $2 million; $13.6 
million for regional colleges in the areas that those members 
represent. Those colleges deliver valuable programs and 
services to rural and northern Saskatchewan, and that’s an 
increase of almost $2 million. And $7 million for Aboriginal 
institutions to prepare students for the workforce because we 
know the future for our students is that they walk hand in hand 
with their Aboriginal brothers and sisters to become active parts 
of the society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well why are they barking out at me like that, Mr. Speaker, and 
yelling opposite? It’s because their platform and their vision for 
education — well get this, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the cold 
winds blowing out there, Mr. Speaker — because their idea of 
education and vision for education: frozen, Mr. Speaker, frozen; 
frozen so they can support their tax reductions. They need to let 
people know in this province that they’re freezing education for 
five years to support their tax measures because I don’t hear 
them saying that outside these doors, Mr. Speaker. And I 
wouldn’t either. Frozen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care is very important to the people in my 
constituency. And they know that the best way to provide health 
care in any country anywhere in the world, Mr. Speaker — 
proven time and time again — is publicly funded, publicly 
administered health care because it’s accessible to all and it 
provides a high quality of care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In the spirit of community and co-operation and in partnership, 
we’ve gone out through the province through Mr. Fyke to talk 
about health care, and to talk with everyone from those 
providers to the users in the system. You know what? I would 
believe that probably Mr. Fyke even talked to people like 
administrators and janitors, Mr. Speaker, because we care about 
everyone in the health care teams in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And we know that this budget focuses on health districts and 
front-line staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More than $2.2 billion will be invested this year to provide 
health services to the average 35,000 Saskatchewan residents 
who use their services. Mr. Speaker, that’s an increase of $230 
million or about 11.6 per cent from last year’s budget. Health 
funding has now grown approximately 42 per cent since 1995, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s not . . . Although we really like to support the areas 
that provide specialist care and tertiary care, our major centres 
of Regina and Saskatoon, but the Northwest Health District 
now are buying new equipment. The East Central Health 
District has announced they’re buying new equipment. The 
Swift Current Health District is announcing they’re buying new 
equipment. The South Country Health District is announcing 

they’re buying new equipment because of this budget, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what do the members opposite . . . what are the members 
opposite saying about health care? Our vision is publicly 
administered, publicly funded health care. 
 
Their clear vision, stated in this House time and time again by 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy is, well why shouldn’t 
people pay for it if they can afford it? Let them pay for their 
programs and services. We’d like to see a privatized system of 
health care because it would be better than what we have today, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, I believe they should be going out and clearly telling 
people of Saskatchewan what they’re about in the area of health 
care. 
 
This budget clearly shows the difference on this side of the 
House for medicare, and on that side of the House for 
privatization and an American-style health care system. In fact 
they’re so enamoured with American-style health care they say, 
you know what we’ll do? Here’s our vision. Let’s freeze the 
health budget to inflation . . . to the rate of inflation. Let’s 
freeze it. 
 
Another cold wind blowing through Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Freeze it, and let’s get a Texas-style audit in here and 
we’ll find out what we really need to do with our health care 
system. Texas-style, Mr. Speaker, Alberta wannabes now going 
down to Texas to have a Texas-style audit. Well they should let 
the people of this province know what their vision is for health 
care. 
 
Our vision’s clear, Mr. Speaker. It’s in this budget. And they’ll 
be clearly articulating through the people of Saskatchewan and 
the Fyke report what we’ll be doing in health care. They have a 
responsibility, Mr. Speaker. These Alberta wannabes have a 
responsibility to tell people they believe in Ralph Klein’s 
privatization. Tell the people of this province. Be upfront with 
them, please, and be fair. 
 
Now there is just so much good news in this budget, Mr. 
Speaker, I would take days and I will take days — I’m having 
public accountability sessions throughout my constituency — 
I’m going to take days to tell the people in my constituency the 
good news in this budget. It started, Mr. Speaker, in White City, 
and people came out to talk about the budget and I was really 
pleased to be able to share with them. 
 
In closing, I want to share one more thing that makes me feel I 
should be standing here and supporting this budget and 
speaking against the amendment of the members opposite, and 
that’s their vision of government, Mr. Speaker. Their vision of 
government. 
 
Somehow in their minds they remove government from people. 
And they say it’s people and it’s government. You know what, 
Mr. Speaker? Government is of the people and for the people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government is no more or less than organizing 
ourselves, with help from the taxpayers, to provide the 
programs and services they say they want and they need, be it 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 337 

 

highways — and I don’t even have enough time to talk about all 
those positive things — be it education, be it health, be it 
environment, Mr. Speaker, and protecting the environment — 
more positive news in the budget on the environment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s about organizing ourselves to react to the Child Advocate’s 
plan. Mr. Speaker, they stand and they say we should be doing 
more about what the Child Advocate said and needs to happen 
in this province. So what do we do, Mr. Speaker? We introduce 
those measures in this budget. And you know what? We put 
people in there to deliver those programs. And what do the 
members opposite say? They’re going to vote against this 
budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Have they told me how they’re going to address social 
development in early childhood stages? Have they told me how 
they’re going to address the child action plan? Have they told 
me how they’re going to support the children’s ombudsperson? 
No, Mr. Speaker, no. They’re going to freeze funding there too; 
maybe even cut. 
 
Because clearly in the ’80s we know where the cuts happened, 
and they happened deeply, Mr. Speaker. It was providing these 
kinds of programs and services to people, Mr. Speaker. And 
that’s what I would be afraid of if they say they’re going to 
stand and vote against this budget and then talk about our civil 
service in the way that they have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you our vision of government. It’s to put 
our money where our mouth is, to use that money to put people 
out there to provide the highway systems that people have 
asked us to do, to provide the education and the training that the 
youth have demanded of us in this province. It’s to be able to 
have the people out there to deliver those programs and 
services, Mr. Speaker. And in all the while, to try as much as 
we can to make sure that that’s a professional civil service and, 
Mr. Speaker, that civil service has the training and development 
opportunities. 
 
Now last year, as the minister of the Public Service 
Commission, I talked about management development and 
training and I think that received very . . . a high level of 
attention from the members opposite. I’m not sure why, but 
they just couldn’t understand why we’d want to do that and then 
thought we shouldn’t have those kinds of dollars in the Public 
Service Commission, Mr. Speaker. But we do. We believe in a 
professional civil service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they should be telling the people of Saskatchewan 
what they believe in government. They don’t believe in 
government, Mr. Speaker. You see it in many of the statements 
that they make. 
 
The one that saddens me the most, and the snake oil kind of 
thing that the leader opposite is trying to sell, came out clearly 
in the last election campaign. And I think, Mr. Speaker, they 
need to tell the civil servants that live in my constituency, the 
Crown employees that live in my constituency, the educators 
that live in my constituency, the health care workers that live in 
my constituency, what they believe. 
 
They stated they don’t care about administrators and janitors, 

Mr. Speaker. And the leader of the party opposite has also 
stated in interviews that listen up, we know where the 
deadwood and the skunks are. Elect me — together we’ll find 
the deadwood and the skunks. We’ll do that because we know 
what they did to Mr. Devine. Shame, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s not what I believe of our civil service. And it saddens me 
to hear people in leadership positions spouting off that kind of a 
vision and a philosophy in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Kelvington-Wadena stood up 
last evening and supported the Women’s Secretariat, and I’ll 
share those comments with the Women’s Secretariat. And I’m 
very thankful for them, Mr. Speaker, because there’s not much 
else that comes from the benches opposite that supports the 
status of women in our community or supports diversity in our 
community, Mr. Speaker. So I will pass on those thanks. 
 
Her next comment was, you know, they’re a small group. So 
she’s saying they’re a small group. Hopefully she would 
support that at some point we’ll make them a stronger and 
larger group, Mr. Speaker. But you know what? Guess what? If 
we did, they’re bureaucrats. They’re the numbers in the budget 
that they’re putting their finger on and saying get rid of them, 
Mr. Speaker. They want to get rid of government employees 
and bureaucrats. Well, excuse me, that’s what the fine, 
professional, strong, dedicated women in Women’s Secretariat 
are, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You would want more. I ask the members opposite, you’ve got 
some members who want more. Do they get a free vote on this 
budget? I’d want to know. Or are they all going to stand in 
unison and vote against their own amendment? No, they won’t, 
Mr. Speaker. And what do they talk about? More. We want 
more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s why I’m standing here and I’m supporting our 
budget, and I’m rejecting the amendment from the members 
opposite. 
 
(15:15) 
 
You know that this kind of talk about the civil service and about 
what they would do with government services reminds me of 
something that was horrific in the late ’80s, early ’90s, Mr. 
Speaker — privatization of government services, not in a 
reasoned or let’s-see-if-it-makes-sense kind of way but they had 
an office of privatization, Mr. Speaker. And it was privatization 
for privatization’s sake, and cut off arms of government, and 
cut off legs of government, put it out to the private sector. Their 
friends, Mr. Speaker, who then charged more money for those 
programs and services in the private sector. Our citizens need to 
know that’s their agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it also reminds me of Fair Share 
Saskatchewan. Fair Share Saskatchewan. You know people, 
when I heard about Fair Share Saskatchewan, I was on Regina 
City Council; I couldn’t believe my ears. 
 
Let’s take an example, Mr. Speaker, the senior’s secretariat. 
Now, Fair Share, you would think if you’re going to take an 
arm of government and send it out to rural Saskatchewan, you 
would do this, Mr. Speaker. You’d look at the demographics of 



338 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

our province, and you’d find out where the most seniors would 
be located. So you could come and bring the services closer to 
those seniors. Which, at the time, Mr. Speaker, when I looked at 
the demographics, happened to be around the south part of the 
province. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, what was their Fair Share Saskatchewan 
about? Send the senior’s secretariat to St. Walburg, Mr. 
Speaker. Well why St. Walburg when all of the seniors, the 
densest population of seniors was in the South, I couldn’t 
understand. And I couldn’t understand, Mr. Speaker, what they 
would do with people’s lives, they would do it like this. 
 
The office of privatization was responsible for this initiative. So 
each week they would look around and say, h’m, where could 
we get votes in this province, and let’s send a government 
department there. It doesn’t matter if we’ve got to hook them up 
with telephones up there and try and hook them up with the 
Internet, or try and hook them up to other parts of government, 
or co-ordinate or whatever. 
 
Here’s another good one. Let’s take the Liquor and Gaming 
Authority, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority that works with distillers and brewers from 
across this country, who have to come in and show us their 
product lines and talk to us about how we provide responsible 
programs and services, and where would they send the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority. Anyone here remember? Where was the 
Liquor and Gaming Authority to go? Actually they had a few 
employees up there already. Hudson Bay, Mr. Speaker. Well 
that’s about as much sense as loading us all up to hit the streets 
of Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
After the last production when we took them with us, Mr. 
Speaker, and we were to be singing from the same song sheet as 
the farmers, the producers, everyone, the groups all got 
together, and we were going to be a unified voice. Isn’t that 
right? So we go down east. We’re going to be a unified voice. 
Down to Ottawa, stay united, stay strong. That’s what the 
farmers told us. 
 
Got back in here. What was the first thing that happened when 
we came home? The member from Kindersley stood up and 
said, we need AIDA now. 
 
We didn’t need AIDA, Mr. Speaker. The farmers told us that 
it’s a program that’s got high administration to it and will not 
benefit the people in Saskatchewan. 
 
But the minute we’re back home, they break ranks. So what’s 
the use of sending us all down there and saying one thing and 
they come back here and say the totally opposite thing? What’s 
the use of supporting a motion, I ask the members opposite, 
who don’t provide the people to deliver on the budget measures 
that people want in this province, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I just want to close this notion of fair share and what it did to 
people’s lives, Mr. Speaker, because not everyone in the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority worked for Liquor and Gaming. Spouses 
worked elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. Spouses were nurses in the 
health care system, or teachers, Mr. Speaker. And when you 
sent their spouse off to Hudson Bay, how could they follow 
without major disruption to their family? 

Well in the offices, I’m told, Mr. Speaker . . . And this is how 
you treat people that work for you. This is a progressive 
workplace that they would be implementing, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the office of privatization, each week, would have a Friday 
announcement. So it was kind of like all week waiting to hear 
what would happen to your life on Friday. Doomsday, it was 
called, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s how they would treat the 
public service in this province and how they would treat the 
public service by their motion. 
 
Well they’ve got a reason they want to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
They say that they’re supporting municipalities, that somehow 
this is going to be a new and unique way to support 
municipalities in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well I’m a member of a constituency that has municipalities as 
a part of it and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I heard from those 
municipalities. They talked to us and they said, you know, if 
you don’t do anything else in this budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
please try and do something about 60/40. I know it’s a lot of 
money they said, but take steps to try and change the formula 
for funding of education so there’s more money in education. 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) together 
came to our minister and made that proposal, came to cabinet 
and talked about that, and said repeatedly, if you do nothing 
else, put more money into education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I just want to for a minute say this because I 
can’t say it enough. I think people need to hear this. Mr. 
Speaker, education, our province’s education system had to 
struggle to regain financial freedom as everyone else did, and 
we met with good co-operation, but now we’re able to focus on 
Saskatchewan’s children and their future. 
 
Think of it, Mr. Speaker. It was not long ago that we spent more 
on interest payments, more on interest payments, wrapped up 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the 
other members of this Assembly, a guest that we have in your 
gallery. We have Mr. Gordon Barnhart, Secretary of the 
University of Saskatchewan. Mr. Barnhart is certainly no 
stranger to the Assembly, as he was Clerk of the Assembly 
during the ’80s. I would like all members to welcome Mr. 
Barnhart this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — With leave, to introduce guests as well. 
 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 339 

 

Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I would like to join with the member opposite in 
welcoming a wonderful person to this Legislative Assembly. He 
not only . . . Mr. Gordon Barnhart was not only formerly Clerk 
of this Assembly, he is now currently a wonderful constituent in 
a wonderful riding in Saskatoon Southeast. Welcome to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

MOTION FOR COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
(BUDGET DEBATE) 

 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that the Assembly resolve itself 
into the Committee of Finance, and the proposed amendment 
thereto moved by Mr. Krawetz. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I hope it’s appropriate to 
quickly also welcome Gordon Barnhart here. He was someone 
who was a neighbour in my constituency a number of years 
ago, and when his work took him to Ottawa, he and his wife 
Elaine were very gracious to have me into their home, and be 
such wonderful hosts to a new member of the CPRA (Canadian 
Parks and Recreation Association). 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say to you: think 
of it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it was not that long ago that we spent 
more on interest payments than on education. A sad legacy. 
 
In 1993-94 we spent $865 million on education. That same year 
interest on the debt was our second highest expenditure at $873 
million. Mr. Speaker, think of it, $8 million more spent on 
interest than on education. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to report this year and this budget 
we will spend almost twice as much on education as on interest 
payments in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Hurrah, Mr. Speaker. Hard work, but 
we got there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the municipalities said, if you do nothing else, 
do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second thing municipalities said was, please, 
please . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. The hon. member is not 
very far from the Chair and I realize that there is a little bit of 
excitement in the Chamber on some of her recent remarks, but 
I’d just like to remind all hon. members that this is only the 
second day of the budget debate. All hon. members on both 
sides of the House will have a chance to enter into the debate. 
And I would just ask that they limit their exchange across the 

floor to when they have their chance to enter the debate, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I just have been so 
excited about this budget, I’m taking far too much time. 
 
I just want to say, Mr. Speaker, that Regina also told me, max 
out the Canada/Saskatchewan infrastructure program. Mr. 
Speaker, municipalities told our minister, max out the 
Saskatchewan/Canada infrastructure program; get as much 
money for infrastructure as you can. And we’ve done that, Mr. 
Speaker. And there’s much, much more that I’ll be able to share 
with the city of Regina that will be positive in this budget for 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the reason why I’m exceedingly proud to 
stand here and support this, our eighth balanced budget, and 
support this budget, the first budget of our new Premier, and to 
vote against the amendment as placed before us by the members 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, first of all, just extending a personal welcome to Mr. 
Barnhart who’s joined us this afternoon. Certainly enjoyed his 
time when he was in this Assembly as the Clerk of the 
Assembly and we wish him well in his future endeavours, 
especially involved in bringing, I believe, some students to kind 
of work along with members in the future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the budget debate we’re entered into at 
this very moment is certainly a debate that is going to cross a 
number of areas. And there’s a number of criticisms and 
accolades. We’ve been hearing the government and, most 
recently, the member from Regina Wascana Plains telling us 
how good and how well-received their most recent budget has 
been. 
 
And yet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we find is we find many 
individuals who are very skeptical of the budget that has just 
been presented. 
 
And I will acknowledge, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m pleased 
to see that the government is beginning to recognize a need for 
funding for highways across the province of Saskatchewan. 
And certainly the constituency of Moosomin that I represent has 
a number of major highway arteries that we’ve been looking for 
a number of years, for funding into the highway network; such 
as Highway No. 1, Highway 48, and Highway No. 8 and No. 35 
and 47. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the grave concerns I have — 
however, I will hold my direct criticism until we receive the 
notice from the Department of Highways as to where all the 
funding is going to go — but I am concerned when I hear the 
Minister of Finance and the Minister of Highways, it appears, 
earmarking most of the funding for twinning of the 
Trans-Canada Highway to the western side of the province. 
 
And the reason I say that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, not that it isn’t 
needed there, but the facts are, No. 1 on the eastern side of the 
province certainly needs work and work immediately as well. 
We’re very familiar with a couple of recent tragedies on No. 1 



340 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

east of Regina in that Wolseley area and the Wapella area. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m looking forward to the itemized 
document that the department will be issuing shortly indicating 
where all the expenditures are going, because I believe it’s very 
important that as we look at expenditures in the highway 
system, that we keep in mind the needs right across the 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking about highways, another area of 
concern has to be the fact that the government continues to talk 
and promote the involvement of RMs (rural municipality) and 
the off-load again on to rural municipalities and more heavy 
traffic onto our grid road base or the gravel road system in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I can give you first-hand knowledge of how well that is 
working right in the area that I live, where the heavy traffic has 
been taken off Highway 48 between Kipling and No. 9, and it’s 
been routed on a couple of grid road systems — one that 
happens to run directly by our farm. 
 
Our farm, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And I can also tell the 
Assembly today that the RMs are going to be facing some fairly 
significant costs just to uphold the grade on that grid road 
system just from the traffic that’s already flowing on it, and we 
haven’t even had heavy traffic on it for a full year. 
 
So there are some grave concerns that our caucus has been 
raising in that regard as to how the funds are being expended in 
the Department of Highways. And we will continue to raise 
those because we want to see the Minister of Highways and we 
want to see this government . . . Mr. Speaker, when they talk 
about putting more money into highways, I believe as we put 
more money in, it’s time we started looking at how we’re 
spending the money and the fact of putting some quality dollars 
in and building some quality roads, rather than just appeasing 
everyone by a bit of thin membrane surface that actually just 
breaks up so immediately and leaves us with a depleted 
highway system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well . . . or Deputy Speaker, I believe the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains talked about the 
government finally putting 100 per cent of the revenue it takes 
from gas tax into the highway system. Well I just want to 
remind the member that their own figures show that we’re quite 
a ways from that 100 per cent figure yet. I believe that we’re at 
about just over the $300 million and the revenue generated from 
the taxes is 367 million by the government’s own figures, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we look at 
highways, it’s time we talked about the numbers and talked 
about them accurately. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And I hear the Minister of Finance 
commenting from his seat about the numbers. Well I’m going to 
get into some other numbers shortly. Just trying to show to the 
people of Saskatchewan that what the Minister of Finance . . . 
the snow job that we received the other day is actually a snow 
job; that really what the Minister of Finance and this 
government is trying to portray isn’t actually all the facts as 
they would like the public to believe. 

In fact, maybe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I should move into that 
right now. When you talk about government expenditures, the 
Minister of Finance is telling us — and I believe and I have to 
double check this — but I know that a number of his colleagues 
in the debate over the past couple of days have been telling us 
that this is their eighth balanced budget. If that’s the case, Mr. 
Minister . . . or Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe when you go 
through the Provincial Auditor’s report — and this is the Fall 
Report 2000 — the first balanced budget was 1995. I believe 
my mathematics would tell me that this is the seventh balanced 
budget, if we wanted to get into technical details, it’s not eight 
— promoting something that really isn’t factual. 
 
While it’s seven — and I give the government credit for that — 
the unfortunate part, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that those numbers, 
those numbers . . . that’s all fine and dandy. They’re talking 
about the general revenue pool. One of the problems we face, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the member from Rosthern pointed 
that out just a moment ago in debate with the Minister of 
Finance, that what the government is promoting as actual fact, 
really they’re omitting a fair bit of the expenditures that the 
government is involved in. 
 
The government likes to talk about a $7 billion deficit. In fact 
they’ve done a very good job of putting the blame elsewhere for 
their problems, for their financial woes. They blame the federal 
government for its offload. They blame the former government 
for the debt that was created, and they blame hospital boards for 
the problems in health care. And they blame rural governments 
for the problems that we’re facing in tax rate increases, rather 
than looking at the fact that all of the problems we’re facing 
here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, really end at their feet and they’re 
failing . . . they do not want to admit that they have been part of 
the problem. 
 
I believe the minister for Indian and Northern Affairs has made 
the comment — yes it was — he’s making the comment, yes, it 
was all the Devine problem. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s 
look at some of the debt that we have here in the province. 
 
You know, it’s fine to acknowledge that the general revenue 
pool is balanced. That’s easy to balance. It’s easy to balance 
when you can offload it onto Crown corporations. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for that matter the taxpayers just have to take 
the government’s own documents and find out exactly how the 
books are being balanced. While the general revenue debt is 
showing a decrease, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a couple of pages 
over in their own document, the Crown corporation debt is 
actually showing an increase, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We go back to 1982. The government likes to point back to 
prior to the 1982 election and talk about a balanced approach 
and a balanced budget. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, while there 
may have been a balanced budget presented to the public in 
1982, the facts were on the opposite side the Crown corporation 
debt was increased, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The unfunded pension 
liability was increasing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And also in the 
auditor’s report we see other debt was increasing. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what has happened since 1991, 
since the election of 1991? The government can pat itself on the 
back for reducing the general revenue pool. But if you look at 
the auditor’s report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, since 1991 the 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 341 

 

unfunded pension liability has grown by $1.1 billion. That’s an 
increase — $1.1 billion. Other government debt has grown by 
$1.3 billion. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe I’m hearing someone saying on 
the government side of the House that it’s not true. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I ask him to go to the auditor, go to the 
auditor’s report. Is the auditor not telling us the truth, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? I don’t think the auditor is trying to snow the 
people of Saskatchewan. The auditor is trying to present the 
facts so the people of Saskatchewan know exactly what the 
financing of this province is. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the government wants to try and snow 
the public by saying yes, we’ve reduced the debt; we’re on our 
way to reducing the total debt. The facts are they have a long 
ways to go yet. In fact in the Fall Report of the Provincial 
Auditor the debt in the province of Saskatchewan, the total 
debt, is $19 billion — $19 billion total debt in the province of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s fine to hide behind a net debt of seven when you leave out 
three-quarters of government expenditures. And I think, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that it’s important for us to let the people 
know that there is the fact . . . what the facts are in regards to 
government expenditures. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at the . . . when you 
look at this current budget, the government talks about and 
brags about their $200 million investment in health care. And I 
was interested, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if indeed this investment is 
a worthwhile investment; at the end of the day, if the public are 
going to see any better health care than they have today by 
throwing $200 million more into the budget. 
 
And the reason I ask that is because their own . . . there’s a 
gentleman by the name of Mr. Fyke is currently reviewing 
health care and the expenditures and, I believe, will be 
submitting a report to the Assembly in the very near future in 
regards to what he sees about health care and delivery of 
services. 
 
But it’s interesting to note that Mr. Fyke says, and I’m quoting 
from an article in The StarPhoenix, Friday, March 30. He says: 
 

. . . the time has come to stop assuming that more and more 
health dollars are the answer. 
 
It’s high time we came to the realization that the important 
issue is not how much we’re spending in health, says Ken 
Fyke, the man assigned to head Saskatchewan’s 
Commission on Medicare, who will be releasing his report 
within two weeks of today’s budget. 
 
It’s how we’re spending that money that truly matters. 

 
He says: 
 

“The difficulty we’ve got in the system is that, in the past, 
we’ve paid for volume and not looked at our results . . . 
We’ve measured quality by (the) volume of services, (and 
the) volume of dollars.” 

 

And what he’s pointing out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is we have to 
. . . we need to take the time. And while it’ll be interesting to 
see what recommendations he makes, I have a feeling that one 
of the recommendations he may come out with, he may suggest 
to this Assembly, is that we not only look at how we deliver 
services but maybe how we spend the dollars. Are we getting 
value for our dollars? 
 
I’m waiting . . . we’re . . . certainly on this side of the 
Assembly, we’re waiting for Mr. Fyke to issue his report in 
regards to the health care. I know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
people of this province are waiting for that as well. 
 
Like the couple that phoned most recently — and the 
government talks about how they’re trying to . . . how they’re 
actually reducing waiting lists — well a couple just called me 
most recently, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and this is one of many 
— asking me if there’s anything that can be done. They’ve been 
on a waiting list . . . Actually the lady was calling on behalf of 
her husband who’s been on a waiting list for over two years for 
a procedure that actually his specialist is saying is critical; and 
on the specialist’s list he’s got him down as critical, and yet, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they called in to the hospital and 
he’s supposed to be referred to for the special procedure, the 
hospital couldn’t even find his name on the waiting list. 
 
And you have to ask yourself exactly what is happening in our 
health care system. Then they finally . . . After they went back 
to the specialist and said, well, we’re told by the health district 
that he’s not on the waiting list, he’s not scheduled for a 
surgery. And the specialist certainly wasn’t very pleased to hear 
that. And after follow-up, they finally did realize, yes, he was 
but ended up somewhere back in the late files of the computer. 
 
And what that’s saying, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the public 
themselves are just becoming . . . just becoming very fed up and 
frustrated with this health care system. And I’m suggesting to 
you, while more money into the health care system is probably 
essential in a number of various . . . I’m not exactly sure it’s 
going to direct all the concerns out there. 
 
We’ve been talking about more money into health care. I just 
chatted with a young lady the other evening, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who’s been working in the health care system for two 
years. It’s been two years since she graduated and received her 
nursing degree. But it was just recently, while she’s been 
working for two years — she’s been on casual work, and that 
work has varied from half a day to a third of a day, a week, to 
maybe two days a week — and she just most recently ended up 
on full-time work within the health care system, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you have to ask yourself exactly what 
are we receiving for the value we are putting in our health care 
system? And that’s why in the last provincial election, one of 
our campaign commitments was to really evaluate how we are 
spending money. And it will be interesting to see, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when the Fyke report is brought forward, the 
recommendations that are brought forward. And as I indicated 
earlier, I wouldn’t be a bit surprised to see Mr. Fyke come up 
with some suggestions in the way of how we measure the value 
we receive for the money we would spend in health care. 
 



342 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about a $200 million increase 
in health care, the people of Moosomin are asking where 
exactly is the facility that this government promised us three 
years ago? Where is the funding for it? Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there are people still waiting, many groups and organizations 
who have been working diligently on their own to raise the 
funding that they must put in place in order to receive a health 
care or receive a facility. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan . . . I believe the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains talked about a system 
that’s going to treat everyone equally. The facts are, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan rural residents have to dig into 
their pockets for 60 . . . or 35 per cent of their capital 
expenditures, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So you have to ask yourself 
— is that a system that treats everyone equally? 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when it comes to health care and this 
budget, another situation that was brought to my attention is the 
way an elderly lady was treated in her last, final days on this 
earth. The fact that she ended up in an acute care facility 
because of a heart problem, and that after two or three days the 
staffing just determined that this elderly lady really should be in 
a heavy care facility because she didn’t quite meet the 
requirements in the acute care facility. And so there was some 
arguments back and forth and the doctor didn’t want to 
discharge her, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The travesty was that while that lady . . . had she not had to face 
the problems associated with the debate that was going on, 
ended up passing, passing on, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it was 
unfortunate that she had to face her last few days in a state of 
controversy versus developing a system that would 
acknowledge if there’s an acute care bed available, that maybe 
we could, maybe we could handle people and we could look 
after them if the services are there, rather than saying, no, 
you’ve got to go 40 miles away where you’re away from your 
family. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the area of health care, more 
money. Maybe that’s fine, but I have to suggest to you that 
there are a lot of things that need to be addressed in health care 
yet. And I don’t believe this budget is really going to address 
the real needs out there and really encourage physicians and 
specialists to stay and provide the services in this province 
because of the lack of leadership we see coming from that side 
of the Assembly. 
 
(15:45) 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, let’s talk about taxes for a minute. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t have to go that far back. We can 
go back to the 1999 election. What vision came from the NDP 
Party? What vision was presented by the NDP premier and 
leader at that time when they went into the provincial election, 
as far as the economy? Did they present an economic package 
for the people to vote for? No, they didn’t. But the 
Saskatchewan Party did, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party presented an economic package talking 
about tax reduction. And Mr. Deputy Speaker, we all know how 
close the Saskatchewan Party came to actually being able to 
implement that economic policy. 
 

It’s interesting to note, and I’ll give the government maybe a 
little bit of credit there, they realize too that the people of 
Saskatchewan, when it came to casting their ballot, the 
economy and taxes in their pockets is an important thing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at where we are today. The 
member from Regina Wascana Plains, the minister responsible 
for Liquor and Gaming, talked about a reduction in the PST. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the interesting thing is she forgot to 
mention that it was her government that increased the PST and 
then just brought it back to where it was. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . And members are asking how high did 
they go? Well they jacked it up to 9 per cent — 9 per cent. They 
jack it up on one hand and then a couple of years later begin to 
reduce it and give themselves a pat on the back telling the 
people of Saskatchewan, look what we’ve done for you, look 
what we’ve put back into your pockets. The people of 
Saskatchewan just began to realize, oh we’re just getting back 
what we had before in the first place; we’re just getting a little 
back of what was originally in our tax system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget, what does this budget do for 
the economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What I see in this budget, 
and what Mr. Mandryk brings out, I believe in The Leader-Post, 
he talks about job creation in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And he refers to the forest industry. I think the budget talked 
about an increase in the number of employees in the forest 
industry. 
 
But a comment here is, ironically Ainsworth Lumber of BC 
(British Columbia) announced just Monday that it was pulling 
out of three deals worth 210 million because, according to the 
company’s president, it’s just too difficult to do . . . The 
member from Regina South just asked for the reason. Well here 
it is — it’s just too difficult to do business in this province. 
 
Is this budget going to actually encourage investment in this 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker? I doubt it. I doubt you’re going 
to see a massive influx of investment dollars into the province 
of Saskatchewan with this group and with this government at 
the helm, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, at the end of the day 
the people of this province are going to sit back and they’re 
going to make a judgment call, they’re going to make a 
judgment call. I have a sense, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there 
are many members sitting on that side of the Assembly will not 
be here come the next general election because the people of 
Saskatchewan do not believe that this Premier and this Finance 
minister have delivered a budget that they can really take a hold 
of and believe that is going to build the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they will look to the 
Saskatchewan Party. They will look to that vision of building, 
of putting dollars in people’s pockets so that they can invest in 
this province, so that they can build this province. Because we 
do have a good province to live in; we do have an excellent 
province to live in. We have wealth in this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that should be just . . . we should be actually a 
booming province rather than a province that has been a 
have-not province and a have-not province for far too long, Mr. 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 343 

 

Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you talk about job creation, you talk about 
jobs and go to the people of . . . or the town of Wolseley and 
ask the people in the town of Wolseley whether or not this 
government has a vision for job creation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you look at a company pulling out 
of the province of Saskatchewan and then shortly after the 56 
jobs are closed, a $40 million investment to the very company 
that pulled out of the province of Saskatchewan. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, you have to ask yourself exactly what was 
going on. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member of Regina 
South wants to blame the health districts again for the further 
loss of jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And I believe the member from Regina northwest was 
at the celebration a year ago in the town of Wolseley for Abbott 
Laboratories, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s no wonder as we assess this budget 
that there are so many holes in it. I remember just prior to and 
. . . I remember the Throne Speech debate a few days ago in this 
Assembly and I remember the members across the floor with 
glee just saying, just wait for the budget, just wait for the 
budget, you’re not going to be able to find anything to criticize 
in this budget because it’s going to be such a good budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we warned them then, and we’re telling 
them right now that the budget is certainly not the budget that 
they could really gloat over. And the budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, just reflected the snow job that the province of 
Saskatchewan and this minister is trying to level across the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, come the next election the public of 
this province are going to sit down and they’re going to 
evaluate the performance of this government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re going to say we’ve 
had enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I could certainly go on and on and on in 
regards to the budget. We could talk about agriculture. We 
could talk about . . . I think one of the headlines was this budget 
was an attempt by this government, NDP, hoping to buy back 
the farm, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This government is trying to buy 
back votes and it will only go so far. The average . . . the 
electorate and taxpayer in the province of Saskatchewan are 
going to look at this budget and look at the vision of this 
government, and they’re going to find it wanting, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. They’re going to find it wanting. 
 
And they’re going to look to a party that has a vision for this 
province. They’re going to look to a party that is prepared to 
work with people to build the province, rather than dismantle 
the province — rather than just giving jobs, rather than just 
giving jobs to their own political cronies as we’ve seen in the 
most recent hirings within the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What did this budget do, if this budget did something to really 
assist the people of this province? Creating 570 more jobs in the 
public sector. What people are telling me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s not what they’re looking for. They’re looking for 

government to work better and to work wiser and to work 
within, rather than becoming larger, as this budget is certainly 
doing . . . as this budget is currently doing. 
 
I believe the vision for this Premier and this government is to 
become larger. They talk about job creation. They’re failing 
badly so they’ve got to create the jobs from within to try and 
meet some of their targets, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when the member from Canora-Pelly 
brought forward an amendment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, really 
hitting one of the crux of the matters and the issues in this 
budget. And the fact that again municipal governments are 
going to . . . and taxpayers across this province are going to be 
probably seeing an increase in their tax base because of the fact 
that municipal governments were left out of this budget. 
 
In fact, the off-load is going back onto the property base, and as 
a result, if the government talks about a decrease in taxes, the 
realities are we just pull, we just pull out of another . . . we just 
reach into the other pocket and pull it out again and give back 
exactly what the government has handed to us. 
 
Five hundred and seventy more jobs in the public sector, and 
that’s just the start. Who knows where it’s going to end? Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that what the public of Saskatchewan are 
asking for? No, they’re not. They’re asking for the government 
to run more efficiently. They’re asking for the government to 
show themselves . . . show that you can give some leadership, 
that you can tighten your belt. 
 
You don’t have to level . . . you don’t have to build higher 
levels of administrator and bureaucratic government in order to 
provide services. Let’s put the money . . . And I believe I heard 
the minister from Social Services talking about more jobs 
created in his department. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
the CBOs (community based organization) certainly weren’t 
pleased with the increase they were given. What they were 
asking for, Mr. Deputy Speaker, do we need more jobs or do we 
need to look at paying the people who are doing the work, do 
we need to look at paying them fairly and recognizing their 
contribution? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I hear the Minister of Social Services 
brags about the decrease in the number of people on welfare. He 
wants to tell us that we’ve actually got welfare recipients going 
down. But he keeps hiring more people. If we’re actually 
decreasing, as he says, the people on welfare, do we need more 
individuals working or do we just look after those who are 
providing the job for us rather than creating administrative 
positions even in the department of welfare? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget is certainly a budget that is 
wanting. I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the public of 
Saskatchewan find this budget to be a budget that’s wanting. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe the people of Saskatchewan 
are just waiting for the day when they can voice their opinion 
through the polls as to what they think of this budget. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I speak in support of the 
amendment and opposed to the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



344 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to make a few comments on the current budget. I’ve 
made mention before in the House about the concerns that my 
constituents in Arm River have in regards to their future. I’m 
afraid to say that the residents of Arm River, having reviewed 
this budget, find very little comfort to them in any meaningful 
way from this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, history has shown us that one of the strongest 
measures of any government is how well they manage the 
taxpayers’ money. Well when you mention that, SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) seems to 
come to mind, Channel Lake, Sask Valley Potato Corp, SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority). 
 
You know, this government seems to forget it’s the taxpayers’ 
money, not their own to just go and spend it however they want. 
Crown corporations spending money outside this province, 
outside this country, making investments, losing money in most 
of them. 
 
One of the largest points to the current budget is not as much 
how they spent the taxpayers’ money, though they largely failed 
here as well, but what they did with a large portion of our tax 
dollars, which was nothing. 
 
Five hundred million dollars, Mr. Speaker — $500 million — is 
parked by this government despite pressing problems that 
paralyzed Saskatchewan these past few years. Mr. Speaker, 
more of this money should have gone to help out the most 
important of government resources, the hard-pressed 
Saskatchewan taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see absolutely no relief to our citizens, 
no relief from the PST, the gas tax, property tax, which may be 
on the rise this year. Where are the new cuts to income tax? I 
was looking for new tax relief, same as my constituents were, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. But I didn’t see any. 
 
I did see a windfall, however, in oil and gas revenues. Five 
hundred million dollars again for those opposite who may have 
missed that. 
 
At the very least some of the surplus should have gone to help 
our residents in the area of direct tax relief. But no, this money 
is probably put away for election slush fund. We don’t know. 
 
Further to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see rate hikes — 
SaskEnergy and SaskPower. There’s most certainly a backdoor 
tax policy in this present government. So any tax relief this 
government is claiming is suddenly gone by the very fact of 
these hikes. 
 
So instead of eliminating the small-business tax, they drop it. 
They do a small concession — drop it from 8 per cent to 6 per 
cent and then send utility rates soaring with no end in sight. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the mayor of Davidson they do not know 
how they could keep their recreation and public facilities open 
in the face of skyrocketing utility rates. I have spoken to many 
of the business owners in Arm River over the last week, and 
they tell me this is basically too much to bear; that they hope 
that this budget would deliver some relief to their dwindling 

bottom line. 
 
Calls and letter continue to pour in from individuals who are 
struggling with the present, let alone the future rates of utilities 
and the long list of taxes they must continue to pay. 
 
But let’s not forget about the relief this government did give to 
Saskatchewan taxpayers in regards to utility rates — $25 a 
family. Mr. Deputy Speaker, enough to send mom and dad out 
for a movie and a small popcorn so that for two hours at least 
they can forget about the soaring rate increases the government 
is heaping upon them. Because that’s about all it’s worth, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
For a government that wishes to keep $500 million to itself 
while estimating over $1 billion in revenues for 2001-2002 in 
combined oil and gas, liquor and gaming sectors, it would still 
seem to me that more meaningful tax cuts would result. But no. 
However this government has decided to spend money where 
they believe it should be spent — 550 new government 
employees at a cost of $50 million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
You know, this money could have provided a tax cut of $230 
per family. But let’s all remember that the government thinks 
25 bucks will be enough to people to pay their wages. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very important that we talk 
about this budget’s lack of substance in the area of urban-rural 
revenue sharing. Here again, we come up with a goose again, a 
zero increase. Yet another year ahead for urban and rural 
governments to struggle with the high costs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our local governments need more help 
than this. The only option they have is raising mill rates, and 
that’s no longer simply feasible. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to talk about one of the high costs 
that many of my communities are facing now. As Sask Water 
critic, I’ve been following with keen interest the incident at 
Walkerton, Ontario. The result of this tragedy has brought new 
awareness across Canada about clean and safe water supplies 
for our residents. 
 
In Saskatchewan recently there have been alarms raised in 
several small communities, including my hometown of 
Bladworth. While the water quality problem has since been 
resolved there, it must be noted that many towns like these have 
water and sewer infrastructures that will be needing expensive 
repairs or even replacements in the near future to guarantee a 
safe water quality and efficient sewage disposal system. 
 
How are these communities, in large part now without their 
elevator tax base, going to come up with the funds necessary to 
make the repairs so vital to the safety and health of their own 
residents? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, help is needed for these communities now, 
and we continue to spend money as needed to ensure the 
drinking water quality of both our urban and rural residents is 
looked after. Sask Water still seems to think potatoes are more 
important than possibly spending money on water systems out 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 345 

 

there. They’re going into the potato industry again. I don’t 
know if the word land bank means nothing to these people out 
here, but it seems like they’re intent on leasing and buying more 
land around the Outlook-Lucky Lake area — money that could 
be spent on water systems to help small towns and urban areas. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over the past many months we have seen a 
steady decline in the quality of our provincial health care 
system. Our caucus has called repeatedly for changes but little 
seems to have happened. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our health care funding is now $2.2 billion 
or 39 per cent of total spending in this budget. This issue of 
course is the utmost importance to Saskatchewan residents and 
my constituents. Increases in the areas of cancer treatment and 
obtaining a second air ambulance should hopefully improve this 
sector of our health care system. 
 
But again this government somehow thinks that merely money 
is the answer. Their own commission, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
already hinting as we on this side of the House have been 
saying all along, manage your resources more efficiently with 
less waste in administration and more spent on front-line 
services. 
 
We must get waiting lists under control. We must open — not 
close — hospital beds. We must protect our overworked, 
front-line, medical personnel. I would ask this government to 
look closely at what the people of Saskatchewan want as a new 
vision of health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, each new day brings us closer to spring 
seeding and each new day there is more and more urgency in 
the calls, the letters, and e-mails that my office gets from 
farmers who need assistance before seeding. They simply need 
some cash to be able to get going. The 2001 crop will probably 
go down as one of the most expensive in our province’s history. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, here are just a couple of facts about the 
rising costs farmers are facing in 2001. From last April to this 
April, a hundred gallons of diesel fuel will now cost $23.15 
more; fertilizer costs will be $2.30 per acre more, when you’re 
. . . if you’re applying 80 pounds of 46-0-0 nitrogen. I can also 
go about . . . on about the high cost of . . . high equipment repair 
costs, as we all know, seem to be . . . go up. Chemical costs, 
seed costs — the list is endless, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when 
you’re on the farm. 
 
And all we have from this government is a commitment to the 
Canadian Farm Income plan or AIDA II, the sequel. What a 
relief it will be to farmers to, once again, to begin to fill out 
endless forms for assistance that never arrives. 
 
This Premier and Agriculture minister should have been in 
Ottawa if they didn’t like that program. And they knew it was 
no good, flawed. But did they go down there? No, they sent, 
sent a, I guess, a strongly worded letter. They should have been 
down there fighting for more rights and more money for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, farmers need not only economic support 
but also active support from this government. We need to 
address our most important industry with the same urgency the 

farmers are expressing now. 
 
As a farmer myself, I can attest to the fact that we are, indeed, 
in danger of losing a generation of farmers. Farmers in Arm 
River and around Saskatchewan just cannot comprehend why 
their own provincial government isn’t doing more to help them. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the agriculture industry sees this 
government holding onto half a billion dollars as their future 
hangs in the balance, then it is not hard to understand the 
frustration among farmers today. Farmers know the value of 
saving for a rainy day, as would quite naturally be the case. 
They’re not demanding everything, but they need just . . . but 
they need more than just commitments to another federal 
program that doesn’t work. Farmers are asking for real help, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, real help this spring, and this government 
isn’t listening. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the new Rural Revitalization ministry is 
all set to spend their 800,000 budget in the new office in 
downtown Regina. There’s not a clear mandate from this one, 
and no clear direction. The fact that this government believes 
the idea of rural revitalization should begin with eight 
employees in Regina, gives us an idea of how much 
revitalization they hope to do. 
 
After she spends that money on her eight employees, I hope she 
has a little left over. Unfortunately on the weekend the Regina 
Pats lost, so I think their bus is free for this summer. So 
hopefully maybe she can rent that — it would also provide a 
little bit of money for the Regina Pats who could probably use 
some — and they can go out in rural Saskatchewan, and they 
can go out and she can visit these communities and talk to them. 
 
One of the communities that have tried to . . . have sent her 
messages a month and a half ago, was the town of Marquis; 
they haven’t even phoned back, let alone to talk to them. And 
this is a ministry and a government, a Premier that said he 
would talk to the people, listen to the people? These people out 
there would like a call. They would like at least a phone call 
back. 
 
You know, if this new ministry is to have any value, then the 
work must be in the small, rural communities of this province. 
Listening is the key to any results that may come up as the year 
progresses. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as the Minister of Rural Revitalization is 
also the Minister of Highways, I think a few words need to be 
said about this year’s Highway’s budget also. I welcome the 
new money, which appears at least to be going into our 
crumbling infrastructure. But already I see holes along many of 
the highways in my constituency as spring continues. I would 
like to assure my constituents these broken patches will be 
repaired this spring, rather than late in the fall like last year. 
 
I’m going to watch closely as the new construction tenders 
come out for I’ll be calling for the renewal of many of the 
secondary highways in Arm River constituency to be fixed. 
Business owners, residents, school bus and ambulance drivers 
will not tolerate another summer of bad roads nor will there be 
any patience left for the excuses that the government was 
dishing out to the people of Saskatchewan last year. 



346 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

Results will be expected and I hope to see the crews out in force 
repairing and building. But as my constituents say, when they 
see the graders and the utes moving, then they’ll believe it. And 
I hope the 71 new people they hired for highways goes out to 
fix potholes, won’t be lost up here in administration. But I 
haven’t seen any of them hired yet and I haven’t seen any of the 
forms going out or any of the talk in the highway . . . I’ve talked 
to a couple of highway foremen. They haven’t said that there 
was going to be extra men out there helping them. When I hear 
that, then I’ll believe that this government is really true about 
fixing these highways, rather than just talk. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while I’m glad to see some movement in 
the area of education funding, we still have a long way to go 
before we see any significant easing of the tax burdens to the 
residents who have been hit hard by the provincial downloading 
over the past decade. We still need to see a better commitment 
by the province to assist local school boards with their 
education costs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, announcements of new schools may be 
encouraging but I wonder if rural schools are really in the cards 
when you see communities like Marquis, who are currently 
fighting to keep their school from closing. They’re having a 
meeting tomorrow night in the town of Marquis, if any of the 
government members . . . I think invitations were sent to the 
Premier, to a few other cabinet ministers — or anybody, or even 
a deputy minister would like to come out there and tell these 
people why their school is closing. 
 
The attendance has only dropped by five students and they have 
a projection that it’s going to grow by more than that in the next 
couple of years. They take in in that division over $600,000 in 
tax a year, given to the school division. That school takes 
$225,000 to run. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we take this budget apart piece by piece 
you can also look at: is there any commitment to our children’s 
. . . commitment to our children’s education is vital importance 
from K to 12 to post-secondary. 
 
New resources are always good to see. But combined with this 
must be real effort to keep our graduates in the province and 
keep our children educated and keep the schools open in the 
rural, in the urban areas, Mr. Speaker. To do it, to keep the 
students here, we need new businesses in which our children 
can realize their future right here at home, for not everybody 
can work for the government. If there are jobs for our graduates, 
then our investment in our provincial future is more than 
assured. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see that the present 
coalition government has failed to get any grasp on the kind of 
action needed, I think, to turn Saskatchewan around. You know, 
by providing little in the way of concrete tax cuts new 
businesses will not see any reason to set up shop here. With tax 
cuts replaced by utility rate increases, new businesses have no 
incentive to put their bottom line to risk. Existing businesses are 
finding it increasingly difficult to earn an adequate income after 
all the expenses are paid. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing has been done here that will result 
in an overall improvement to the economy of Saskatchewan that 

I can see, and the time has come for the new Premier to decide 
whether he will take us in a new direction or more of the same. 
Unfortunately, it looks like more of the same. 
 
This government treats taxpayers’ money like it was their own. 
They would do well to remember where it came from — from 
the hard-working, good people of our province. All we see is 
this government . . . the population staying the same, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and this government growing bigger, hiring 
more, it seems like, administrators. Not that there’s anything 
wrong with that but, like one of my colleagues had pointed out, 
in Social Services they keep saying that they’re getting more 
people off. Well why do they need more people in there? 
 
We need more people in the front lines working, not more 
people up here in Regina; not more civil servants. We need 
people, nurses, and we need people fixing them potholes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government was listening to the 
people — as I don’t think they are; as they should be though — 
the answers are there. All they have to do is ask. All they have 
to do is act, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Ask any student on any campus these days what he or she needs 
and the first thing they will say is a job. They need a job to go 
to when they graduate. Second on the list, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
would be a break from the high student loans they must burden, 
from the high tuition fees and services. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, unfortunately it looks like tuition fees are going up this 
year. 
 
What they received from the budget was a very modest 
increases to university and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology), and of course, the tax credit 
increase. All in all, not much relief in the continuing stress of 
student loans and student workloads. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan residents are very patient 
when it comes to health care in our province. With the length of 
the waiting lists, they have to be patient. But results from the 
new injection of cash and action from the information derived 
from the Fyke Commission is now a tree which people expect 
fruit from this year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I received many calls from anxious people who just want a fair 
shake when they go in for treatment. Is it too much to ask for a 
loved one to have a hospital bed if it’s truly needed? I don’t 
think so. I can go back many years and not think of any time 
when hospital services in this province were in such a terrible 
condition as they are in right now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I’m alarmed at the number of cases in Arm River where 
families with family members needing long-term care being 
refused a bed. It is difficult to be in this situation, especially as 
they leave the health care facility that they notice that some 
beds stand empty, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When I get these calls, when I make the calls, the answer 
usually begins with this typical response from the health district 
officials — these beds are not designated for long-term care. 
Well this is poor solace for the family whose loved ones need 
care desperately. Worse than this is when loved ones are sent to 
larger centres which are many hours away. Here again this 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 347 

 

policy seems intent on breaking the family bond. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are as well medical cases where 
patients try to receive emergency treatment at our large 
hospitals in the city. Many times patients do not receive the 
proper treatment and were released only to have to be 
readmitted shortly afterwards. Clearly medical staff is so short 
that people are falling through the cracks of our health care 
system when they need it the most, unfortunately, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I will continue to have my office compile cases where 
individuals run into the difficulty during the treatment of a 
medical problem. As long as the cases continue to come in, and 
they come in as months go on with more frequency, I will 
continue to press this government to make the changes they 
keep promising to make our health care system better. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have spoken to many of our retired folks 
in Arm River who have expressed their concerns about the high 
taxes and high living expenses. Seniors are worried about hikes 
in their utility rates, high fuel costs, and of course high school 
taxes on the property tax bill. 
 
Seniors stress that they are increasingly worried that their fixed 
incomes are under considerable burdens. Without exception, 
these seniors are asking for some sort of assistance in the high 
amount of school taxes that they must pay. They are saying they 
have paid for their kids and their grandchildren and they are no 
longer in a financial position to pay for yet another generation. I 
believe that government should look at the issues of many 
seniors in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I have mentioned earlier, farmers are 
facing a dramatic increase in many areas of farm inputs. The 
fertilizer prices have absolutely been going through the roof. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the price of 1 tonne of fertilizer has almost 
doubled than what it was last fall, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
now to add insult to injury, fertilizer experts are now hinting 
that there could be shortages. What is this government doing to 
address that? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, if this government does not intend to help 
farmers in a direct way or any way for that matter, then what 
will the government do for farmers at all? I grow frustrated as I 
tell farmers that are working hard to see farmers’ interests 
protected only to find a government that just doesn’t seem to 
care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the people of Arm River constituency and 
of Saskatchewan deserve better than this budget that was 
delivered. They expected that at the very least the Minister of 
Finance would acknowledge that further work needs to be done 
on taxation, on the overall economy, on health care, education, 
and our vital infrastructure. 
 
Instead, the residents of my constituency saw that this 
government . . . was pleased with very little that they 
announced in the budget. It’s difficult for them to have hope 
that the future will bring change when this budget does largely 
. . . largely does not . . . does little to address the continuing 
problems out there in Saskatchewan. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe there are solutions to the 
problems that we have here in Saskatchewan. What we need is 
for the government to finally come to terms with the fact that 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money belongs to the people of 
Saskatchewan. That this money does not belong to the 
NDP-Liberal coalition, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
When we see the immediate and desperate need for tax, we can 
see that obvious steps need to be taken to save our province 
from further falls down the economic ladder. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would ask the government to finally start 
to listen to the people out there, especially the rural residents 
that they’ve ignored for so many years. Only then will real 
solutions to real problems be solved. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot support this budget, but I will 
support the amendments brought forth by the member from 
Canora-Pelly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. This is my first opportunity to congratulate you on 
your new posting. So let me say very directly that I think that 
you will be, and you are — you’ve already proven yourself to 
be an excellent Deputy Speaker. I wish you all the best in the 
discharge of your duties. 
 
I also would like to congratulate the Speaker, the member from 
Prince Albert Carleton. I know that he will serve this legislature 
ably, fairly, and with a very clear view he has already 
demonstrated, a very clear view of the Speaker’s job to educate 
Saskatchewan people about the important role that this 
legislature plays, and a very clear idea of legislating, or of 
educating rather, the MLAs in this legislature about proper 
function and the proper way to address the Chair. 
 
So I would like to congratulate both you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and the Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on the subject of congratulations, I would like to 
congratulate my new colleagues — first of all the member for 
Regina Elphinstone, and the member for Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Now members of this side of the House 
will know that I followed that campaign very, very closely 
because I happen to live in the Premier’s riding. Now that’s a 
great privilege. 
 
I also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, had the dubious distinction of being 
a recipient of the opposition’s scare poll. And I refer, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to this poll that was supposedly an unbiased 
gathering of opinion of the Saskatoon Riversdale constituents. 
 
In case the members opposite have forgotten, this was a 
negative American style campaign tactic that was a blatant 
attempt to hint to the voters in Saskatoon Riversdale that the 
New Democratic Party were planning to close St. Paul’s 
Hospital. 
 



348 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

I was phoned on that poll, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and my 
immediate reaction was one of anger that the party opposite 
should stoop to such low depths. 
 
I think, and it is apparent that the voters of Saskatoon 
Riversdale recognized that this is an underhanded tactic that 
should not be used in an election campaign. Because what were 
the results, Mr. Deputy Speaker? What were the results? We 
have a Premier, a wonderful person, sitting here in this 
legislature representing Saskatoon Riversdale, representing all 
of Saskatchewan, and also making a very clear statement to the 
people of Saskatoon Riversdale that St. Paul’s Hospital will 
never be closed as long as he is Premier of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Now the voters of Saskatoon Riversdale 
very correctly recognized a dirty tactic when they saw it, and 
they very correctly voted against that dirty tactic. But that tactic 
illustrates a theme, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I’m going to 
elaborate on today, the doom and gloom style of the opposition, 
or as my seatmate, the member from Melville calls it, the trash 
talk from the opposition, the trash talk — nothing’s good in 
Saskatchewan, everything’s good outside our borders. 
 
Now I want to contrast this doom and gloom, this trash-talk 
approach, with what we do on this side of the House, where we 
accentuate the positive. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
know, we know very clearly that Saskatchewan is a great place 
to live, Saskatchewan is a great place to work, Saskatchewan is 
a great place to raise a family. Saskatchewan, in short, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is a place where positive things are happening. 
 
On this side of the House, we don’t trash talk Saskatchewan. 
Unfortunately we have to leave that to the opposition. What we 
do is we talk about the positives. So while I’m on my feet, I 
would like to talk about the 10 top reasons why Saskatchewan 
is a great place to live. Ten reasons to move to Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. You know, it’s . . . the members opposite 
are talking about David Letterman — that’s right. I am going to 
give you the David Letterman version of why Saskatchewan is 
a great place to live, why people should move to Saskatchewan. 
 
Now some of the reasons the members opposite will have heard 
before. But in their doomy, gloomy way, they want to ignore 
them. Some of the reasons may be new to them because they 
just aren’t doing their research. They’re so busy trash-talking 
that they have no time to look at all the positive things in this 
province. 
 
There are reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are solid reasons 
to celebrate our province, and I’m going to give you 10 of them. 
And I’m sure when other members on this side of the House 
follow me, that they will have 10 more or 20 more or 30 more, 
because there are hundreds of reasons to celebrate 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s start with reason number 10. Reason number 10, youth 
employment. In the year just ended, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
86,000 young people found work in this province; 86,000 
young people between the ages of 15 and 24 were working in 
this province — 3,000 more than in 1999. What a great way to 
start a new millennium, Mr. Deputy Speaker, youth 

employment in this province. Not youth unemployment — 
youth employment. Jobs for youth in this province. 
 
And we’re building on that, Mr. Speaker, with our new summer 
jobs program, the centennial students summer employment 
program. We had 3,000 more last year, and this year with the 
centennial program, 1,500 new jobs for young people. That’s 
reason number 10 to move to Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Reason number nine, low utility rates. Low utility rates. We 
already know about the great deals you get with SaskTel, the 
great deals you get with SaskPower. Let me talk a bit about 
automobile insurance, okay. Automobile insurance. 
 
A 2000 Ford Taurus, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan rates 
are the lowest, lowest for automobile insurance for a 2000 Ford 
Taurus for any province except PEI (Prince Edward Island). It’s 
a little lower in PEI, but here in Saskatchewan it’s very 
inexpensive to license a 2000 Ford Taurus. Rates for young 
people between 18 and 25 are significantly lower than in BC, 
Ontario, and Alberta. 
 
As a matter of fact, I want to just quote a little. Suppose you’re 
a young person and you buy a 1996 Chevrolet Cavalier. Well 
you’re going to register that car and drive it in Saskatchewan, 
you’re going to pay $872 for the year. Now what will your 
licence plates cost in Vancouver? — $1,827. Almost $1,000 
more for that young person. It’s a good reason to move from 
BC to Saskatchewan. 
 
If you’re in Calgary and you’re a young person and you have a 
1996 Chevrolet Cavalier, it will cost you $3,386 to put licence 
plates on that vehicle. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if you’re in 
Toronto, if you’re in Toronto the good and you want to drive a 
Chevrolet Cavalier, it’s going to cost you $5,300 for licence 
plates; $5,300 in Tory Ontario is what it costs that young person 
to license that automobile. And what does it cost here in 
Saskatchewan? A mere $872. That, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a 
significant reason to move to Saskatchewan. 
 
And if you don’t want to move to Saskatchewan for the low 
automobile insurance rates, come to Saskatchewan for the low 
energy rates. I’m just going to focus on Alberta just for a 
moment here. 
 
In Saskatchewan you would pay for your energy to SaskEnergy, 
you pay $4.52 per gigajoule. Now a gigajoule is a whole lot of 
hot air, Mr. Speaker, and it helps you to heat your homes. But if 
you were in Alberta, you would be paying $9 a gigajoule for 
that same natural gas. Almost double, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I would suggest that that is one very good and very significant 
reason to move to Saskatchewan. 
 
Now let me get to reason number eight. Reason number eight is 
something that I am particularly proud of because I’m from 
Saskatoon. Saskatchewan is the only province in Canada and 
one of only seven countries in the world to have a synchrotron. 
A synchrotron means that Saskatchewan is and will continue to 
be an innovator in research. 
 
We innovate in this province, just like the announcement just 
yesterday made by the Minister for Economic and Co-operative 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 349 

 

Development when he talked about the Saskatchewan Research 
Network, or SRnet for short. This is a super highspeed Internet 
pipeline that will facilitate national research. Something that we 
can be very, very proud of. 
 
Scientists, innovators are moving to Saskatchewan because they 
know that we have significant facilities here in this province 
and we are a significant player on the world stage, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Reason number seven. CommunityNet. As the Minister for 
Culture, Youth and Recreation will be very fond of telling you, 
CommunityNet is expanding Internet access to rural 
communities. 
 
By becoming the anchor tenant, government is making 
high-speed Internet possible for rural communities. And that 
means something very significant these days, Mr. Speaker, as 
most people are becoming wired and are buying all the latest 
computers and everything, they want not a slow dial-up modem, 
they want high-speed Internet connection. And that is exactly 
what we are being able to deliver by virtue of CommunityNet 
and SaskTel. It’s possible thanks to this budget, this great 
budget, this brilliant budget — dare I say it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? — this exciting budget. 
 
And by the way, I should point out if people are needing more 
information about Internet hook-ups; we also have universal 
Internet numbers for dial-up. There’s no long-distance charges 
in this province on top of your Internet charges if you happen to 
live in a rural or small urban area. We should be very, very 
proud of that and we should celebrate it, instead of doing the 
trash-talking like the members opposite do. 
 
Now, got to get to reason number six now. Reason number six 
to move to Saskatchewan. Reason number six why 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live and to work. Community 
schools, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this budget, this exciting budget, we have announced the 
creation of 42 new community schools — 42 new community 
schools, Mr. Speaker, in rural and urban areas, both elementary 
schools and high schools. This doubles the number of 
community schools in this province and it will help kids who 
are growing up in poverty to get ahead, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it’s worthwhile pointing out, as other members have done, 
that this budget now means that we are spending twice as much 
on education as we spend on interest on the Tory debt — twice 
as much we are spending on education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give you the fifth reason to move to 
Saskatchewan. The fifth reason is we have the highest rate of 
volunteerism per capita in Canada. We have over 6,000 
registered not-for-profit, volunteer-driven organizations in this 
great province. And 47 per cent of Saskatchewan people — 
that’s nearly one in two, Mr. Speaker — 47 per cent of 
Saskatchewan people volunteer their time and talents. 
 
Just a couple of days ago in this House, Mr. Speaker, I was 
privileged to be able to rise in my place and to announce that 

we were distributing pins to these volunteers in this wonderful 
Year of the Volunteer. 
 
We have purchased 450,000 pins, Mr. Speaker. Just think of it 
— 450,000 pins will be given out by various volunteer 
organizations to their spark plugs, the volunteers who keep their 
organizations going. 
 
And we should also add to this, as well as the spirit of 
volunteerism, Mr. Speaker, we have creativity among 
Saskatchewan citizens. Creativity and compassion and 
co-operation and hard work. Those are the cornerstone values of 
the people of this province, and that is a very significant reason 
to move to this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Because, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you a secret. 
Saskatchewan people see opportunity around every corner. 
They don’t look, like the members of the opposition, and see 
doom and gloom; they see opportunity, Mr. Speaker. And that’s 
a great reason to move to this province. 
 
Reason number four, moving on. I said I would only give 10 
reasons so I should probably speed up a little. Reason number 
four is nursing education, Mr. Speaker. Do you know that in 
many provinces it takes three years to receive a diploma in 
nursing. And what is the situation here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker? Well let me tell you. 
 
In this province, within three years or depending on how you 
set up your nursing education program, within three years or 
three and a half years or four years, Mr. Speaker, you get not a 
diploma but you can get a degree in nursing. That is a 
significant advantage. 
 
As well, as members of this Assembly know, we have just 
introduced legislation for changes to permit advanced practice 
opportunities for nurses with advanced training. That’s a very 
significant reason, Mr. Speaker, for nurses to come to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we should be very proud of the forward looking initiatives 
that the former minister of Health and the former . . . and the 
member for Saskatoon Nutana and the former associate minister 
of Health, the member for Saskatoon Eastview have done in this 
regard. I think that all people of Saskatchewan, all patients, and 
all nurses should be very thankful for the innovation and the 
far-sightedness that those two members have shown in 
introducing this. 
 
And the other thing is, Mr. Speaker, speaking of nurses, we 
have bursaries for nurses who’ve been away from the 
profession so that they will return to nursing. And, Mr. Speaker, 
just closing off on reason number four, this exciting, great 
budget adds funding for access for a northern nursing program. 
 
Now reason number three, Mr. Speaker, how about sound 
financial management? The people of this province saw a clear 
demonstration of that the other day when our Finance minister 
rose in his place and delivered our eighth balanced budget. It’s 
an exciting budget, Mr. Speaker, a sustainable budget, a 
progressive budget. 



350 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

We are . . . we continue to implement sustainable tax cuts and 
tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, which as my colleague from Regina 
South says allows Saskatchewan to have the lowest percentage 
of its budgetary income from income tax of any province. So 
we have a diversified economy and diversified revenue. 
 
Reason number two, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is the province 
that is home to programs like building independence and the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement. Programs that work to 
reduce child and family poverty. 
 
Now reason number one, Mr. Speaker, is that we have a 
growing and vibrant Aboriginal population. Sixty per cent of 
Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan are under the age of 25. 
These are young people eager and ready to get an education and 
to join the workforce and to help Saskatchewan compete in a 
global economy. They are Saskatchewan’s best-kept secret. 
They are people who want to be a strong part of this province as 
we build this economy together. 
 
So those are the top 10 reasons, Mr. Speaker, why 
Saskatchewan is a great place to live. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s that vibrant Aboriginal population that I 
mentioned just a moment ago — our number one reason — that 
I’d like to talk a bit more about. Because Aboriginal people, 
Mr. Speaker, are beginning to build a strong presence in 
Saskatchewan and they are our natural competitive advantage in 
many, many areas. Areas like mining, forestry, gaming, 
tourism, science, and manufacturing. And I could go on and on. 
 
Let me highlight it though, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan’s 
natural competitive advantage is the Aboriginal population in 
this province. 
 
I’d like to just briefly refer to a column that was written by 
Doug Cuthand recently. It appeared in The Leader-Post on 
March 26 of this year. Now I’ll spare you the quote but 
basically what Mr. Cuthand, a noted Aboriginal journalist and 
filmmaker, did in that column was to question the views of the 
opposition. 
 
Now I’m not going to repeat his words, but I would say that I 
would like to contrast Mr. Cuthand’s view of what the 
opposition is promoting with our positive initiatives for First 
Nations and Metis people that are being put forward in the 
Throne Speech and in this exciting budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate the government on the 
emphasis on Aboriginal people in the budget and in the Throne 
Speech. I see this as a continued commitment to a strong and 
visionary future in Saskatchewan. The Throne Speech states 
that Saskatchewan must be a prosperous, secure, and tolerant 
society where diversity is celebrated and seen as strength. 
Strength, Mr. Speaker, our natural competitive advantage. 
 
You know, in my new role I have tried a bit of French by virtue 
of my function of being responsible for the office of French 
language coordination. I’ve tried a bit of Cree by virtue of my 
function as Minister of Aboriginal Affairs. Right now I’m going 
to try a bit of Latin because the motto of this province, Mr. 
Speaker — Multis E Gentibus Vires— From Many Peoples, 
Strength. We must never forget that, Mr. Speaker — From 

Many Peoples, Strength. 
 
This government is committed to working with Metis and with 
First Nations people to secure a strong future. As the budget 
says, we will be connecting to the future, and Aboriginal people 
are a key part of that connection. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we work on connecting to the future, I 
want to say that there will be two main thrusts from my 
department in the upcoming year. And I’m very pleased and 
very proud, Mr. Speaker, that the Premier has entrusted me with 
the responsibility of being the Minister for Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
We have two main thrusts that we will be working on very 
diligently and very aggressively in the upcoming months and 
years. The first is the Metis and off-reserves First Nations 
strategy, and the second is the treaty land entitlement 
framework. 
 
The Metis and off-reserve First Nations people strategy brings 
together 13 government departments in an historic mission of 
cooperation to address the social and economic needs of the 
province’s Aboriginal people. Thirteen departments, Mr. 
Speaker, working together. It’s based on wide-ranging 
community consultations, consultations that are and will be 
ongoing. The strategy has four goals: primary, secondary and 
university education. Goal number two: education and training 
for a representative workforce. Goal number three: a 
representative workforce, and goal number four: individual and 
community well-being. 
 
The goals in the strategy respond to what we heard from 
Aboriginal people during our consultations. And we will be 
talking further with communities and with First Nations and 
Metis leadership in the coming weeks as the various 
departments prepare to move forward with their own initiatives 
under the strategy. 
 
We will also be developing measures for success for the 
strategy, and we will seek advice from communities and 
Aboriginal leadership on this. This strategy is a meaningful, 
provincial initiative investment and one upon which we hope to 
build in future years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t mention the other 
major thrust in my department, and that is the ongoing treaty 
land entitlement process. TLE (treaty land entitlement) is a 
process to provide land to First Nations pursuant to the treaties. 
We will continue to work with the federal government, and with 
First Nations to fulfill this important obligation. 
 
The TLE framework ensures that the interests of all people of 
Saskatchewan are protected in the process. It’s on a willing 
seller, willing buyer basis. TLE leads to greater economic, and 
social independence for First Nations, and it provides economic 
development opportunities for all members of the province. 
 
The treaty process, Mr. Speaker, is designed as a course of joint 
problem solving and mutual recognition. And I’m very proud, 
Mr. Speaker, that more than 365,000 acres have attained reserve 
status through TLE, helping First Nations’ people to build 
strong economies. The province of Saskatchewan believes in 
respecting treaties, Mr. Speaker. 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 351 

 

Mr. Speaker, last week I had the pleasure of attending the 
launch of two new books sponsored by the Office of Treaty 
Commissioner, and I would like to quote very briefly from one 
of them, Bounty and Benevolence. This quote describes the 
negotiating strategy of Alexander Morris, chief negotiator for 
the Crown during the Treaty 4 negotiations. And the quote is as 
follows: 
 

. . . the government’s chief negotiator, Alexander Morris, 
conveyed [to the participants]: that they should regard the 
treaty as a ‘gift’ from a beneficient Queen mother . . . They 
would have the use of their lands ‘as before,’ but with the 
addition of presents, annuities, and other benefits. Morris 
expressed it this way: ‘What I have offered does not take 
away your living, you will have it then as you have now, 
and what I offer now is put on top of it. 

 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said that I was trying to learn some French, a 
little bit of Latin — not very good Latin — and also some Cree. 
Mr. Speaker, in Cree, the word for treaty is tipuhumatowin and 
it means a reciprocal exchange, a payment to each other. 
 
I’d also like to quote a statement made by Chief Richard 
Poorman of the Kawacatoose First Nation this past weekend. I 
was at Kawacatoose to celebrate the signing of a TLE 
agreement between Kawacatoose, Canada, and Saskatchewan. 
Chief Poorman said: 
 

This meeting is done on behalf of the children, so they can 
have a future. 

 
I endorse Chief Poorman’s view. That is what our work is all 
about. Our budget is a reflection of that commitment. The 
Throne Speech was a reflection of that commitment. And our 
actions will continue to be a reflection of that commitment. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude today with a 
quotation from this year’s Massey Lectures given by Michael 
Ignatieff. He says: 
 

The lesson that follows is true for aboriginals and 
non-aboriginals alike: you can’t act effectively in the world 
and take responsibility for yourself unless you respect 
yourself. And you can’t do that unless your identity as (a) 
member of a people is honoured by the political system in 
which you live. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I am hopeful that our actions in the Throne Speech 
and in the budget will serve to show that our political system 
does honour Aboriginal peoples. Whether it’s the Metis in 
off-reserve strategy and its commitment to spend an extra $10 
million, or whether it’s our ongoing TLE negotiations, we work 
to show that respect. 
 
Through our commitment to introduce the Metis Act, we will 
work to recognize the unique historic, economic, and cultural 
contributions that the Metis have made to the development and 
prosperity of Saskatchewan and Canada. We work to show our 
respect. 
 
So I can assure all members that I will be voting for this budget, 

and I will be rejecting the amendment of the members opposite. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to rise today to speak about the budget. I forego 
the opportunity to speak on the Throne Speech, but I’m pleased 
to be able to rise today to address the budget that was presented 
by the Minister of Finance. 
 
And the budget that he presented was called Connecting to the 
Future, Mr. Speaker. But I think in his title he missed out the 
complete sentence. It should be, connecting to the future in my 
rear-view mirror. Because, Mr. Speaker, this budget is clearly 
about the past — not about the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Allan Blakeney I’m told is one of the advisers to the Premier. 
And it’s certainly a budget that Allan Blakeney would feel 
comfortable with, Mr. Speaker. It’s a budget about bigger 
government. It’s not a budget, Mr. Speaker, for the people or 
for families or especially not for taxpayers, Mr. Speaker; but 
Allan Blakeney would clearly feel comfortable with the idea, 
Mr. Speaker, of the family of government and Crown 
corporations getting bigger. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, one of the first things I recollect about 
Saskatchewan politics that really caught my attention, Mr. 
Speaker, was the 1982 budget as presented by Allan Blakeney 
and the NDP. 
 
People at that time, Mr. Speaker, were losing their homes 
because of high interest rates, farmers were losing their farms, 
businesses were going under because of the high interest rates; 
but Allan Blakeney’s theme in 1982 budget was the family of 
Crown corporations is strong. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in 20 years nothing has changed. Blakeney is 
back and the message is the same: government and the Crown 
corporations will grow; families will leave, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
the message that this budget presents to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And the fact is, Mr. Speaker, it’s not even Allan Blakeney that’s 
the only one that’s looking in his rear-view mirror. But I listen 
to the speeches of the members opposite — the member from 
Regina Dewdney, the member from Regina Wascana Plains, the 
member from Athabasca, the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast — every one of them, Mr. Speaker, is looking to the 
past. 
 
And I certainly understand why, Mr. Speaker, that they want to 
look at the past. Every one of them, Mr. Speaker, wants to 
re-fight the election of 1991. It’s understandable why they 
would want to do that. They won that election, Mr. Speaker, so 
everybody likes to look back nostalgically on their victories. 
 
But what they don’t want to do, Mr. Speaker, is admit any 
responsibility for the preceding 10 years. They don’t want to 
admit to anything that happened from October of 1991 onwards 
through today. Not one iota of responsibility, Mr. Speaker. Not 
one iota of responsibility. 
 



352 Saskatchewan Hansard April 3, 2001 

 

You know, you take a look . . . Ah, the member from Regina 
Lumsden is hollering about the debt. Well indeed, Mr. Speaker, 
there was a debt remaining. And I remember when Ed 
Tchorzewski was the minister of Finance, Mr. Speaker, in the 
early 1990s — about ’92,’93 — standing in his place next to, 
next, Mr. Speaker, to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — We will please allow the member to be heard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I enjoy the 
heckling from the member from Lumsden because it doesn’t 
say anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ed Tchorzewski was the minister of Finance and 
stood in his place and said yes, to this Assembly, there was a 
debt under Allan Blakeney. He admitted it, Mr. Speaker. Not 
one of the members opposite will admit it today, but it’s in 
Hansard, Mr. Speaker, if they want to look for it. Now I 
understand they don’t want to look for it because it doesn’t suit 
their vision of history, Mr. Speaker. But it was there. It was 
there. 
 
And it was the basis for the debt we have today, Mr. Speaker. A 
debt, Mr. Speaker, that continues to grow — not to shrink — 
continues to grow. The debt in this province has never been 
higher, Mr. Speaker, has never been higher than under Roy 
Romanow, the previous premier, of which every . . . almost 
every member on the opposite side was a part of his 
government. 
 
The only ones, Mr. Speaker, the only individual opposite who 
can escape any blame for having the largest debt in 
Saskatchewan history is the newly elected member for Regina 
Elphinstone. He’s the only one, Mr. Speaker, who can escape 
the blame for having $21 billion of debt in this province. And 
indeed, Mr. Speaker, they have shrunk that debt. But it’s still 
many billions of dollars higher — that’s billions with a “b”, Mr. 
Speaker — higher than Grant Devine ever left. 
 
So while they may wish, Mr. Speaker, to holler and scream 
about it, the Provincial Auditor is very clear — the debt is 
higher now than it was in 1991 and continues to grow, Mr. 
Speaker, continues to grow. But they have done everything they 
can do, Mr. Speaker, to ignore the Provincial Auditor because it 
doesn’t fit into their dream world, Mr. Speaker, into their dream 
world. They would rather simply just holler and try to gloss 
over the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina . . . from Saskatoon 
Southeast is always talking about doom and gloom. Doom and 
gloom — it seems to be, Mr. Speaker, her favourite words. Her 
talking trash, as the members opposite like to call it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it kind of reminds me of the Charlie Brown 
cartoon. You know the one where Pig Pen is moving along and 
he’s got the cloud overtop of him, Mr. Speaker. That’s sort of 
like the member from Saskatoon Southeast. Her life must be 
terribly dreary, Mr. Speaker. She always is under a cloud of 
doom and gloom, you know and I guess, Mr. Speaker, we have 
to have some sympathy for her in those cases. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are some things that she could do, that 
this province could do, and this government could do to 

improve the situation, Mr. Speaker. The government is 
spending, I believe it’s $6.3 billion — $6.3 billion this year. 
Very impressive number for a province as small as 
Saskatchewan. You know, one million people, Mr. Speaker, for 
the last 60 years, spending $6.3 billion is a lot of money. 
 
And the members opposite, I know that they’re very proud of 
the fact that we have a million people in Saskatchewan and that 
we’ve had a million people here since the 1930s. And nothing 
has grown, nothing has changed, Mr. Speaker, but they’re very 
proud of that fact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think if you want to be proud of the province, 
what you need to be able to say is, Mr. Speaker, we grew this 
province from a million to a million and a half. Now that would 
be something to be proud of. But the members opposite are 
proud of the fact that they haven’t grown the province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, in listening to the member from Regina 
Albert South talk, he seemed to be very proud, Mr. Speaker, of 
the fact that there were now fewer taxpayers in Saskatchewan. 
Now I don’t know of a single jurisdiction, Mr. Speaker, who 
would be happy about the fact that there are fewer taxpayers in 
this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, something to be proud of is to be a taxpayer. 
Now that’s worthwhile. Being a taxpayer in any jurisdiction is 
something to be proud of because it means you’re being 
successful, it means that you’re providing for your community 
and your province, state, country — whatever the case may be. 
It’s good citizenship, Mr. Speaker, to be able to pay taxes. 
 
So why would the members opposite be happy that people 
aren’t paying taxes, that there’s fewer people here, Mr. Speaker, 
to pay taxes. That is clearly the wrong direction, Mr. Speaker. 
That is looking in your rear-view mirror, in your rear-view 
mirror, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what is the government’s solution to creating more 
taxpayers? You know, are they providing opportunities for 
business? Are they providing reasons to be in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker? No. What they’re doing is hiring more 
government workers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if you’re a government worker that’s very 
good. You get a salary. You pay taxes. But 100 per cent of your 
salary comes from the taxpayer and you may be only returning 
25 per cent of it. So the province has a net loss of 75 per cent of 
the value of your salary. That doesn’t grow the economy, Mr. 
Speaker, that shrinks the economy. 
 
What we need in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, is an economic 
policy that increases the number of jobs we have available, 
increases the number of businesses we have available, and, Mr. 
Speaker, most importantly, increases the number of people we 
have in Saskatchewan. 
 
The members opposite have a clear track record on the creation 
of jobs — they lost 13,000 last year. A clear track record on 
increasing the population of Saskatchewan — since 1944 when 
their predecessors were first elected, we have not grown, we 
have not grown. I think they’ve been in power, of those years, 
roughly 50 of them. So in 50 years of CCF-NDP (Co-operative 



April 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 353 

 

Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party) 
government, no growth in the population of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have built. We have many good people who have gone out 
and built positive, creative companies, positive and creative 
jurisdictions around the world but not in Saskatchewan. 
Because under this philosophy and this government, it is 
impossible to grow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to move adjournment of 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 


