















































Hansard: May 01, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 835 
 May 1, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
on behalf of citizens surrounding Cudworth and area that are 
concerned about the loss of their community-based ambulance 
services. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from St. 
Benedict. Cudworth, Prud’homme, Wakaw, and the 
surrounding area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 
petition regarding two of the government’s Crown corporations, 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy. Both recently announced 
significant rate increases for residential and business customers. 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Elrose, Rosetown, 
Harris, Wiseton, and Perdue. I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today on behalf of people from the Archerwill area who are 
concerned about the EMS report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
I present this on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the high energy rates. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 

portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Signatures on this petition, in addition to my home community 
of Melfort, are from Tisdale, Mistatim, and Bjorkdale, as well 
as Gronlid. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well presenting 
petitions referring to health care in this province. And reading 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba and beyond. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Wauchope, Redvers, and Kipling. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise on 
behalf of Saskatchewan citizens deeply concerned about 
ambulance services. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Rose Valley. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I have each day of 
this session I rise again on behalf of people in the southwest 
concerned about the Swift Current hospital. And the prayer of 
this petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by residents of 
Swift Current, of Gull Lake, Admiral, Waldeck, Stewart Valley, 
and Ponteix. 
 



836 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the good citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about their ambulance service. And the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this is signed by the residents of Ceylon, Radville, and 
Pangman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan regarding the EMS 
(emergency medical services) service. And the petition reads 
. . . or the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners may pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people from the Redvers, Storthoaks, 
and Carlyle area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present dealing with the Redvers Health Centre. The 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our district, 
southeast Saskatchewan, and southwest Manitoba and 
beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
These petitions come from the good people of Bellegarde, and 
Redvers, and Antler areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition to retain the Hafford Hospital. The prayer 

reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Hafford 
Hospital remains open. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Speers, Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by the good citizens of Davidson worried about the rate 
increases of SaskPower, SaskEnergy: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
As I said before, the signatures are all from the town of 
Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the centralization 
of ambulance services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Mozart and Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the EMS 
report. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Wynyard and Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 837 

 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia, Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of service and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition to stop further cuts at Assiniboia 
Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of service and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signators on this are from Assiniboia, 
Wood Mountain, Mossbank, Willow Bunch, Limerick, 
Coronach, and Bethune. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province petitioning the 
Assembly on the following matters: 
 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
Reverting highways to gravel; 
 
Level of services at Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia; 
 
Protection of children from tobacco use; 
 
An energy rebate to consumers; and 
 
Ensuring Redvers Health Centre be maintained. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 32 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Information Services 
Corporation: how much was spent on travel outside of 

Saskatchewan but inside Canada by officials of ISC to 
investigate investments made or under consideration in the 
year 2000? 
 
With parallel questions for 1999 and proposed 2001. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I also give notice that I shall on day no. 32 ask 
parallel questions as to: 
 

How much was spent on travel by officials of ISC outside 
of Canada? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce through you and to my colleagues in 
the Legislative Assembly, a group of 50 grade 4 and 5 students 
from Henry Janzen School in my area and I’m very pleased to 
have them here this afternoon. They’re accompanied by their 
teachers Mrs. Taylor, nice to see you again; Mrs. Desrosiers; 
and by a parent volunteer, Mrs. Rakochy. 
 
So please join with me in welcoming these grade 4 and 5 
students from my constituency. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The grandpa 
member from Melfort-Tisdale and the grandma member from 
Kelvington-Wadena tossed a coin, and as a result it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you first of all, my best friend and wife, 
Carole, in your gallery, Mr. Speaker; also our daughter, Patti; 
and one-half of our grandson, Grant Michael, Mr. Speaker. 
Please welcome them warmly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to introduce guests 
in the legislature today. You can see I did lose the coin toss so I 
have to go second. I’d like to introduce to you my oldest son, 
Timothy. He works in Doepker Industries. The other half of the 
baby, Grant Michael, the dry half, that’s my grandson. 
 
And I’d also like to introduce to the members of the legislature 
my uncle, Leonard Francis, from Guisborough, England. He 
came over yesterday into Saskatchewan. And just so everyone 
in the legislature knows, he doesn’t watch Coronation Street 
and he believes that wine would be a great addition to the 
cafeteria in the House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 
Assembly, 59 students from the Shaunavon High School, sitting 
in the east gallery. Mr. Speaker, they are accompanied by 
teachers, Shaun Penner, Shelley Wickham, Owen Sebastian, 
Tim Miller. 
 
I hope you enjoy the proceedings here this afternoon and I look 
forward to getting together with you as soon as question period 
is over. And we can have a little discussion about what went on 
in question period. 



838 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

Please join me in welcoming the students from Shaunavon to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
with the member from Wood River in welcoming the students 
from the Shaunavon High School to the Assembly today. Even 
though Shaunavon is technically just outside of my 
constituency and just barely into Wood River, a number of the 
students there, I’m sure, are represented by myself, and their 
parents as well. And so I’d like to welcome them warmly here. 
 
As you may recall, Mr. Speaker, the Shaunavon High School 
was one of the schools in this province that showed great 
leadership in cancelling their trip to England when the 
hoof-and-mouth outbreak was of such great concern. And I’m 
not sure if any of these students were part of that group or not 
but if they are represented here today, I’d like to express my 
personal appreciation for the leadership that they showed in that 
regard. 
 
And I hope that they’ll ask the member from Wood River to 
treat them to something special when they meet with him a little 
later this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you, two constituents of 
mine, Esther and George Haas. Esther and George farm right 
along the Saskatchewan-Manitoba border and due to the 
amount of water we have in our constituency they don’t have to 
hurry home to seed. 
 
I would ask everyone here to join with me in welcoming them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to introduce to all members of the legislature two former 
Transportation ministers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
They’re joining us behind the bar on the government side today. 
The former member from Cut Knife-Lloydminster, Bob Long, 
Transportation minister of the province in the late ’70s, early 
’80s. And Andy Renaud, the former member from Carrot River, 
Transportation minister in the mid-1990s. 
 
So I’d all members to join me in welcoming these two people to 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce guests. There are three friends who are up in the west 
gallery: Sarah McQuarrie and Melissa McDowell and Sabrina 
Cataldo who take a great deal of interest in the happenings in 
this legislature. 
 
And I would like all to join with me in welcoming them to this 

session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Mayworks 
 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, today I rise to speak about a 
celebration of Mayworks. Today, May 1, is the international 
day to celebrate workers’ rights and struggles. This is only one 
aspect of the overall celebrations here in Regina, as events are 
scheduled to take place starting April 28 through May 5. 
 
Mayworks began over 15 years ago with the first festival held 
in Toronto. Now, Mr. Speaker, this festival takes place 
throughout all the borders of Canada. Mayworks festivals are 
generally organized by volunteers of the labour movement, arts 
groups, and community organizations. After all, these are the 
people being celebrated. 
 
Modern celebrations of May Day as a working class struggle 
evolved with a fight for an eight-hour workday called by the 
Knights of Labour in 1886. May 1, 1886 saw national strikes in 
both Canada and the United States that ended in tragedy for six 
workers in Chicago. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, this day is when we celebrate and thank 
those workers who went on strike and risked their lives to 
achieve what we now experience as labour rights. In 
commemoration of the violence in Chicago, the International 
Working Men’s Association of Paris declared May 1 as an 
international working class holiday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the unions and the union activists 
past and present. They’re responsible for bringing Mayworks 
celebrations to Regina and throughout the world. I encourage 
all members and all people of Saskatchewan to attend some 
Mayworks festivals in the next few days and join in the 
celebrations of working class culture and arts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Child Find Month 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today in recognition of Child 
Find Month. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the month of May has been declared Green 
Ribbon of Hope Month, and I cannot think of a more important 
cause than efforts to reunite thousands of children that go 
missing every year with their families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year in Canada thousands of children were 
reported missing but the number is growing around the world. 
Many children go missing because they are trapped and sold 
and enslaved in the international child sex trade. Some children 
are kidnapped by non-custodial and custodial parents. Some are 
runaways. Some are lured into cults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the green ribbon is a symbol of many things. We 
wear the ribbon to raise awareness of the growing problem of 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 839 

 

missing children. We wear them as a symbol of hope for those 
whose precious children are missing. And finally, because 
green is the colour of hope and it symbolizes our light in the 
darkness and is a symbol of hope for the safe return of all 
missing children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to take this opportunity to 
commend Child Find Saskatchewan on all of their hard work 
and dedication to assist families in finding their missing 
children. Without the commitment from members of this 
organization, many of our missing children would be forgotten 
about and just become a statistic. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hog Producers Form Co-operative 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s more good 
news for rural Saskatchewan. Ivan Stomp, the largest 
independent hog producer in Saskatchewan, who saw his 
operation hit hard by fire on February 22 is back on top with a 
little help from his friends. 
 
Mr. Stomp has joined forces with a hundred other farmers in the 
Leroy area to form a new generation co-op to build new hog 
barns. Stomp, along with the new co-op, will spend around $40 
million to build the new hog production facilities, as well as a 
feed mill in the Leroy area. The project is estimated to create 50 
full-time jobs, Mr. Speaker, and produce 200,000 pigs annually 
upon its completion. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the new feed mill will buy up to 3 million 
bushels of wheat and barley produced by members of this new 
generation co-op. The farmers belonging to the co-op represent 
32 per cent of the total grain acreage in the Leroy area, meaning 
a large number of these people can now sell their crops locally, 
rather than nationally or internationally. 
 
Stomp says his new agreement is likely the first new generation 
co-op to get involved in the pork production in Western 
Canada, and an expert in new generation co-ops agrees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a great example of how innovation and 
teamwork can establish a community, giving it a solid footing 
for the future. 
 
On behalf of all the hon. members, I would like to congratulate 
Mr. Stomp, the members of the new generation co-op, and the 
community of Leroy on their exciting future in this province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

RCMP Graduation 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
privilege of attending ceremonies for the 32nd division’s 
graduation at the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
depot here in Regina. I’d like to congratulate the 30 men and 

women who graduated, especially my nephew, Cst. David 
Knibbs of North Battleford. 
 
This has been a dream of David’s since he was a little boy, and 
what made the ceremony even more special was that his father, 
Cpl. Alvin Knibbs was on hand to present him with his badge. 
 
The RCMP have always held a special place in my heart as my 
grandfather, Cpl. H.E.P. Mann, was a member of the original 
Northwest Mounted Police. He graduated in Regina in 1920 and 
now 81 years later his grandson is following in his footsteps. 
 
I wish the very best to David as he prepares to report for duty in 
the RCMP detachment of Fort St. John, BC (British Columbia). 
Also warm congratulations and best wishes to all the new 
graduates as they work to uphold the laws of the land and 
continue to bring pride and honour to our great nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Provincial Parks System Marks 70th Anniversary 
 

Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, today marks a special occasion 
for the provincial parks system, its 70th anniversary. That’s 70 
years of protecting natural and cultural features, 70 years of 
providing recreational and educational experiences, and 70 
years of tradition that SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management), and the Saskatchewan government are 
proud to continue to provide to the people of Saskatchewan, as 
well as visitors to our province. 
 
As someone who worked several summers at Makwa Lake 
Provincial Park and Pike Lake Provincial Park while attending 
university, I’m pleased to highlight this anniversary today. 
 
The Provincial Parks and Protected Areas Act, 1931, which 
established the provincial parks programs, was assented to on 
March 11, 1931 and was proclaimed May 1, 1931. 
 
To quote directly from the Act, it states that, quote: 
 

Parkland is dedicated to the people of Saskatchewan and 
visitors of Saskatchewan for their enjoyment and education. 
And the natural prehistoric and historic resources of 
parkland are to be maintained for the benefit of future 
generations. 
 

The original six provincial parks designated in 1931 included 
Moose Mountain, Duck Mountain, Good Spirit Lake, Cypress 
Hills, Katepwa Point, and Little Manitou. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the provincial government and 
minister of SERM, I’d like to offer my congratulations and best 
wishes to the provincial park system for a prosperous future. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteers Recognized 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon in our 
honoured Assembly, I’d like to bring attention to all members 
of the legislature, an event that took place Sunday evening, 



840 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

April 29. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on said evening, the North Central Regional 
Recreational Association held its annual banquet to honour 
those persons who go above and beyond for their home 
communities. This banquet was held in recognition of 
volunteers whom communities firmly believe have done an 
outstanding job of giving of themselves so that their 
communities are a little bit better place to live. 
 
Fourteen people from the north central region were honoured 
for their volunteerism, Mr. Speaker. And I’m delighted to report 
that three of those honourees come from the constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers: Louis Hradecki of Meath Park, William 
Ludnicki of Weirdale, and Rosemarie Mitchell of Candle Lake 
were presented with many awards on Sunday in remembrance 
of this special evening. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with pride I bring recognition to these 
constituents of Saskatchewan Rivers, and I ask that all members 
join me in congratulating these and all other volunteers for their 
exemplary efforts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince of Wales Visit 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to take a moment of the 
Assembly’s time to say how proud I am that the Prince of 
Wales took time while in Saskatchewan to visit Scott 
Collegiate, which is in the heart of Regina Elphinstone. 
 
I am also very pleased that he stepped next door to meet the 
volunteers and the kids at the Chili for Children program at the 
Albert-Scott Community Centre. I know I speak for the staff, 
students, and parents at both school and community centre 
when I say that the prince’s visit was as much an honour for us 
as it was a revelation for him. The event, I dare say, was 
mutually enjoyable and educational. 
 
The Prince of Wales has often expressed his interest in the lives 
of inner city residents, and before this trip, he also said that he 
wanted to learn more about Canada’s First Nations people and 
culture. 
 
I think that his meeting with the students at Scott, his 
introduction to elder Willie Peigen and the four generations of 
his family, his first attempt at playing a First Nations hand 
game — though no dancing on this occasion, Mr. Speaker — 
and a look at Scott’s computer lab all combined to serve the 
Prince with a unique look into life in inner city Regina and into 
the lives of urban First Nations people. 
 
I also want to mention how appropriate to the Prince’s visit was 
the announcement of the Prince of Wales scholarships of which 
we will certainly hear more in the future. 
 
To close I want to thank all of the people who worked very hard 
to make the Prince’s visit to Scott such a great success: 
Principal Johns Simpson, Vice-principal Boldt, hosts Chantal 
Dustyhorn, Justin Toto, the Peigan Family, Ovide Bighetti, 
Keith Buffalo, Dakota McFadzaen, the Scott Improv Group, the 
Drum Group, Tim Molnar, Barry McKay, Constables Pratt and 

Keiser, Lisa Pratt, Senator Theresa Stevenson and Robert 
Stevenson, Shelley Lavallee and Keith Pratt. You and everyone 
who took part in the Prince’s visit did the neighbourhood and 
the whole province very proud. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Allegation by Member of the Legislative Assembly 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Premier. Mr. Speaker, this morning’s paper contained 
extremely serious allegations against officials with this 
government. The headline reads, and I quote: 
 

Hillson alleges bribe to shut up. Claims CIC offered world 
excursion . . . in exchange for silence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the member for North Battleford said that he and 
his wife were offered a trip around the world in exchange for 
his silence on certain CIC investments. Mr. Speaker, this is an 
extremely serious allegation. What is the Premier doing to 
investigate the matter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. The question from the member opposite is one of a 
very serious nature. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we take his 
question very seriously. 
 
The opposition has asked you today to rule in regards to 
whether or not a breach of privilege has occurred in this House 
and I want to say as Government House Leader that members 
on this side of the House very much respect your independence. 
You’ve been duly elected by members of this Legislative 
Assembly to fill the very important role and we are confident in 
your ability and the counsel that you have to review this serious 
allegation and to make the correct ruling. Our government, Mr. 
Speaker, will respect that ruling and abide by your decision. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and certainly, 
Mr. Speaker, we do, do recognize that you will play a very 
important role in this matter. But I want to bring to the House’s 
attention rule no. 102 of the Rules and Procedures of the 
Legislative Assembly which reads and I quote: 
 

The offer of any money or (any) other advantage to any 
Member of the Assembly, for the promotion of any matter 
whatsoever pending or to be transacted in the Legislature, 
is a high crime and misdemeanour, and tends to be a 
subversion of the Constitution. 

 
The House of Commons has a similar rule dating back to 
confederation, 1867, and the British Parliament has a similar 
rule dating back to 1695. 
 
Bribery is one of the most serious offences in our parliamentary 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 841 

 

system and the member for North Battleford has made an 
allegation of bribery. Now we know the Speaker has a role, but 
as leader of the government the Premier has an obligation to 
investigate these allegations. 
 
Again I ask the Premier, what does he intend to do to 
investigate these serious allegations made by the member from 
North Battleford? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, it’s quite clear in the 
paper that there appears to be a dispute between a senior official 
and a member of this legislature. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there are some processes that take 
place with respect to decision making and with respect to travel 
and I want to clarify a couple of points. First of all, that there is 
no official of this government that can authorize 
out-of-province travel. That is done by the chief of staff and the 
Premier, and there’s a process that takes place for an application 
and an approval or a disapproval with respect to travel outside 
of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the date of departure is on that document, the date 
of return, the nature of the business, who accompanies, what the 
cost of accommodation, what the cost of travel is, and the 
nature of the travel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government has very much put in place a process of 
accountability and no travel out of the province occurs without 
the Premier’s approval. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think from the minister’s answer, he recognizes that there’s 
some blanks that need to be filled in. It’s kind of hard to know 
exactly took place. The member for North Battleford said CIC 
attempted to buy his silence with a trip around the world. The 
president of CIC denies it. 
 
However a serious allegation is now out there and this 
Assembly has an obligation to get to the bottom of this matter. 
The appropriate forum for this investigation is the Standing 
Committee on Privileges and Elections. That committee has the 
power to call witnesses and require them to testify under oath 
and with the full protection of parliamentary immunity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition believe that these 
allegations should be referred to the Standing Committee on 
Privileges and Elections for a full investigation. Will the 
Premier support our call for that investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
government, I want to again answer that question. And I’ve said 
earlier that there was a request in a letter and documents 
forwarded to you this morning that request of you a decision, 
and I have a copy of it here. 
 
I’ve indicated that members of this legislature on this side of the 

House very much support the process that has been put in place. 
It’s part of British parliamentary tradition, and it’s part of, I 
believe, of good decision making. And I say again, that 
members on this side of the House will support your ruling on 
the issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Information 
Services Corporation. Yesterday the minister told this 
Assembly that he is satisfied with the performance of ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) that 
basically just lost $11 million. This from a Crown corporation 
that hasn’t even completed its original mandate of automating 
the province’s land title system. And despite this, officials today 
said they’re now focused on risking taxpayers’ dollars to sell 
this non-functioning technology to Third World and developing 
nations around the globe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ISC has lost $11 million. Its overall budget has 
bloomed to $58 million and, Mr. Speaker, so far they have one 
signed contract from Ukraine worth a paltry $150,000. 
 
The question to the minister is this: is that it? Will the minister 
table all the other contracts that he’s inked while spending $58 
million taxpayer dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the answer to the 
member’s question is, first of all, to indicate that ISC is seeking 
contracts overseas not just in developing countries, as the 
member says, but in developed countries too. 
 
I know the member likes to say that we are . . . likes to 
besmirch Crown corporations, but this is a Crown corporation 
which is seeking ventures everywhere, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
$50 million investment that we can ensure brings significant 
benefits back to this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the members over there will know that you 
can’t market a sophisticated high-tech project without 
advertising that project, without selling that project, without 
going to customers, and without going to find out what those 
customers need. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the activities of the corporation at the present time 
has been precisely that — to get the LAND (Land Titles 
Automated Network Development Project) project up and 
running and to market that and other high-tech projects around 
the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if the minister is saying that the 
opposition is concerned whenever Crown corporations stray 
from their core mandate and start risking taxpayers’ money 
around the world with respect to this government, he’s dead 
right, Mr. Speaker. He’s dead right because the parade of losers 
gets longer every day — SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 



842 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

Utility Development Company), Guyana, Channel Lake, NST 
(NST Network Services of Chicago), clickabid, IQ&A, 
SecurTek, SaskPower International, Sask Valley Potato 
Corporation, and now Information Services Corporation. Each 
one lost millions of dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New Democratic Party) say they learn 
from their mistakes; they get smarter each time they make a 
mistake. Mr. Speaker, given this list, by now they’re all 
candidates for Mensa, I’d say, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: have they 
learned anything from IQ&A? Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP 
risking millions of taxpayer dollars without signed contracts? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the mandate of ISC is to 
carry on the business of re-evaluation, design, and automation 
of Saskatchewan’s land titles system, to integrate that into a 
whole range of other activities in the province, to investigate 
and develop potential markets for the use of those systems, to 
operate inter-provincially, Mr. Speaker. And indeed what this 
shows, Mr. Speaker, is that this corporation is precisely 
fulfilling its mandate by exploring opportunities to sell the 
system we’re developing. 
 
The member knows how business works. This is the way 
business works. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to make a huge investment of 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars and make no sales, maybe that’s 
how NDP businesses work but that’s not how they work in the 
real world, Mr. Speaker. I can assure you of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to read a quote from Daryl 
Silzer, he is the former Chair of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to read a quote from Mr. 
Daryl Silzer. He’s the former Chair of IQ&A who . . . That 
company lost two million taxpayer dollars because they didn’t 
have any signed contracts. Here’s what he had to say, and I 
quote: 
 

I would have made sure that letter of intent was in fact a 
contract rather than a letter of intent. 

 
He admits it was a huge mistake and now what are we hearing 
from the minister? A lot of Third World and developing 
countries and nations around the world may be interested in ISC 
Services — no contracts, just services. Mr. Speaker, these guys 
haven’t learned anything. Once again they’re gambling and 
losing millions of taxpayers’ dollars based on the same vague 
commitments they had for IQ&A. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he rein in this company and 
tell them to stick to their original mandate of automating land 

titles and geomatics? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I gave the member the mandate. He 
can find that by looking at the Crown corporation’s annual 
reports. He knows the mandate is broader than the land project. 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, the majority of ISC’s activities are in the 
province. In fact the huge majority of activities are here in the 
province. 
 
But the issue here is, Mr. Speaker, is how do you bring 
resources money back to the people of Saskatchewan for their 
investment in this land corporation, Mr. Speaker. And what 
we’re doing here, Mr. Speaker, is ensuring that the people of 
this province benefit from this investment, which is the most 
sophisticated land titles operation in this country. 
 
We were last to get into this but, Mr. Speaker, this is the best in 
the country and it will be something which repays the 
investment of this province significantly. 
 
The member knows that; the member just doesn’t like that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what the member doesn’t like and 
more importantly what the taxpayers don’t like is the waste of 
money in things like SPUDCO, Guyana, Channel Lake, NST, 
clickabid, IQ&A. That’s what we don’t like on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps saying that everything is fine. 
Well ISC had to go back to CIC for a $5 million grant. That 
doesn’t sound like everything is fine. The former minister of 
Economic Development had major concerns. Doesn’t sound 
like everything is fine. The fact is that everything is not fine. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, this question is for the Premier. In light of 
the fact that his Crown Investments Corporation minister and 
now the Justice minister refused to rein in these Crown 
corporations and wild investments, the question to the Premier 
is this: will he stand in his place today and commit to this 
legislature to rein in both his ministers and these Crown 
corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I sit here quietly 
listening to the member recite off some of the losses. Mr. 
Speaker, I hope they quietly sit and listen as I recite some of the 
profits that they’ve made as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leicester cable, Mr. Speaker, made $100 million for the people 
of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, Saturn/Austar made $37 million 
for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Regional Cable 
made $8 million for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Alouette made 6 million, Mr. Speaker; and ISM Westbridge 
made $23 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member neglects to talk about the good things that our 
Crowns are doing for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 843 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Post-Secondary Education 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education. 
 
The University of Saskatchewan Council recently passed a 
motion which states in part, and I quote: 
 

Be it resolved that the University Council convey to the 
legislature of Saskatchewan that the teaching, research, and 
public service obligations of the university to the people of 
Saskatchewan cannot be met at current levels of public 
funding. 

 
The council states that human resources, both faculty and 
non-faculty, have been eroded to the breaking point. They 
cannot replace equipment and the deficit in capital maintenance 
is growing. They state the accumulated underfunding to the 
university over the last 10 years has created a sequence of crisis 
situations with regards to buildings and programs. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, pardon me, what are the minister’s 
plans to deal with the serious funding issues facing the 
University of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s taken some 25, 26 
days to get the — 27 days — to get the opposition to ask a 
question about post-secondary education. And I welcome that, 
Mr. Speaker, because there is a difference between this side of 
the House and that side of the House when it comes to 
commitment to post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the last three years over $100 million in 
capital expenditures to our universities alone, Mr. Speaker — 
over the last three years. And let me point out a distinct 
difference, Mr. Speaker, because it is stark. 
 
If this side of the House was to implement SP (Saskatchewan 
Party) policy in funding for post-secondary education, 
universities this year, Mr. Speaker, would have $17 million less 
than in the budget. I repeat: $17 million less if we were to use 
SP policy. 
 
Why do I say that, Mr. Speaker? Because on this side of the 
House over the last three years an increase of over 15 per cent 
to universities. If we were to follow their policy less than 6 per 
cent, less than inflation. That’s their story. They’re sticking to 
it. We ain’t going there, Mr. Speaker. We’re in support of the 
universities of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education said recently that operating grants to universities 
would keep up with inflation. Well they certainly — at 3.5 per 
cent — certainly don’t keep up to the increases in utilities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the University of Saskatchewan Council believes 

the lack of government funding has undermined the overall 
quality of education they can provide and that the university is 
underperforming in areas of research. They correctly state that 
the university is an engine of social progress, economic 
development, and improved well-being. But they all say that 
support resources haven’t been there for those essential 
purposes. 
 
This motion they have passed is a cry for help and it’s a 
warning for this NDP government, Mr. Speaker. The province’s 
operating grant to the university has decreased by some 10 per 
cent since 1987 and they may be faced with increasing tuition 
fees from anywhere from 25 to 100 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to review the budgeted 
operating grant to the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) and 
to commit to working with the institution to avoid these 
massive increases in tuition fees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I note 
with interest that the universities have said that they have been 
affected by the decisions and funding related to the recovery in 
this province from the Devine deficit and also from the 
recovery across the nation, Mr. Speaker, to the CHST (Canada 
Health and Social Transfer) cutbacks from the federal 
government. 
 
But the hon. member raises the matter. He says very proudly 
that their position is to fund according to increased inflation. 
Mr. Speaker, in the last three years inflation in this province has 
been less than 6 per cent. And, Mr. Speaker, in the last three 
years in this province funding to our universities, I repeat once 
again, has gone up by over 15 per cent and if you were to look 
at the difference, it would be, and I repeat, $17 million less to 
our universities if you were to use SP policy in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, it seems whenever this government 
hasn’t got an answer they revert back to what went on in the 
’80s and the people of this province are getting tired of that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan ranks last in the 
country when it comes to the amount of public funding spent on 
each full-time student. And the U of S is considering major 
tuition increases this year because of cuts to operating grants by 
this NDP government. 
 
While tuition fees have risen dramatically, family incomes have 
not. So you have the issue of reduced accessibility for students 
— something that this government should know about since 
they spoke about it in the last provincial election. 
 
Those students who cannot afford to attend university will be 
faced with huge student loans when they graduate, Mr. Speaker. 
This is what 10 years of NDP government have done to the U of 



844 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

S — last in the Maclean’s ranking and now they cannot fulfill 
their mandate to the people of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how does the minister explain the NDP 
government’s lack of commitment to the University of 
Saskatchewan and to publicly funded post-secondary 
education? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the hon. member 
was to have his way and follow SP policy, he would be 
introducing a $17 million cutback this year. That’s the fact of 
the matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The minister will continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I point out to the hon. 
member and to families and students across the province of 
Saskatchewan: in this budget this year, a scholarship program; 
in this budget this year, a student employment program, a 
centennial employment program; in this budget this year, a 
doubling of education tax credits. Mr. Speaker, the list goes on 
and on. 
 
But when the hon. member stands and he wants to talk about 
commitment and percentage increases for funding to our 
universities, there is no denying he is . . . you notice very 
carefully he did not deny the SP policy for funding in the 
province of Saskatchewan is to increase by inflation. That 
means ripping $17 million out of the University of 
Saskatchewan. We’re not going there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Minister of CIC. The Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation 
owns potato storage facilities in the RM (rural municipality) of 
Rudy near the town of Broderick. Last fall the RM sent a grant 
in lieu notice to the corporation for the land and facilities they 
own in the RM. The notice amounted to just over $155,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Crown corporation decided they didn’t have 
to pay any business or commercial taxes on this property, and 
they paid the RM just $795 as agriculture property. Mr. 
Speaker, no other business in Saskatchewan gets to revert their 
taxes in this way. How is that fair, Mr. Speaker? 
 
To the Minister of CIC: why is the Saskatchewan Valley Potato 
Corporation exempt from paying the commercial taxes to the 
RM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I believe the 
member asks a very legitimate and serious question. It’s my 
understanding, Mr. Speaker, that our officials in the corporation 
are working with the RM to try and find a resolution that is 
mutually agreeable on this particular issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, they’ve been 
working, I believe, for over a year. The RM of Rudy is expected 
to supply the same services to facilities as any other business in 
the RM. They have to make sure there are good roads to storage 
buildings; they also provide snow removal. Yet for all this, the 
NDP government thinks $795 in tax is enough compensation. 
 
Meanwhile private and agriculture businesses in that same RM 
pay thousands and thousands of dollars in taxes. Any private 
person or business who doesn’t agree with their assessment or 
their tax rate can enter an appeal process. But this RM received 
no notification that the potato facility wished to appeal their 
grant in lieu of notice. All the RM got back from Saskatchewan 
Party . . . or from the Saskatchewan Potato Corporation was a 
letter saying all they would pay was the tax owed on the 
agriculture land, nothing on the commercial buildings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Why did SPVC not go through 
this appeal process with the RM? And who in this corporation 
decided that they didn’t have to pay the commercial and 
business tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I 
don’t think I can do much more than repeat the answer that I 
just gave, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have an industry out there that is, I think, doing very well 
right now. We’re certainly exporting potatoes to Prince Edward 
Island, as I said. 
 
But on this particular issue, the member raises a legitimate 
concern that I think needs to be dealt with. And it’s my 
understanding that the officials within the corporation, Mr. 
Speaker, are working with the RM and the RMs to try and find 
resolution to this issue that I know that there is disagreement 
on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, over the last few weeks, we’ve 
heard the Minister of Municipal Affairs brag about grants in 
lieu of taxes that his department is supplying to municipalities. 
Well here we have a government Crown corporation, a business 
enterprise, telling an RM they don’t have to pay grant in lieu of 
taxes that have been assessed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this property was assessed by SAMA 
(Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency), the 
government’s own assessment agency, yet this potato facility 
just decided to change the amount it owed. 
 
Every other private agriculture business must pay commercial 
taxes, but the government somehow thinks it’s exempt. Now all 
other ratepayers in the RM are going to have to compensate for 
this Crown corporation’s arrogance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why should every other business and local 
ratepayer in this RM have to pay their taxes at assessed values, 
but this Crown corporation thinks they are somehow exempt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 845 

 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m not the minister 
responsible, but I think I’m going to make one slight correction. 
SAMA is not a government agency, just for clarification for the 
member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, for days we listen to criticisms, Mr. 
Speaker, about investments that our Crown corporations have 
made outside of the province. Well here we are with an 
investment in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, investment in 
Saskatchewan and they’re critical of that as well. 
 
We create jobs out in that area, Mr. Speaker. There’s many jobs 
there and I think we have an industry that is going to grow into 
the future. We have an industry that we should be proud of out 
there, Mr. Speaker. We have an infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, that 
is an investment of some $120 million that I think is only 
logical that we add value to. 
 
Again though, I want to repeat that it is my understanding that 
our officials are currently working with the RMs to try and find 
resolution to the problem as correctly identified by the member 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 216 — The Crown Corporations Disclosure Act 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to move 
first reading of Bill No. 216, The Crown Corporations 
Disclosure Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Item 113 will be converted to orders for 
returns (debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Item no. 114 converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to table a response to 
question no. 115. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to question 115 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Item no. 116 is converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Item 117 is converted. 

Mr. Yates: — I’m pleased to table a response on behalf of the 
government. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip is tabling the response 
to question no. 118. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Table responses to questions 119 through 124 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to items 120, 121, 122, 123, 
and 124 are hereby tabled. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on a 
point of privilege. 
 
The Speaker: — Could you state your point of privilege please. 
 

PRIVILEGE 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier today 
according to the proper procedures I sent you a letter detailing 
my point of privilege that would deal with the article in today’s 
newspaper which the headline read, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, 
“Hillson alleges bribe to shut up.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very serious charge and I believe needs to 
be referred to the Committee of Privileges and Elections to 
make this determination. This type of an accusation, Mr. 
Speaker, sheds a cloud of question over this entire Assembly, 
every member in it. As well, Mr. Speaker, due to the nature of 
the accusation, over every one of our Crown corporations and 
the Crown officials that deal therein. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do have a motion to make and I would ask that 
you rule and allow this to proceed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I wish to speak to the motion. I wish to speak 
to the request made of Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — The member from North Battleford is 
requesting to make a statement. Is leave granted? With respect 
to this same issue I presume? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday I was asked by a 
reporter if I’d ever been offered a trip, and I replied yes. I might 
say that the word bribe never crossed my lips, but was added by 
the media. 
 
However, I do wish to say earlier last year I was approached by 
a senior official of CIC and offered a trip to Australia as part of 
my, quote, “professional development.” I had been critical of 
CIC investment decisions and was told that this would help me 
to understand the province’s investment strategy. 
 
Later in December, after a government caucus meeting at which 



846 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

I was critical of CIC investment plans, the same official 
telephoned me. He again repeated that I should go to Australia 
with my wife. He said that as long as I was going that far they 
may as well make it a ’round the world ticket. I could stop in 
Zurich, London, and wherever else I wanted. There would be, 
quote, “the usual political cover for the trip.” 
 
I was shocked, but made no response. I concluded that the NDP 
had little respect for me or my motives for being in the 
coalition. 
 
I reported the incident to a few people. I note that the, quote, 
“denial” issued by Mr. Hart is technical and does not refute my 
statement. He says that no specific trip was offered to me, and 
that is correct. He also says that no travel arrangements were 
made for me, and that is also correct. 
 
The question has been raised as to whether my parliamentary 
privilege has been violated and whether I wish a special 
meeting of the Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections 
to investigate. While I am certainly prepared to repeat under 
oath what I have said, I do not request an investigation. If one is 
ordered by Mr. Speaker, I will of course be happy to co-operate 
fully. But I know what was said to me. 
 
It seems to me that all of us, whether elected officials or not, are 
afforded opportunities every day of our lives to make the wrong 
decision. It is no one else’s fault if we take advantage of such 
opportunities. In my case, I did not take the trip. I decided I 
could not remain in a coalition in which my partners apparently 
held me in low regard. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. I want to thank the 
member from Cannington and the member from North 
Battleford for their input. This is a very serious matter that the 
members have brought, and the members have brought 
information that needs to be very carefully considered, some of 
the information which I have just received within the last half 
hour. Therefore I reserve my ruling at this time. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Protection of Children and Youth from Sexual Exploitation 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise today to move an extremely important motion 
that has been near and dear to me . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is indeed 
my pleasure to rise today to move an extremely important 
motion that has been near and dear to my heart since I was 
elected to the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a growing problem in our province. The 
problem, Mr. Speaker, surrounds the grooming of and the 
sexual exploitation, the commercial exploitation of children in 
our province — the exploitation that they experience through 
the sex trades on our streets in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this very, very harmful activity damages our 
children beyond measure. It damages them emotionally, 

psychologically, and physically. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my opinion, there is no worse crime — no 
worse crime — than the exploitation of children through the sex 
trade. There is no worse crime than adults knowingly and 
purposely hurting our children, using children for their own 
selfish gratification. And there is no worse crime than those 
who would exploit children because they want to ensure their 
financial means are achieved through this heinous activity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on the average, children that are pulled into the 
sex trade and involved in the sex trade die within seven years of 
their initial involvement on the streets. This is a matter not only 
of children’s health — it is a matter of their dignity, it is a 
matter of their rights to live safely and successfully. All of these 
rights that they should enjoy are being exploited and stripped 
from them by the sexual abuse that they encounter on the 
streets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been countless media reports done on 
this issue, but one cover story that stands out in particular was a 
cover story in The StarPhoenix in 1995. And the headline that 
day in The StarPhoenix sums up how I feel about this very, very 
horrendous activity. And, Mr. Speaker, that headline was 
shocking — “So many, so young.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a series of reports done by one of our great 
media people here in Saskatchewan, I also read a story of a 
young 11-year-old girl, Dawn May Davidson. As I read through 
that report, Mr. Speaker, I just simply could not believe it, that 
so much . . . such horrific activity was happening to this very 
young Aboriginal girl to the point where she was completely 
debilitated, not only because drugs were forced upon her but 
through malnourishment and through a situation that she could 
not seem to fight. She was being placed on the streets and 
groomed by her peers and she knew no better. However, the end 
result was a near-death experience for this young woman. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of our most vulnerable members of society 
are young children, are on the streets late at night, being forced 
to sell their bodies for a few measly dollars, for a pack of 
cigarettes, for diapers for their siblings, for money that support 
a drug and alcohol habit, a habit that their pimps have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the World Congress Against the 
Commercial Sexual Exploitation of Children, it has indicated 
that each year, over one million children are forced into 
prostitution, trafficked, and sold for sexual purposes or used in 
child pornography worldwide. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there is this really sick view by some men 
whom we call johns, that younger individuals on the streets who 
sell themselves are not children or persons, but rather objects or 
products who are willing to provide a service. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is absolutely no truth to that sort of an 
attitude. And on the part of these perpetrators, Mr. Speaker, 
there seems to be absolutely no indication, no element of 
emotional association, or no indication of an intellectual 
realization of what is actually taking place, of what they are 
doing to these children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in many instances those that abuse our children do 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 847 

 

not realize the personal psychological cause and effect that 
sexual molestation has on the lives of children, that sexual 
molestation has on children who go through experience after 
experience of horror and pain. It is viewed by these johns as 
simply supply and demand. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very insensitive and unfeeling lack 
of understanding point of view. And this is where the problem 
seems to lie. This is the problem with years of learned 
behaviour by johns. This is the problem with years of myth and 
fantasy. And that’s what continually causes the most damage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, irresponsible behaviour on the part of johns and 
pimps and those who would perpetuate the activity of selling 
our children on the streets, persons who have such a disrespect 
for children and for human life, it is because of those kinds of 
attitudes, Mr. Speaker, that we have come to a time in our 
history, a time that has been created, an activity that is almost 
accepted, and it is what we know as child prostitution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it perhaps can be said that the selling of children’s 
bodies into the sex trade is the worst type of sexism and abuse 
that we have created as a society. 
 
Since I became familiar with this issue, Mr. Speaker, it has been 
a challenge, a challenge to place criminalization of this activity 
where it belongs — with the criminals, with johns and pimps, 
and all those who would perpetrate this very horrendous crime. 
And it has been a challenge also, Mr. Speaker, to bring 
awareness, to point out the need for comprehensive services to 
aid in the healing and recovery of child victims whose lives are 
almost devastated by this crime. 
 
It has been a challenge to find out what the root cause of the 
problem is, since we all know that no one in society is safe from 
sexual predators. And one root cause, Mr. Speaker, that has 
been pointed out to our committee time and time again, is 
poverty. 
 
Many children enter willingly, and some unwillingly — mostly 
unwillingly — into the sex trade. But those that do it willingly 
do so to improve their life or to obtain material goods, or 
sometimes as a means to escape an abusive situation, only to be 
lured into a world that is very, very difficult to escape. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker, there are many media 
reports that can be referred to that paint a very sad picture for 
these children that are exploited through the sex trade. Many of 
these children’s lives and their futures are put into serious 
jeopardy. Many of them are forced to sell themselves at such 
young ages as seven or eight. These children are often not in 
school. They do not learn basic social skills that would help 
them become productive members of society. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are also many other negative things that 
happen to these children when they are out on the streets. They 
are coerced and manipulated into involvement with drugs and 
alcohol. Oftentimes they use these substances to suppress the 
pain of what they’re going through in their lives. 
 
One very sad story was brought to my attention by a young lady 
that was forced into working on the streets at the age of 13 and 
then tried straightening out her life. But, Mr. Speaker, just three 

days before her 16th birthday, she overdosed on drugs. She 
died. 
 
Mr. Speaker, children exploited through the sex trade is nothing 
more than paid rape. Looking at children as a means of sexual 
pleasure is strictly criminal. But, unfortunately, it is practically 
treated as though rape is legal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also important to look at the other side of this 
issue, and that is the side of those individuals that are buying 
sex from children. They appear to be some . . . there appears to 
be some need on their part for power, either to prove one’s 
sense of self or have power over those that are not as powerful. 
 
It is no doubt that in our society those with the least influence 
and power tend to be children. Every person in our province has 
a responsibility to ensure that our children and youth are 
protected not only from sexual predators, but also from the 
other ills of society that can come along to steal away our 
children. 
 
Our children become perfect victims of abuse by those that seek 
to buy sex, but we need to educate everyone on the 
consequences of those actions. Continuing to ignore the 
problem, Mr. Speaker, will not make it go away. Life for these 
children involved in the sex trade can sometimes be a 
nightmare. In fact, almost all of the time it is a nightmare. 
 
(14:45) 
 
One young lady that was forced into the sex trade by her cousin 
said that her biggest fear was getting killed. Now that is a very 
telling statement, Mr. Speaker. Our children should not have to 
fear for their lives. Adults should be protecting them when they 
speak of these fears. 
 
Not only are these children afraid that someone may physically 
hurt them, Mr. Speaker, there’s a major concern about disease, 
and with a growing number of AIDS (acquired immune 
deficiency syndrome) cases these children are a major target. 
 
Our children need help now. The world sex market is a 
multi-billion dollar industry, and when children are lured or 
coerced into this life they are denied their rights, their dignity, 
and their childhood. The activity of exploitation subjects our 
children to diseases, and most importantly it impedes their 
mental and physical health, undermining their development. 
Robbing a youth of their childhood is one of the most criminal 
acts any one person could do to another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, studies have shown that the majority of children 
exploited through the sex trade are girls; however there are 
growing numbers of boys. Many of these children come from 
poor families, urban and rural areas, and are between the ages 
of 7 and 18. Many of these children are runaways and they turn 
to prostitution on their own to survive. But the vast majority are 
coerced into it. 
 
One of the best ways in addressing the child sex trade is 
prevention. The causes of sexual exploitation of children are 
diverse. And although it may be easy to place blame on many, 
many criminal syndicates to reduce exploiters to pimps and 
perverts, to disparage the children themselves as promiscuous 



848 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

or sexually irresponsible, no social sector can escape 
responsibility for the sexual exploitation of children. 
 
Unfortunately there is no magic cure that can effectively 
address this problem, but one tool certainly can be put into 
place that can help. And that is effective provincial legislation. 
It is our duty to ensure that children are protected. And there is 
no better way to do that than to pass legislation that helps our 
children stay safe and sends a message to those that abuse our 
children, that it will not be tolerated. 
 
We must never forget that our children are our most valued 
treasures. They are not be used, and need to be loved and 
nurtured. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my comments by quoting 
Nelson Mandela: 
 

In days gone by, and possibly even today, in many 
instances the view has prevailed that children should be 
seen and not heard. The time has come for our children to 
be seen and to be very closely heard. The cries of our 
abused and exploited children must no longer fall on deaf 
ears. 

 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move the following 
motion, seconded by my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
introduce legislation to protect youth in our province from 
those involved in the child sex trade before the end of the 
current session of the legislature. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear! Hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have had the honour of being on the committee that is trying to 
protect our children from sexual exploitation. The committee 
has been meeting since January of the year 2000. We’ve met 
with over 200 witnesses and each one of them is involved or is 
concerned about our children on the street. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have an order of reference and a mandate that 
our committee has been working under for the last year and a 
number of months. The first one is: we are to consult with 
stakeholders that have an interest in this issue to determine the 
work that has been done to date by community representatives 
and service providers and seek their input of the next steps to be 
taken by the community and the government. 
 
Our second mandate: is to check the strategies employed by 
other jurisdictions and the effectiveness of their approaches. 
 
Our third reason, and the one that maybe is taking the longest 
for our committee and the one that’s maybe the hardest to listen 
to in our committee meetings is: the reasons why children end 
up on the street in the first place and supports that may be 
necessary to help communities effectively deal with the sexual 
exploitation of children. 
 
And finally: other such consultations that may be germane. 

Mr. Speaker, when we initially started this committee we knew 
. . . all of us recognized there was a large concern out there. The 
number of children that were on the street was a number that 
was variable — we couldn’t get any concise number, any firm 
numbers on it — but we knew that even one child was too 
many. 
 
And all committee members work together and knew that there 
was something that this province could do if we were going to 
make zero tolerance the word that we wanted to be known for 
across this great land. 
 
I remember so many of the testimonies that we heard and they 
all had a huge impact on us as it did with other committee 
members. One of the young girls that spoke to us had been on 
the street since she was 12 years old. In fact, she was the oldest 
of three children that had been in the house for a number of 
days with no adult around. She remembers there being no food 
in the house and no one to look after the young children, and 
she didn’t know where to turn. So do you know what she did? 
She did the only thing that she knew how to do. She went out 
on the street and she sold her body and she sold her soul and 
she sold her mind. She did that, Mr. Speaker, for $20. 
 
She went back in the house and put her siblings in a wagon and 
pulled them down to the Mac’s store or 7 Eleven and bought 
milk, and bread, and diapers, and treats for those children. Mr. 
Speaker, that child was never a child again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an example of the horror stories that we’ve 
heard over and over again from our committee. Everyone on 
our committee, every single member of our committee, and I 
believe everyone in this Assembly wants those stories to be a 
thing of the past. 
 
They really do want zero tolerance to be the goal of our 
committee. We are united in our desire to totally eliminate the 
involvement of children in the sex trade in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the reasons children are on the streets will 
not surprise any of the members in this House. The economic 
conditions of many children is very, very low. Over 85 per cent 
of the children that are on the street are of Aboriginal descent. 
Witness upon witness talked about the racism that is felt 
amongst Native people. The poverty that we have witnessed 
firsthand as we travelled around this province is hard to believe, 
Mr. Speaker, and not just on a reserve — off the reserve, in our 
cities. Right here in our province, in this beautiful province that 
we’re all proud of there are many children living in absolutely 
abhorrent conditions. 
 
Alcohol and drug abuse is a huge factor. Many of the young 
people we talked to stated clearly that they never knew a home 
life free from alcohol. Many of them had never knew what it 
was like to live a life away from physical and mental abuse that 
came from the abuse of alcohol and drugs. 
 
One thing I believe many members should know is something 
that I learned during our committee members . . . our committee 
meetings. I believe that many of the girls, the children on the 
street were there to pay for their drug habit. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
was very, very wrong. In fact, it’s the other way around. 
 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 849 

 

Children that use drugs, help them . . . use them to help them 
forget what they have seen, what they are doing on the streets, 
and what they are doing to their bodies. They need the drugs to 
take them away from the real world that they are living in — 
the physical and mental and emotional abuse that comes from 
selling your body. They are using drugs for that reason, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other issues that we heard about, very 
loudly, from a number of members . . . witnesses, was the 
truancy that there is in our cities — in Saskatoon especially. 
We’ve heard numbers of anywhere from 600 to 1,500 children 
that are not going to school. They are called hidden children, 
not only by the witnesses that met with our committee but by 
the witnesses from the Role of the School report that was 
presented to the legislature not long ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these children that are not in school are living 
lives that are . . . probably they don’t even know that they 
should be in school. They have no one there at home to 
encourage them to go to school. They don’t know what the life 
is where education is part of their well-being. 
 
On Friday evening, I had an opportunity to ride along with the 
city police in Saskatoon and, Mr. Speaker, that was an 
eye-opener. We were on the street to witness first-hand what 
johns do, how they pick up the children, how these children are 
standing there helpless and not knowing where they are going 
to. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at 3 o’clock in the morning we ran into a 
group of young people, 15 or 20 children that are between 10 
and 12 years old that weren’t at home. And when we asked 
them why aren’t you at home, they seemed surprised that we 
didn’t know. They didn’t think of home as you and I know it — 
as a loving place where somebody cares about us. There was no 
one there to give them a curfew. There was no one there to ask 
them why they didn’t come home at night. There was no one 
there to put their arm around and tell them that they loved them. 
They didn’t understand what we know as a home life. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s something that many of us cannot possibly 
relate to. 
 
And these children, Mr. Speaker, that are, that are truant are the 
ripe candidates for being on the street for children that will be 
abused. Many of the children that we have talked to through our 
committee meeting have lived such a life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the stories that we have heard over and over again 
have one common theme. We hear that the children should no 
longer be penalized. It is not the children’s fault. Why should 
we punish them over and over again? 
 
The second thing that we heard about is that johns should not 
only be discouraged, they should be shamed and scared and 
totally embarrassed and know that they are not permitted to deal 
with our children in Saskatchewan the way they have been. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the goal of all of the committee members. 
 
The people that we have met with have said let’s not study it 
any longer. Let’s not talk about it any longer. Let’s get on with 
making a difference. One of the mothers that we talked to last 

year came back to our committee again this year and said, I 
believed in your committee. I know what you . . . I know you’re 
all trying to do the right thing. But it’s been a full year and my 
daughter is still out on the street and she is still lost and I can’t 
get to her. And I’m banking on you to help me. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a huge responsibility and one that everyone 
in this Assembly should be taking very seriously. 
 
I have the greatest respect for the members opposite’s desire to 
make changes that will have a positive effect on our exploited 
children. I know that we are united in our desire to stop this 
exploitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is no longer just enough to talk about it and to 
plan for a future change. It has to happen right now. We might 
not get the legislation right the very first time. We may have to 
amend it; we know Alberta amended their legislation. But 
anything that we can do now will protect some child, even if it’s 
just for a short time, even if it’s just for tonight. 
 
And you know what this is going to do? It’s going to send a 
very strong message that we are very sincere and determined in 
this respect — that we mean business, that we’re willing to take 
a chance and maybe have a word wrong in some legislation and 
maybe have to make changes. But we will start getting the 
message out, educating the people of this province that 
Saskatchewan has zero tolerance for abusing children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is the message that we want to send. As a 
united Assembly, that’s what we want to do. So I will second 
the motion put forward by the member from Humboldt, and 
hope that all members in this House will join us in this desire to 
stop the exploitation of our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
members opposite in talking about this very serious issue. At 
the conclusion of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will be moving an 
amendment, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin, that I think all members of this Assembly will be 
able to support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the members opposite have said, this is a very, 
very serious issue. And the two members that have spoken to 
this issue have sat with myself and members on this side, and 
the member from Moosomin as well, listening for hundreds of 
hours to those who have a great deal of concern about this issue 
in our communities. 
 
Now we started this endeavour, as the member spoke of, well 
over a year ago. And I do believe that we have listened with 
respect to every single person who would like to speak to us, 
Mr. Speaker, and I believe that the time has been well spent. It 
has taken time for many of the stakeholders to this problem in 
our communities to come forward and be part of the solutions, 
Mr. Speaker. It has been recently that members of the First 
Nations community have come forward and wanted to be 
helpers and solvers of this problem as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We started this committee and moving down the road to 
resolution of this problem with some very, very strong 



850 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

principles, Mr. Speaker. And those principles include that every 
child is everybody’s responsibility. 
 
And we’ve heard throughout the province as we’ve gone about 
and talked to people and talked to the children, the parents, the 
teachers, the community service providers in our communities 
across the province, that this is everyone’s problem and that it 
will take everyone to find a solution. And, Mr. Speaker, I agree 
with that. 
 
(15:00) 
 
This problem isn’t one that we can’t turn our backs on, we can’t 
run from and we can’t hide from. We have heard, the members 
of this committee, from too many children who are depending 
upon us to make a difference. And, Mr. Speaker, that is what 
we are going to attempt to do. 
 
But we alone cannot make a difference. Until society views this 
heinous crime against children for what it really is, there will 
always be those who take advantage of our children in our 
society. And, Mr. Speaker, awareness in our discussions about 
this, helping to raise awareness, will turn more people’s eyes 
towards this heinous crime and make it more and more socially 
unacceptable. And, Mr. Speaker, until every single person in 
our communities believes that the protection of our children is 
everybody’s responsibility, we won’t make the type of 
significant difference that we need to make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also very clearly outlined our position that the 
involvement of children in the sex trade is child abuse. It is not 
prostitution. It is not any other event but simple child abuse, 
Mr. Speaker. Anybody that would abuse a child is the lowest 
form of individual in our society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we must recognize this for what it is — child abuse. We 
can no longer put names on it that people are willing to accept 
or no longer look at it in a way that people can avoid dealing 
with this crime for what it is — it’s simple child abuse, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We also developed a goal, Mr. Speaker, that zero tolerance is 
where we want to be. There’s not a single member of our 
committee, or do I believe a single member of this legislature, 
that does not want to see a goal of zero tolerance for any form 
of abuse of our children on the streets. And to that end, we’ve 
been working. The members of the committee have worked 
hard to listen to the people who are most involved in these 
issues on the street, who have worked most closely with the 
children who are involved on the streets, with their families, 
their parents and their communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we have to act to protect our 
children and I believe the members opposite also very strongly 
believe that we must act to protect our children. We have heard 
many things and many comments from children and their 
parents that shake the very foundations of what you believe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very difficult to have a 9- or 10-year-old child 
come before you in hearings and tell you about how they were 
first involved in the sex trade at eight and how it impacted their 
lives, how their parents and others were impacted by their 
involvement, and how their community is affected. 

Mr. Speaker, you cannot have spent a year listening to all the 
things that we have and not have a significant dedication to 
moving this issue forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this issue is one that our communities need 
to be part of the solution. Yes, we in the legislature must lead, 
and once the all-party committee brings forward its 
recommendations we must act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have heard and researched the methods that 
other jurisdictions are trying to deal with this problem. We’ve 
looked from British Columbia, Alberta, Manitoba, Ontario. 
We’ve talked to officials in those provinces. We’ve talked to 
police officers from those provinces and we’ve talked to our 
own people within the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we 
have seen what has worked and reviewed what has worked in 
other jurisdictions. We’ve looked at other provinces and other 
states in the United States and some of the methods that they’re 
using to tackle this problem. 
 
But we’ve also looked at the root causes of this problem, Mr. 
Speaker, because without some of the social problems that we 
still have in our society that make this issue and problem much 
more relevant to those young children. Those young children 
are involved in the streets for a number of reasons — poverty, 
education — things that we as a government must also seek to 
address the root causes of why they’re involved. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we must act as one to solve this problem. 
This is not one that has partisan politics involved. It’s one that 
must stretch across the breadth of our communities; it’s one that 
can only be tackled by total co-operation of all involved. 
 
I must say that this committee, all-party committee, that I’ve 
been a part of, has worked towards that goal. I don’t think 
there’s a single member of the committee that doesn’t work 
with the greatest relentlessness towards resolving this problem. 
It is one that has many dimensions. It’s not simple; it’s a very 
complex problem. It is one that many would just as soon sweep 
under the carpet, Mr. Speaker, and not want to deal with. If it’s 
not in my neighbourhood, it’s not my problem. Mr. Speaker, we 
have to ensure that the people of this province view it as 
everybody’s problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we must deal with both the children that are 
exploited on the streets and we must deal with those who 
exploit them. We must be willing to deal with them in a manner 
that sends a message to the public that this will not be tolerated. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we must give the tools, knowledge, and 
expertise to those in our communities who work with these 
children to make them more able to deal with the pressures in 
our society and deal with the facts that they must deal with in 
their lives in order to become more rounded, more 
knowledgeable, and more able participants within our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult to find any fault in these 
children. These are children. They are the ones being abused 
within our society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but we also have to deal with the families and the 
communities that have allowed this to be a silent crime, for 
there hasn’t been a public outcry. We must deal with our First 
Nations communities to help them develop training mechanisms 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 851 

 

and treatment facilities to deal with Aboriginal youth. 
 
We must work with our cities and our departments in 
government to enhance our treatment facilities and capabilities 
to deal with these children. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we must do something within a timely 
manner. And I think it’s very important to the members 
opposite and to the members on this side that we do this within 
a timely manner. And to that end, Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
move an amendment, seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin: 
 

That all the words after Assembly be deleted and 
substituted with the following: 
 
encourage the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade to present 
its report to the Legislative Assembly by the end of May, 
2001, so that speedy and appropriate action based on the 
recommendations of the committee may be taken to protect 
the youth in our province. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to second the motion made by my colleague and to 
enter into the general debate on this topic. 
 
And I know that there has been a great deal of unanimity in this 
committee, and I know that there’s also a good deal of 
frustration. You cannot sit and listen to the horrific stories that 
we have sat and listened to for the last almost 18 months and 
not be moved to want to deal with this problem in the speediest 
possible way. 
 
I would also say, though, that being on the government side of 
the House, I am very cognizant of the need to craft our 
legislation, if indeed legislation is what the committee 
recommends, in the most careful manner, with great attention to 
detail so that we can get it right. 
 
And it’s easy to say we will make some mistakes. And I think 
that it’s easy to say that even with very careful consideration, 
Mr. Speaker, that we will still make mistakes. But I don’t want 
to give the perpetrators of this abuse of children on the street 
any opportunity to have more time to perfect ways to get around 
laws that we may be able to bring into force as soon as possible. 
 
All members have spoken quite eloquently about the problem 
that these children are facing; about the stories that we heard; 
the very young children that are out there; the very helpless 
feeling that they have. And we’ve talked about the guiding 
principles of our committee — that every child is everyone’s 
responsibility. And I’m proud of that guiding principle. And 
part of our mandate, I believe, is to spread that message into the 
general public and make sure that we all share that common 
goal that every child is every person’s responsibility. 
 
There are those who would, as my colleague across the way 
said, who would think that it’s a victimless crime; that the ones 

who are engaging in this practice are willing victims; that if 
they get some money for it, what’s the harm. And the harm, Mr. 
Chairman, is absolutely immeasurable. It cannot be measured in 
any human terms that we know of. These people are left 
shattered. Their lives are for the most part destroyed. And it will 
take years and years of nurturing to put them back on any sort 
of a path. 
 
And so I think in having zero tolerance as our goal, it’s the 
noblest of goals, and we all have to work toward it. And we will 
have to educate people. Because children are very much left and 
thought of in many parts of our society as chattels, as objects to 
be put on the street for either the exploitation of those who 
would use them to bring money into the home, to bring drugs or 
alcohol or other things that they consider necessities of life into 
the home, and by those who would use them for their own 
personal gratification, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it’s near and dear to every member on this committee, it’s 
near and dear to our heart to make sure that we get it right. 
 
The behaviour by johns, we have found, can be addressed in 
some ways by john schools. And we find that the stories we 
hear from people who give those schools is that they have no 
idea of the effect that they’re having on the people that they’re 
abusing. But certainly that is not enough, to just send them off 
to a john school. 
 
But there is some learned behaviour, and it’s not going to be 
easy to knock that out of their system, if you will. 
 
We understand on this side of the House, and every member of 
this committee understands that these children need help now. 
And we are as anxious as anyone to make sure that that gets 
done. 
 
We know that legislation can be an effective tool, or we hope 
that legislation can be an effective tool. And as stated, one of 
the mandates of our committee was to review legislation that’s 
been enacted in other jurisdictions. 
 
Unfortunately from what I recall of most of that, the Manitoba 
legislation I think can be a useful piece of legislation in seizing 
the vehicles of johns and abusers. The Alberta legislation has 
met with a great deal of critique here in Saskatchewan, mostly 
from the victims of child sexual abuse on the streets who feel 
that it would be another form of victimization. 
 
But I think that there needs to be some way that we can save 
these children from themselves if you will, some way to rescue 
them when they’re in peril and in harm and get them to a safe 
place where we can begin to address the issues that face them. 
 
(15:15) 
 
However, the prospect of locking children into a secure system 
and having to deal with the possibility of chaining them if they 
refuse to co-operate is one that I’m not very anxious to think 
about. 
 
And I think that, therefore, one of the problems that we face is 
that the devil is indeed in the detail of anything that we may 
propose to deal with this problem. And I would suggest that that 



852 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

is why we must look extremely carefully at what we’re going to 
do in taking measures to address this rather horrific and indeed 
heinous problem that we have. 
 
One child wasted on the streets of our cities or our small towns 
is too much — one is too many. And I want to deal with it in 
the best way I can, but the devil is in the detail. 
 
And so I am hopeful, with the help of my colleagues and the 
help of all of the resources of the legislature, that when we get 
our report written, that we will be able to bring forth measures 
to deal with this problem as quickly as possible. I’m looking 
forward to having our report concluded by May 30, as may be 
passed with this amended motion that is being proposed, and 
looking forward to getting this job done. 
 
But I don’t believe it will ever be done. I believe that the 
committee will report, measures will be taken, but I think that 
the invaluable experience that this committee has gained can 
serve as a resource to people who will be left to deal with the 
problem in the future. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure to second the 
motion posed by my colleague. And I hope that it can meet the 
unanimous agreement of all members of this committee . . . of 
this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Speaker. And to 
save getting a twist in my tongue, probably the last time I’ll use 
that term, deputy deputy. 
 
But it’s a pleasure to join in the Assembly and the debate this 
afternoon in regards to the motion presented to us and the 
amendment. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, certainly I agree 
wholeheartedly with the motion and I can agree with the 
amendment. I think the amendment goes a long ways too in 
dealing with the concerns that are raised out there. 
 
I do have one question with the amendment. I hope to address 
that in my remarks over the next few minutes as I speak to this 
motion before us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this whole question is a question that I think if all 
members and all people in our society had an opportunity to 
really sit down, as a number of the members in this Chamber 
have already indicated — the members from the opposition side 
and the government members — there’s no doubt, Mr. Speaker, 
that if you were to sit in on any of the consultations we had with 
groups across this province, and certainly with young women 
who some are involved in the sex trade, some who were 
involved in the sex trade as children, I would have to suggest to 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d find it very difficult to think that 
there’d be anyone who would not have a real tug in their hearts 
and a real sense of the deplorable state we’re in when we prey 
on young children on the street. 
 
This question has been raised for a number of years, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and it’s time we dealt with it. And certainly 
the all-party committee, which I have a privilege of being a part 
of, and at times, I think, we’ve all felt the same way, we’ve felt 
at times like we’re spinning our wheels in trying to address the 

questions and trying to come up with some suggestions that we 
would ask the government to look at and to implement very 
quickly. 
 
We realize that there are some restrictive elements when it 
comes to bringing forward legislation. But at the same time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we need to take a serious look and we need to 
ask ourselves, are we serious about the question of whether 
we’re not going to begin to address the question of young 
children on the streets. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe we 
need to look beyond that, but our mandate was to really address 
the child sex trade or children in prostitution. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, through our debate, we’ve talked to 
individuals, we’ve talked to groups, we’ve talked to law 
enforcement officers, we’ve talked to other provinces. And a 
number of issues have been raised with us, from issues of 
poverty and the reason that children are on the streets. 
 
For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one young girl mentioned 
that there was no food in the house and she had siblings that 
were younger than her. And she was told that, you know, if you 
just went out on the streets someone might buy sex from you 
and you could use that money then to buy some food for your 
. . . and feed your siblings. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was abhorred at that. One, it’s hard 
to believe that in the province of Saskatchewan, in this country 
which we say is one of the greatest places to live, that we have 
young people, are placed in the situation and in home 
environments where there just isn’t the food available, and 
they’re prepared to sell themselves — their most precious 
resource if you will, the most intimate part of themselves — in 
order to provide for their young siblings. 
 
And I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that certainly gripped 
my heart. And I believe every member on the committee was 
gripped by the testimonies that were raised through the 
numerous meetings that we held. And it didn’t matter, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, what part of the province we were in; it didn’t 
matter where we were, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we heard the same 
thing. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a serious, a very serious matter, 
and one that needs to be dealt with. And I think you can 
appreciate the fact that all members have been struggling and 
grappling with the ways in which we can bring forward 
suggestions that we believe the government could act 
immediately to begin to address the concerns of child sex . . . or 
child prostitution. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the element of dealing with child sex 
prostitution is not just getting the children off the streets or not 
just dealing with those who would prey on these young 
children, but it’s a matter as well of building some pride and 
letting these young people know that they are very important 
and very special people and they are valued as citizens of this 
province. 
 
And rather than tearing their lives apart, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we want to encourage and help them build their lives so they 
can build for their future and become active participants in our 
communities and in our society and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 853 

 

actually be very able-bodied participants, and providing for not 
only themselves but their families, and for, hopefully, down the 
road, their children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So this whole question, as we’ve been talking about it, is there 
obviously is no easy, fast answer. And as my colleagues have 
already mentioned, the committee has met for a period of 
months endeavouring to come up with some suggestions. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think you will find that when the 
committee reports, that we will have some recommendations. 
We’re going to come forward with some recommendations; 
we’ve committed ourselves. 
 
There isn’t a member on the committee that isn’t prepared to 
come up with some serious recommendations, asking the 
government to take these recommendations seriously, and 
having reviewed them, to then — as a committee we’ve been 
reviewing them very carefully — we then want the government 
and the ministers responsible then to react quickly and very 
efficiently to begin to deal with the issues. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we would actually like to see the government come 
forward with some legislation, even in this session if at all 
possible. 
 
And I think while the member from Regina Dewdney’s 
amendment is suggesting that the committee report by the end 
of May, my hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that we are able to 
even beat that deadline. I know the committee members are 
committed to working diligently to even come forward with 
some recommendations before the deadline. 
 
But I think the suggestion that’s been brought forward giving us 
a time period to come up with recommendations is certainly, 
probably has given us more of an incentive to sit down and 
come up with some recommendations. 
 
And while we are aiming for a time period of bringing forward 
these recommendations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t want to 
just bring recommendations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, hoping that 
sometime in the distant future we’re going to address this 
question or legislation is going to be brought forward. We 
would like to see, or I believe many of the committee members 
would like to see that the government act immediately to begin 
to address the questions. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they may not be able to act on every 
issue, because I believe you’re going to see a number of 
recommendations coming forward and it may not be possible to 
move immediately on every recommendation. But I believe that 
we want to see the government begin to move and certainly 
within this session to address, begin to address some of the 
concerns, to show a commitment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to take 
the recommendations that the committee will be coming 
forward with very seriously. 
 
And so having said that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to take 
seriously the concerns that have been raised by every 
individual, every presenter, every police officer, every resource 
person, every group that has been out there working with 
children. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want people to take 
these seriously. 
 

I believe there isn’t a member in this Assembly when they hear 
the report brought forward by the committee, will not begin to 
acknowledge that this is a serious matter and that it’s one that 
we have to move on very quickly. 
 
And so while I certainly agree with the motion, and I appreciate 
the amendment and I can agree with the amendment, but I 
believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendment needs to go a little 
further. And I would like to therefore move a following 
amendment, seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That the following words be added after the word 
“province”: 

 
and that the government act on these recommendations 
including introducing appropriate legislation prior to the 
end of this session. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased to enter into this debate. 
This is one of the most important issues that we face in this 
province, the question of how to stop the sexual exploitation of 
our children. 
 
And in fact the child sex trade is just the tip of the iceberg in 
terms of the problem that we face in this province with respect 
to the sexual exploitation of our children. Because as our 
special committee has gone around the province, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’ve in effect realized how large scale a problem this 
question of sexual exploitation of our children is — in our 
homes, in our communities, and on the street. 
 
And in fact a lot of the children who are being sexually 
exploited on the street — most of the children who are being 
sexually exploited on the street by johns and pimps, by the 
predators of the street, in effect have first been sexually 
exploited in other settings in their community or at home. 
 
Now I do want to point out that our government has already 
taken a number of actions with respect to try to curb the 
exploitation of children in the sex trade. Members opposite 
haven’t made reference to any of those actions but I would like 
to do that now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Let’s not forget that the province of Saskatchewan already 
funds street outreach agencies in Saskatoon, Regina, Prince 
Albert, and North Battleford to work with children who are 
being sexually exploited on the street. 
 
Let’s also not forget that the province funds a safe house in 
Saskatoon that’s run by the Saskatoon Tribal Council. Both the 
Department of Justice and the Department of Social Services 
provide about $180,000 of funding a year to that safe house as a 
place of security for children who are either at risk of becoming 
involved in the sex trade or are already in some way involved in 
the sex trade in Saskatoon. And I might add that Saskatoon 
District Health also provides funding to that initiative. 
 
(15:30) 



854 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

Let’s not forget that the province has just announced a $10 
million initiative to try to curb, among other things, domestic 
abuse in the home, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We have announced 
that we are going to invest money in communities where 
children are particularly at risk and in neighbourhoods where 
children are particularly at risk and we’re going to try to set up 
home visitation support services to high-risk families. Now this 
initiative has been undertaken by a number of US (United 
States) states and the results have been very good, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in terms of reducing domestic abuse in the home. 
 
So obviously our government is very concerned about all of 
these issues and the whole purpose for setting up the special 
committee was to receive recommendations on an action plan 
for how to stop children being exploited on the street. And our 
government I know will move forward with many of the 
recommendations that are contained in the report. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to speak a little bit about some 
of the issues that we’re currently looking at in the report. We’re 
looking at ways of addressing the problem of children not in 
school, because many of the children who are involved in the 
sex trade are also not in school. And we’re looking at what sort 
of supports we could give to those children to get them back 
into school, because once kids are not in school they’re at much 
higher risk of becoming involved in the sex trade. 
 
I think that one of the important preventive measures we can 
take is ensuring that we sharply reduce the number of children 
under 16 who are not in school in our major cities, and we’re 
looking very seriously at that. 
 
We’re looking seriously at the idea of a network of safe houses 
across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that would be a place 
of safety for children in high-risk neighbourhoods, and 
particularly children who are already involved in some way in 
the sex trade, as the starting point for trying to pull them off the 
street on a permanent basis. 
 
We are looking at the potential for expanding significantly 
alcohol and drug treatment facilities for children who’ve been 
sexually exploited and putting in place appropriate counselling 
services not only for the children themselves, but also for their 
families, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We are looking at questions of providing adequate housing for 
children who are currently on the street, particularly if they 
can’t stay safely with an extended family member. 
 
We are looking at the potential for other ways of children who 
are being sexually exploited but have turned to the street as a 
way of earning money. We’re looking at other ways for them to 
be provided with employment opportunities and a source of 
revenue. 
 
So we’re looking at a number of issues — and I’ve just given 
these as examples, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that are not related 
to legislation but are good, sound policy measures and budget 
measures that need to be discussed and introduced in this 
Assembly. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, finally, we are looking at a 
legislative package, and we’re going to be, in fact, discussing a 

potential legislative package when the special committee meets 
an hour and a half from now. We’ll be meeting between 5:15 
and 8 p.m. tonight and what we’re going to be discussing is a 
package of legislation that we might be able to recommend to 
the Assembly. 
 
So clearly all members of the committee and both government 
and opposition in this House are committed to moving forward 
with this agenda. 
 
Now I just want to say a word about the question of legislation, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am absolutely committed to seeing 
legislation introduced as quickly as possible to both deter johns 
and protect children. Whether a full package of legislation can 
be introduced during this session, Mr. Deputy Speaker, remains 
to be seen. I think we should see first what the final report of 
the committee is. 
 
And I just want to comment on both legislation that — and I’m 
speaking personally now and not on behalf of the government 
in any way, but speaking personally — I think there are some 
Bills that we could look at introducing in this session, because 
the framework for the Bills has been worked on by other 
provinces to some degree already. 
 
And I use as an example the legislation that we are currently 
looking at to seize the vehicles of johns. We’ve got this 
legislation operating in Manitoba already. And if the committee 
decides to recommend to the legislature that we adopt similar 
legislation, it would be possible, I think, to get this legislation 
through in this session as long as the official opposition are 
willing to agree. 
 
But there’s a lot of other legislative instruments we’re looking 
at, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that really will have to be built from 
the ground up. 
 
For instance we’re looking at the concept of children who have 
been sexually abused on the street being able to launch a civil 
suit against the john who abused them or against the pimp who 
abused them. No other jurisdiction in the world has ever 
undertaken such legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and it won’t 
be possible to introduce it between the time the committee 
reports at the end of May and the end of this legislative session 
in June. 
 
We are looking at the idea of high surveillance areas, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Areas in the . . . that would essentially 
represent the stroll areas of our city . . . of our cities. In 
Saskatoon, Regina, and Prince Albert, in particularly . . . in 
particular, there’s certain blocks that are known to be the stroll. 
And on those blocks men regularly pick up children, seeking 
sexual services. 
 
And it’s my view, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the police need to 
be given additional powers in those neighbourhoods to fully 
investigate the nature of the relationship between the man who 
picks a child up in a car, and the child. And it’s my view that if 
the man can’t demonstrate a natural relationship between 
himself and the child in the car, that a full investigation of what 
is happening should take place. 
 
But there are significant issues to look at here with respect to 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 855 

 

the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, with respect to 
encroachment on the Criminal Code. And I just want to say to 
all members of the Assembly, in all sincerity, that these are not 
questions that are going to be resolved in a matter of four weeks 
after the committee reports. 
 
So there is some legislation I believe we can do in this session 
and there is some legislation that is going to need to wait until 
the next session, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s why I support 
the amendment that’s being put forward by my colleague, the 
member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Thank you so much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I have a question of the 
mover of the amendment, if I may? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — . . . a few seconds left in the . . . Does 
the member wish to speak to the motion? 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s usually a pleasure to rise and to speak in this 
House, but on this occasion I’m . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. I 
would like to thank the hon. member for Regina Northeast, 
however the time for the 65-minute debate portion has expired. 
We are now going into the 10-minute portion for questions and 
answers of members. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the mover of 
the amendment, from my perspective it is clear that everyone in 
this legislature, those of us who have been listening to our 
colleagues, who have heard those colleagues who are on the 
special committee report, it is clear that everyone in this 
legislature is committed to doing what we can as soon as we are 
able to, to try and put an end to this heinous, heinous activity 
that’s going on out in the community. 
 
There is a job that needs to be done. We asked this committee 
to go out and to investigate the problems, to come back with 
clear and responsible recommendations for this legislature. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we want the legislation that we make here to 
be effective. In order to do that, I believe we need to have an 
effective, responsible report. And so I ask, is it your intention 
that the government should take action beyond what is currently 
being done before the special committee presents its 
recommendations? It seems a little to me like, what I believe it 
was Steven Laycock said, getting on his horse and riding . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Would the member please . . . 
Question. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Do you want this action to be taken before 
the committee presents its recommendations? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I will let the member from Humboldt 
respond. I just remind the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley to direct the questions through the Chair, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 

Speaker, through you to the member, it has been certainly 
indicated a number of times by people prior to committee 
meetings as well as during committee hearings that there was a 
requirement or a request rather for legislation that would deter 
johns. 
 
The committee had, as part of its mandate and its guiding 
principles, one of zero tolerance. Zero tolerance is a phrase that 
is pointed towards zero tolerance for offences committed 
against children as well as zero tolerance by society for 
continuing and allowing the abuse of children on the streets. 
 
So within that context, I do believe that in looking at zero 
tolerance, that the people of Saskatchewan want us very quickly 
and expediently to look at the recommendations for legislation 
that have been put before us and to make sure that that happens 
for the sake of the children. We need to, and I think everyone 
would . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I have a question for the mover of the motion, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and through you my question is that will 
the mover of the motion acknowledge that while there is some 
legislation that we may be able to implement quite speedily in 
this Assembly, and I use as an example the seizure of vehicles 
driven by johns, because this legislation is already being 
developed by Manitoba; that a lot of the legislation we’re 
looking at is essentially cutting-edge legislation that in many 
cases no other jurisdiction has implemented. And I use as an 
example legislation that we’re looking at with respect to 
children being able to launch a civil suit against their john, 
legislation around giving police additional investigative powers 
in high surveillance areas around the stroll. 
 
Will the member acknowledge that there are significant issues 
around the Charter of Rights and Freedoms and around the 
potential encroachment on the Criminal Code that have to be 
looked at with care? And that that may be a reason why that 
legislation would have to be delayed until another session and 
would be difficult to implement now; whereas there are some 
things that we can implement now and therefore ought to do. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. That was a lot that 
you have mentioned there. I’m speaking to the member from 
Greystone. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there certainly was presented to our 
committee the Manitoba legislation, which lays out a format for 
legislation that’s already working in Manitoba and quite 
successful. We also have a complete format within the 
parameters of the legislation that is going to be given Royal 
Assent, I believe, in British Columbia this fall called the Secure 
Care Act. We also have the complete legislation from Alberta 
that has been made before us. 
 
We may be very innovative in our way of approaching things 
and combine components and aspects of those Acts that will 
contribute to one strong Act in Saskatchewan. And because 
those Acts are already printed, the contents are laid out before 
us, I don’t see why we can’t do that very expediently and before 
the end of this session. 
 



856 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, again to the hon. 
member for Humboldt who I have a great deal of respect for on 
this issue, but I want to ask her, will the member for Humboldt 
acknowledge that what happened in Alberta is that before 
legislation was introduced, services were put in place for 
children. The crucial question here with respect to any 
legislation around, in effect holding children in closed custody 
and preventing them from going out on the street can’t be put in 
place until the services are in place. 
 
So in effect, in my judgment, will she not acknowledge that it’s 
only the Manitoba legislation that we could really duplicate 
right now. And with respect to all the other legislation we’re 
looking at, the questions . . . will she not acknowledge that the 
questions around Charter of Rights and Freedoms have to be 
looked at with great care. We urgently need to do this, but we 
need to do it right. Will she not acknowledge that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thanks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Number one, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I think that in reference to your comments on 
the Charter of Rights and Freedoms, certainly we care enough 
to do our very best. And in placing our very best before the 
children of the province to protect them, we may — we may — 
end up having a challenge. However other provinces have done 
that too. They cared enough about their children; they moved. 
They moved; they made some changes. And that’s what’s 
important here today in Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, I think that it is really very important to recognize 
that you yourself — through the Chair, to the member from 
Greystone — you yourself had indicated to the media that there 
would be legislation tabled in this legislature before the end of 
this session. 
 
So I think that your intent at that time in saying that was very 
good, knowing that we have all the resources at hand. The 
government has financial resources, human resources, expertise, 
I hope, to look at all of these pieces of legislation and to put out 
one strong piece of legislation for this province. 
 
And I believe it can be done if we utilize all the resources 
properly. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I personally favour the 
idea of us introducing legislation on seizure of vehicles in this 
session. I just want to say personally, I would support that. I 
want to make that very clear. 
 
But I also want to make it clear that there are complex issues 
around a lot of the other legislative packages that I hope all 
members of this Assembly will acknowledge. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say in asking a final 
question of the member for Humboldt, will she not 
acknowledge that in fact the Alberta legislation that she makes 
reference to does not address the fundamental issue that all 
members in this Assembly recognize needs to be addressed and 
that is deterrence of johns. Not a single john has been charged 
under the Alberta legislation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

And what we need to do in this province is craft legislation that 
will truly deter johns. And will she not acknowledge that that’s 
the fundamental task and that it’s going to take some real care 
to craft that legislation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the question of deterring johns has been quite nicely 
addressed by presenters from the Vancouver City Police. There 
is a major deterrent of johns. It’s working. It’s in place. It could 
be a part of our legislation. It is also a protective measure for 
children on the streets. It’s a tracking system. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are also components of the 
Alberta legislation that we could certainly work on. 
 
What we are saying, very clearly, to the members opposite and 
to the member from Greystone — because he’s the one that 
brought this question forward — is let’s get moving. Let’s do 
something, let’s do something now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will attempt to make 
my question longer than I did my debate in this particular 
motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a member of the committee, I believe that the 
member from Humboldt would agree that we had many 
witnesses come forward to committee that identified that yes, 
there’s a problem existing on the street today and that does, of 
course, need our attention as quickly as possible. But at the 
same time, many witnesses identified root causes that would 
continue that problem to be there unless we are able to address 
the root causes. 
 
My question to the member is: what would you suggest 
legislation would be in place to address the root causes as 
causing young children to be on the streets? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I cannot answer the member 
that has presented that question because he knows very well 
that that is part of recommendations that will come forward. 
 
But we have had suggestions come forward to us to address root 
causes as very much as we can with what we have right now. 
They contain recommendations for work with children that are 
on the streets, that are out of school, talking about poverty, 
talking about different cultural programs that can be put in 
place on- and off-reserve to deal with the Aboriginal people and 
their issues with children on the streets. So we have a number of 
recommendations to deal with that. 
 
What I think is really important to look at and to understand 
that we also had the mandate to look at other jurisdictions and 
what they were doing. And part of those efforts that they were 
putting forward were pieces of legislation. 
 
Every province that we talked to had put forward legislation. 
We have a template of their legislation. I have reviewed those 
legislations, the Secure Care Act in British Columbia, the 
Protection of Children Involved in Prostitution Act in Alberta, 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 857 

 

and the one referring to the seizure of vehicles in Manitoba. I 
don’t think that we need to go through those things with a 
fine-tooth comb; they’re there for us. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The time for the 75-minute 
debate has now expired. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 — The International Bible College 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Ms. Higgins: — I move Bill No. 301, The International Bible 
College Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time and 
referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Our Lady of the Prairies 
Foundation Act, 2001 

 
Mr. Addley: — I move Bill No. 302, The Our Lady of the 
Prairies Foundation Act, 2001 be now read a second time and 
referred to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Providence Hospital, 
Moose Jaw Repeal Act 

 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I stand here with somewhat 
mixed feelings because this Bill marks the end of a wonderful 
facility in Moose Jaw that served its citizens well. But it’s my 
pleasure to move Bill No. 303, The Providence Hospital, Moose 
Jaw Repeal Act be now read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move Bill No. 
304, The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time and referred 
to the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

Bill No. 305 — The St. Anthony’s Home Repeal Act 
 
Ms. Higgins: — I move Bill No. 305, The St. Anthony’s Home 
Repeal Act be now read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

Bill No. 306 — The St. Thomas More College Act, 2001 
 

Mr. Addley: — I move Bill No. 306, The St. Thomas More 
College Act, 2001 be now read a second time and referred to 
the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Canadian Softwood Lumber Industry 
 

Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
have all heard in the media and seen lately on the nightly news 
the on-again, off-again dispute with the United States over the 
softwood lumber industry in Canada, and our exports that go 
through to the United States. 
 
Canada/US trade in softwood lumber has been under close 
scrutiny by the US softwood lumber industry for over 20 years, 
based on petitions filed by the United States industry and the 
United States government. 
 
The United States government initiated countervailing duty 
investigations against softwood lumber exports from Canada in 
1982 and 1986. These investigations focused on federal and 
provincial government programs alleged to provide subsidies to 
the softwood lumber sector. They feel, Mr. Speaker, that our 
stumpage charges for Crown land are too low, and they class 
these as subsidies. 
 
In the past these investigations focused on the softwood lumber 
industry in British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec. 
The Atlantic provinces were excluded from these investigations 
on the basis that the majority of the timber harvested in these 
provinces is taken from private rather than Crown land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this can be a confusing and maybe somewhat 
boring issue, but I would like to give the House just a bit of an 
explanation of what has taken place. 
 
In countervailance cases, the US Department of Commerce 
determines where there are countervailable subsidies provided 
by governments that provide benefits in specific industries. In 
anti-dumping cases, the US Department of Commerce 
determines whether foreign producers are exporting products to 
the US that are either below price in the exporting country or 
below the cost of production. 
 
In both countervailing duty and anti-dumping cases, the 
International Trade Commission determines whether US 
domestic industry is materially injured by either or both 
subsidized or dumped imports. If both agencies agree at 
affirmative rulings, then the countervailing and/or anti-dumping 
duties can be imposed. 
 
In 1982, Mr. Speaker, it was ruled that provincial stumpage 
systems were generally available and therefore not 
countervailable government programs. In 1986, it was 
concluded that the stumpage programs of the four provinces 
were specific and conferred a benefit on the softwood lumber 
sector. 



858 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

(16:00) 
 
The International Trade Commission determined that the 
subsidized imports were causing injury to the US domestic 
softwood lumber industry. Even though the investigation 
examined the measures of four provinces, duties were applied 
on exports from all, except the Atlantic provinces, including our 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now prior to these duties being levied in 1986, Canada and the 
US entered into an agreement under which Canada collected a 
15 per cent levy on lumber exports from all provinces except 
the Atlantic provinces. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we continue to export softwood 
lumber, the Americans, as these shipments went across the 
border, the Americans would have levied duties which would 
have been collected and would have been sent to the American 
Treasury in Washington, DC (District of Columbia). So what 
the Canadians decided to do was put an export duty on those 
shipments before they left Canada so that the dollars could be 
collected in Canada and retained here in the provinces. 
 
But in 1991 Canada terminated this memorandum of 
understanding. And again the United States Department of 
Commerce initiated a third countervailing duty investigation. 
This time it found that the provincial stumpage systems and 
BC’s log export restrictions were countervailable measures. 
However Canada successfully challenged this ruling through 
the Canada/US Free Trade Agreement dispute-settlement 
process, and duties collected were eventually returned. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this could go on and on. This was the third 
time that these duties had been imposed against the Canada 
softwood lumber industry. And every time we won a case, the 
Americans just reinitiated the case. We would forever have 
been in court. 
 
And rather than continue with another round of countervailance 
duty action, Canada and the four major lumber exporting 
provinces — British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec 
— agreed to negotiate a five-year agreement with the United 
States that limited the level of Canadian exports on an annual 
basis. 
 
The Canada/US Softwood Lumber Agreement was 
implemented April 1, 1996. Softwood exports produced in 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and the Territories, and the Atlantic 
provinces, faced no restrictions over the duration of this 
agreement. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, on March 31 of this year the Softwood 
Lumber Agreement expired. And on April 2 of this year the 
U.S. Coalition for Fair Lumber Imports again filed petitions 
requesting the US Department of Commerce to launch 
countervailing duty and anti-dumping investigations against 
softwood lumber exports from Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the fourth countervailing duty action taken 
by the United States against Canada, but it’s the first 
anti-dumping action. 
 
Now there’s a very formal process that goes along with these 

actions taken against our softwood lumber industry in Canada 
and they follow a legislatively based timetable. Now once a 
preliminary determination of subsidy and/or dumping is agreed 
on, bonds are required on any shipments sent to the United 
States. Once a final determination is made, including a ruling of 
injury to domestic markets, countervailance and/or 
anti-dumping duties are imposed and cash deposits are required 
on shipments. 
 
And when we’re talking about the amount of softwood lumber 
from Canada that goes south across the border, we’re talking 
about a staggering amount of dollars and a big impact on the 
industry that we have here in Canada. 
 
But these preliminary and final investigations are expected to 
conclude in the spring of 2002. If an unfavourable ruling is 
reached, Canada has the option of appealing under the North 
American Free Trade Agreement. But only the process, because 
for some reason, Mr. Speaker, softwood was left out of the 
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) agreement. 
We also have the ability to seek WTO (World Trade 
Organization) rulings but again only on process. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve tried to keep the explanation short but 
it’s a complicated situation and has gone on for a number of 
years. And like I said right at the beginning when we see the 
reports in the media and on the TV, they show the forest 
industry in British Columbia cutting down trees and shipping 
them south across the border. And we honestly don’t give it a 
second thought. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, all we have to do is stop and think of the 
industry that is taking off in northern Saskatchewan and we 
have to ask ourselves what does this mean for Saskatchewan 
and us here in our home province. 
 
For the first time, Saskatchewan’s forest stumpage program has 
been included in the trade actions initiated by the United States. 
Saskatchewan has a relatively small, by world standards, but 
rapidly expanding softwood lumber industry that depends on 
the United States market for a significant portion of our sales. 
 
Now Saskatchewan softwood lumber exports in 2000 account 
for about 2 per cent of Canada’s total of $9.2 billion worth of 
softwood lumber exports that go to the US. Two per cent 
doesn’t sound like much, Mr. Speaker, but that works out to an 
approximate $190 million that comes into this province and 
supports an industry that means a great deal. 
 
Now the American petitions are calling for duties and 
anti-dumping tariffs that could severely damage the industry 
that is really just taking off in this province. It would effectively 
destroy or seriously cripple the softwood lumber industry in our 
province. 
 
The Saskatchewan government is disappointed with the 
countervailing duty and anti-dumping cases launched by the 
United States against our exports of softwood lumber. And we 
are taking action to defend what we feel is a fair system in our 
province. 
 
In the countervailing duty case, Saskatchewan will defend the 
forest . . . province’s forest stumpage program against the 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 859 

 

allegations of the United States industry that the Saskatchewan 
program provides subsidies to lumber producers. We have hired 
legal counsel in Washington, D.C. to assist our defence. And 
we will work with our counterparts in the federal government 
and other provinces and the industry in defending our province 
and our programs in our province. 
 
Now for many of us that live in the South . . . and you can see 
for miles and we all know all the jokes there is about seeing 
your dog run away for two days. But the northern half of our 
province is not at all like this. And I think for any of us that 
have had the privilege to travel into central and northern 
Saskatchewan, it is a beautiful part that we need to encourage 
and develop but maintain also for its beauty. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan, central to northern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, we have in operation over 190 sawmills. Now 
most of these supply to local markets within the province and 
within their community. But there are approximately 11 large 
mills in these central and northern communities that export a 
majority of what they cut and produce. 
 
Now these 11 mills will be drastically affected by these duties 
and actions if they do come to pass. And these 11 mills, Mr. 
Speaker, are in 11 different communities. And between the 11 
of these mills they employ over 1,650 people in our province. 
This is an important source of jobs for northern Saskatchewan, 
and especially in the Aboriginal communities in these areas. 
How many families will be affected, Mr. Speaker? 
 
This problem doesn’t affect only British Columbia or Ontario. 
It affects here in our home and will affect many of our citizens. 
 
In Saskatchewan we’ve produced 750 million board feet and 90 
per cent of that is exported. That’s very important to 
Saskatchewan. That’s $190 million industry. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move a motion, seconded by 
the member from Regina Northeast: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government to do 
everything in its power to stop the proposed American 
trade sanctions against the Canadian softwood lumber 
industry, actions which are clearly protectionist in nature, 
actions which have the potential to adversely affect 
Saskatchewan exports of softwood lumber which were 
valued at $190 million in 2000. 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to second the motion moved by my colleague, the 
member from Moose Jaw Wakamow. 
 
First, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to confess that I am no 
expert in the softwood lumber industry. Part of that reason is 
because I don’t think there’s too many lumberjacks live in my 
constituency, Regina Northeast. Although, Mr. Speaker, 
according to my colleague, the member from Regina 
Coronation Park, he has suggested that there is a rumour out 
there that Paul Bunyan did live in Regina for a while and 
perhaps even lived in parts of my constituency. And I’ve heard 
that rumour before. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the Premier decided to 

make Paul Bunyan the Minister of Health, and of course, Mr. 
Speaker, the opposition accused the Minister of Health on 
occasions of trying to hide. I find it a really tough to hide Paul 
Bunyan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . That’s a big hide. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I do appreciate the opportunity to enter into 
this debate because the softwood lumber industry is a very 
important part of our provincial economy. As the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow has already indicated, it results in about 
$190 million worth of exports from Saskatchewan. Most of 
those exports, of course, are going into the US. 
 
It’s interesting though, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the 
history . . . and I, the other day, came across an article in the 
Toronto Globe and Mail, April 4, by Barry McKenna, that sort 
of clearly outlined what the issue is in a broad term. And a bit 
of the history — and I found it quite interesting — that the 
softwood lumber fight between Canada and the United States is 
something that has, has been going on for some time. In fact I 
guess the first dispute took place in 1853. And it’s always been 
a contentious issue between the United States and Canada. 
 
In more recent times — and not quite recently, but I’m sure 
many of the members, particularly the member from Rosthern 
would probably remember this quite well — was that during the 
Great Depression when Canada was hit by the United State’s 
first countervailing duties of $1 per 1,000 board feet, and that 
has been kind of a sore spot between Canada and the United 
States for a number of years and has been an interesting issue. 
Because every time that the Americans have tried to take 
countervailing steps against Canada, the justice system, the 
judicial system, international judicial system will rule against 
them and they will simply accept that ruling and start the 
process all over again. It’s been a number of occasions since the 
’60s and through the ’80s. 
 
But I also find it’s very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that during the 
free trade debate that took place and negotiations that took place 
between the federal government — I believe it was the federal 
cousins of the member’s opposite, the Mulroney government 
who was negotiating the Free Trade Agreement — and during 
that time they left out or made the softwood lumber industry 
exempt from the conditions of the Free Trade Agreement. 
 
And I find that interesting, Mr. Speaker, that an issue that has 
been so contentious between the two countries for such a long 
period of time was so willingly overlooked by our negotiators 
— the Mulroney government — and you would think that if 
they were really serious about maintaining a fair and equitable 
balance of trade between . . . and fairness of trade between our 
two countries, they would have certainly taken into account an 
issue that has been, on a long term, a contentious issue between 
the two countries. But that unfortunately was not the case. 
 
So as a result we find ourselves once again in a situation where 
we have an agreement that has expired and we are now entering 
into a conflict, a trade conflict, between the two countries. And 
on the surface the United States claim primarily, or allege, 
unfair Canadian subsidies. But yet when we look closely at the 
situation it’s more the difference, I guess you would say, in 
governance of the issue. 
 
 (16:15) 



860 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

When we look at the United States for example, the vast 
majority of the woodlots in the good old US of A (United States 
of America) are privately owned and totally different, I guess 
you would say, or most fundamentally different in the nature of 
the governance of the two countries. Whereas in Canada here, 
the vast majority of the wood lots or the timberland here is 
owned by the public sector — federal and/or provincial 
governments. 
 
And I think this is an indication that United States is attempting 
to force upon Canadians their style of governments . . . 
governance, rather. They would like to see the softwood 
industry here moulded to reflect very much that of the US. 
 
The United States also says that Canada is dumping or selling 
lumber at less than what it costs to produce in the US market. 
But more to the point, the US mill owners argue that the 
provinces from Quebec and westward through British Columbia 
are giving away their trees at a fraction of their true value. 
 
And I suppose it depends on your point of view, but if you look 
at the governance of the forest industry, the Americans would 
have much of their forest industry as privately owned, and I 
suppose they’re profit motivated to demand the highest return 
that the market can bear. 
 
But the Americans are buying raw lumber, raw timber from 
Canada so that it can saw it into two-by-fours and take it back 
home. 
 
And I find also another interesting article here, Mr. Speaker, 
that indicated that the US Homebuyers Association were in 
Washington lobbying the Washington government to not to 
enter into any trade-distorting arrangements with Canada, 
because if they were to do such, it would increase the cost of 
the input of lumber. It would also drive up an estimated 800 to 
$1,300 more on a cost of a new house in the United States. 
These increases and increased prices would put nearly 300,000 
families out of the reach of their lifelong dream of owning a 
family home. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think it all boils down to the approach, the 
direction, and the style of governance between the two 
countries as far as the forest industry is concerned. 
 
I believe that a while back the foresters . . . the forest industry in 
the United States presented a petition to the US State 
Department there. And the petition consisted of about 5,000 
pages. And this was really a fight over the free-market 
principles. Both countries have a forest industry that employs 
tens of thousands of workers from one end of the country to the 
other, generating billions of dollars in sales. 
 
But Canada and the United States would not be in this fight 
were it not for the forest ownership. That seems to be the crux 
of the problem is the ownership of the forest. In Canada 94 per 
cent of the timberland is owned by government — Crown land 
— whether it be federal and/or provincial. In the United States 
58 per cent of the timberland is in private hands, owned by 
woodlot owners or lumber mills. The rest is split between . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Leave to introduce visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s my pleasure 
indeed to introduce some visitors from northern Saskatchewan, 
to be more precise, from Pinehouse. These are 10 students from 
grade 11 and 12 from Minahik Waskahigan School, Pinehouse 
School. They are accompanied by their teacher Gloria Belcourt, 
and chaperones Neil Natomagan and Bella Pederson. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like also to give them a good 
northern Saskatchewan welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Ta wow mistuhi tugagenee tagun ootu e 
tugosinek legislature. Meschusees ku wapumitinawaw. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was just saying that it’s always 
tremendous to welcome, you know, the people from the North 
and their safe arrival here, but also that I will be sitting with 
them in a little while and having a photograph and maybe some 
questions on how the House is running. 
 
So all members, please welcome our visitors from the North. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Canadian Softwood Lumber Industry 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I was just 
mentioning to my colleague here that I sort of lost the point I 
was trying to make so I guess I’ll have to start all over again. 
But, Mr. Speaker, I won’t put you through that nor the members 
of the Assembly. 
 
But as I was saying, Mr. Speaker, in Canada 94 per cent of all 
the timberland is government owned. It’s Crown land, it’s on 
Crown land. It’s either owned by the federal government or the 
provincial governments. That’s with the exception of the 
Maritime provinces, Mr. Speaker, which I think the vast 
majority of the forest in the Maritime provinces is privately 
owned. 
 
In the United States some 58 per cent of the timberland is in 
private hands, owned by woodlot owners and mill operators. 
And the rest of the . . . is split between the federal state and 
local governments. And increasingly, environmentalists and 
recreational pressures are putting federal and state lands out of 
the reach of the timber companies, further tilting the balance. 
 
So as we see, Mr. Speaker, the United States is finding 
themselves, I think, in a situation where their traditional 
domestic supplies of timber are tightening up. And they are 
required to look outside of their boundaries and outside of their 
state lines to find those suppliers. And as the law of supply and 
demand, as the supply tightens, those holders of that supply are 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 861 

 

demanding more in return for those goods shipped. 
 
So I think that’s really the crux of the problem here, Mr. 
Speaker. And the Americans, as I’ve already indicated, 
certainly note that as the supply of raw material, raw logs, raw 
timber to be turned into two-by-fours and to be turned into 
building material for building homes, as that cost rise, so rise 
the cost of building a new home for the average family in the 
US. 
 
As I’ve already indicated, I believe that I noted in some of my 
research here that the cost of an average 1,200 square foot 
bungalow, the average family home in the United States is 
expected to rise by anywhere between 800 and $1,300 per 
house. In that case, Mr. Speaker, it would put nearly 300,000 
families out of reach of being able to own their own home. 
 
The effect that the Americans’ decision to introduce 
countervailing duties and to once again start a softwood lumber 
dispute between the two countries is of course going to have a 
dramatic effect on us here in Saskatchewan. As I’ve already 
indicated, Saskatchewan exports of soft lumber I think in the 
year 2000 was . . . made up nearly 2 per cent of all of the 
Canadian exports. But for Saskatchewan it meant $190 million 
dollars worth of exports out of an industry that overall in 
Canada is responsible for $9.2 billion of exports to the US. 
 
So it does have a dramatic effect on us in Canada and on us 
here in Saskatchewan. I think that effect has a rippling effect 
because as the mills and the industry here in this province find 
it difficult to export the material they produce, they have then 
little option but to cut back their operation and perhaps in some 
cases even cease operation. 
 
Well what does this mean? It means that it will affect those 
communities where those mills are situated. It will affect 
workers; it will affect workers and workers’ families because a 
loss of job means loss of income. But it also affects the 
community because when that mainstay of a community — in 
many cases the forest industry and the mill is located in that 
community, is the mainstay of that community — when those 
jobs are lost, that income is lost, it’s a loss to the main street — 
to the grocery store owner, to the little garage on the corner that 
repairs cars and fixes their automobiles, and so on and so forth. 
So it has quite a dramatic effect on not only the community, but 
a rippling effect through our entire economy. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I do believe there is a great deal of 
need to impress upon the federal government to move with 
haste to resolve the dispute, but not at the expense of giving 
away our ability to govern our own resource. 
 
We have experienced that in the past, Mr. Speaker, with the 
Mulroney government, the federal cousins of the members 
opposite here, when they have entered into a negotiation with 
the federal . . . with the United States government, in coming up 
with a Free Trade Agreement that really had a negative effect 
upon Saskatchewan, a negative effect on Canada, our resources, 
and our ability to continue to govern those resources. 
 
And I would encourage through this debate, I would encourage 
the federal government to move with haste, move with haste, 
but at the same time do it right, do it right — don’t give away 

the farm. We experienced that, Mr. Speaker . . . northern wood 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well of course if it’s a wood 
farm I guess you could do that, but northern wood. 
 
But we experienced that in the past, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
that we have a duty, I think we have a duty to Canadian citizens 
today and the Canadian citizens of the future, to guard against 
that type of governance that is so misguided. 
 
We’ve seen that by the provincial cousins and the members 
opposite during the ’80s here, when they gave away this 
province at every opportunity they could. We’ve seen that same 
experience federally when the federal cousins were in power, 
giving away the natural resources. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite will on 
occasion say that, leave it up to them and they would make our 
taxes go down. Well, Mr. Speaker, I have given a lot of thought 
about that, I’ve given a lot of thought about that, and they may 
be correct, Mr. Speaker — and you may be surprised to hear me 
say this —but they may be correct. If they were ever the 
government of this province, I’m afraid our taxes would go 
down — our tax dollars would be going down to Dallas, our tax 
dollars would be going down to Seattle, our tax dollars would 
be going down to New York. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t believe our tax dollars would be staying in this province 
to work for the people of this province. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to conclude my remarks. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Minister. I want to add one or two comments if I could with 
regards to the motion brought forward by the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow. Actually what was said by the mover of 
this motion was very important and I appreciated the 
background that was covered. I think it was very extensive, 
very thorough, and I think it was right on the money. 
 
I think the fact is that this is a very important aspect, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, of the industry. It is very critical to us. We’re 
very concerned about all the industries in the Saskatchewan 
economy and particularly this one because of its . . . it has a lot 
of jobs in the North. And in the north part of Saskatchewan not 
only will it be a detriment by the economy, but certainly a 
detriment for those people that are working in that industry. 
 
So what I wanted to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to actually 
indicate my support for this motion because I think it is a very, 
a very critical issue and I think there is a function that the 
federal government can play in this kind of dispute. 
 
From my . . . some of my earlier life, I was involved in other 
kinds of disputes in the grain industry and certainly these 
disputes can be detrimental if they carry on for a long time. And 
one of the opportunities that maybe we bypassed in the past, but 
one of the opportunities that we should be certainly encouraging 
is looking at these situations and trying to eliminate some of the 
problems. And the reason that we can do that would be if we 
included those kinds of agreements under the trade agreements 
that we have been negotiating in the past. 



862 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

 (16:30) 
 
Because under those trade agreements there are mechanisms to 
address disagreements and uncertainties such as this. 
 
The amount of free trade that goes on between Canada and the 
United States has been going on for some time and it’s been 
increasing now. And I think from the polls that we have seen 
recently, there’s a great deal of support for this kind of free 
trade, even though when it was negotiated in the first place 
there was a great deal of concern about it, certainly expressed 
by the NDP government both provincially and federally. 
 
But in supporting this motion I’d like to really endorse it in 
such a way that we should be moving even further into the 
direction of asking for the federal government to become 
involved in, and in fact, essentially endorsing the whole aspect 
of free trade. Because when you get into free trade, those are the 
mechanisms that I referred to earlier. 
 
Those mechanisms can in fact be worked out beforehand, and 
when it becomes to a critical state like we are now, it is the 
federal government as part of their role to become involved and 
make sure that the mechanisms that are negotiated in that 
agreement come into play, and try and sort this out before it 
gets any further . . . any more serious and damaging to our 
particular industry. 
 
One of the problems that I’ve had with this whole free trade 
issue though, Mr. Speaker, is that the federal government seems 
to be very reluctant at times to get involved. And unfortunately 
in this situation, the agreement that was negotiated, as was 
described by the members opposite, this agreement did in fact 
run out. And currently there is going to be, I’m afraid, some 
time before it can be sorted out properly. 
 
I would like to recognize that under free trade, the barriers that 
are in place are considered in the bigger picture. And 
protectionism in an individual situation such as the softwood 
dispute that we’re now presently addressing — earlier in the 
grain industry, in several different grain, barley, wheat; in the 
beef industry from time to time; hog industry; and earlier in the 
auto industry — those kinds of protectionisms are just very 
detrimental to our economy. 
 
And so it’s very important that we become further involved in 
the free trade agreements as they are being negotiated. 
 
And I noticed last week when we were talking about the . . . 
when there was an assembly in Quebec City, the assembly of 
Americas discussing the Free Trade Agreement for the 
Americas, there was again a lot of protestors out. And I noticed 
that the leader of the national NDP was one of the leading 
protestors, protesting against such things as free trade. 
 
Well without the free trade conditions in place we can expect to 
have a lot of punitive actions against us and protectionisms put 
in place. And I think it’s very important. 
 
There was a lot of concerns expressed by those protestors, but I 
really believe that the interests of Canada and its trading partner 
would be better preserved if in fact everything was included 
under the agreement. 

We saw that when the negotiations completed with the United 
States, trade between our countries increased quite 
substantively. I also noticed that when the agreement was 
expanded to Mexico, trade again expanded. And now we’re 
thinking of other members of North America . . . of the 
Americas. 
 
We have been negotiating with Chile. Chile has become a part 
of these negotiations and agreements as well. And again, trade 
is flourishing right there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many issues that should be 
included in these free trades and the more free trade agreements 
we have, the more trading partners we have. And as we become 
more confident in our trading partners, we become more and 
more confident that we can get around these kinds of disputes 
even though there . . . in any perfect match, there’s always some 
frustrations and these will have to be worked out. 
 
But the motion that was put forward I think was trying to put 
the message across that there is a concern, there is a 
responsibility of the federal government, there is a 
responsibility to negotiate these kinds of things. And in fact 
because of that, I would like to at this time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, put forward . . . I would like to move an amendment to 
that motion, moved by myself and seconded by the member 
from Shellbrook-Spiritwood: 
 

The following be added after the words “in 2000”: 
 
that this Assembly express its support for the continuation 
and expansion of free trade agreements with other nations 
in order to limit such protectionist action being taken 
against important Canadian industries in the future. 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is my 
pleasure to rise in the Assembly today to talk on forestry, and 
also second the amendment put forth by the member from 
Lloydminster. 
 
In regards to forestry, probably half of my constituency, which 
is Shellbrook-Spiritwood, is probably taken up by forestry and 
forestry in that area is a real asset to the province and to the 
people that live there. In fact, for the members opposite, the 
largest mill in Saskatchewan happens to be in my constituency. 
In fact, it’s in Big River and it is owned by Weyerhaeuser. 
 
Forestry is certainly an important contributor to Saskatchewan’s 
economy and we certainly support doing all we can to ensure 
the industry remains healthy. This is a particularly important 
industry in job creation because the jobs are in the North, part 
of my constituency, where unemployment can be extremely, 
very, very high. 
 
So we do support this motion as the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow put forth, but we believe that it has to go a step 
further as well. And that is why we are putting forth this 
amendment. 
 
We’re very pleased to see the members opposite put forth this 
motion that is essentially an endorsement of not only free trade 
but also fair trade. 
 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 863 

 

I’d also like to read a comment from the Canadian Press, and it 
states: 
 

Saskatchewan producers may have been exempt from 
softwood lumber quotas in the United States, but there is 
nowhere to hide if the US government applies the 80 per 
cent duties in industry that they are asking for. 

 
The US lumber producers are seeking duties of 70 to 80 per 
cent against Canadian lumber exports. Provincial 
governments are subsidizing the Canadian industry, and 
that some companies are dumping unfairly priced wood 
into the US market. The possibility of high duties comes at 
a bad time for the industry already trying to cope with the 
prices at a 10-year low. If the duties are ultimately applied 
by the US government they could make Canadian lumber 
too expensive for US customers and force massive closures 
in the Canadian lumber industry. 

 
A member from Weyerhaeuser, Dave Larsen, the executive 
president of public affairs for Weyerhaeuser Canada, the largest 
forestry company in Canada and in Saskatchewan, said: 
 

Doing business during the Commerce department’s 
investigation might be even worse than quota systems of 
this company. It’s really disappointing that it came to this 
and there wasn’t some resolution or negotiation process 
done before. It causes real upheaval and uncertainty for the 
market, for consumers in the States, and for employees in 
Canada and for our communities in Canada. 

 
I also want to read, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a letter that was 
written by Weyerhaeuser Canada to Mr. George W. Bush, 
President George W. Bush, and also to Premier or Prime 
Minister Jean Chrétien requesting their support for the 
government’s sponsored envoy process to help develop a 
long-term solution to the softwood lumber dispute between 
Canada and the United States. And it states and I quote: 
 

(Mr.) President Bush: 
 
Subject: Softwood Lumber Dispute. 
 
With the expiry of the U.S./Canada Softwood Lumber 
Agreement (SLA) last month, the United States and 
Canadian governments and forest products industry are 
now facing a protracted, expensive and uncertain legal 
process that, in Weyerhaeuser Company’s view, is not 
likely to resolve the issue. 

 
I am writing to you to respectfully recommend a 
government-sponsored envoy process — or some form of 
government-sponsored negotiations — as a concurrent and 
separate process from the Countervailing Duty and 
Anti-Dumping Petition submitted to the U.S. Department 
of Commerce. Weyerhaeuser Company has concluded that 
an envoy process is the most likely means of achieving a 
fair, long-term solution for all parties. 

 
Consumers in United States depend on Canadian lumber to 
meet approximately one-third of their housing and repair 
. . . (remodelling costs and) needs. The United States does 
not have the softwood lumber manufacturing capacity, or 

forest resources, to supply sufficient volumes to meet those 
needs. 

 
With that certainty in mind, I believe it is in the best 
interests of all parties — on both sides of the border — to 
undertake a serious, and immediate, effort to reach a 
negotiated settlement. The principles . . . would suggest to 
guide an envoy process (and they) are as follows: 

 
 - Clarify what is expected of the envoys. 
 - Allow maximum flexibilities on how the envoys carry 

out their responsibilities. 
 - Focus on substantive options for long-term solution. 
 - Should not preclude existing legal/international trade 

dispute resolutions processes from continuing. 
 - Have a realistic but firm timeline. 
 - Have envoys report their recommendations to their 

respective governments for consideration. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe this process will 
lead to a solution that promotes free trade and fair trade, and is 
supported by a majority of the affected stakeholder groups. 
 
I also would like to read from the Regina Leader-Post dated 
April 2, where it states: 
 

Months, perhaps years, of costly legal fencing that could 
close mills across Canada is sure to follow. 
 
The (United States) Commerce Department will likely take 
several months to announce their ruling, but it will almost 
certainly order a duty be applied to Canadian lumber 
(exports) . . . 

 
That could cost Canadian lumber mills $4 billion, Cdn, a 
year and drive many of . . . (our businesses right) out of 
business. 

 
Softwood lumber, harvested from cone-bearing trees is 
used to build new homes. It’s among Canada’s top five 
exports to the United States, worth almost $11 billion 
annually. 
 
Canadian lumber producers captured 35 per cent of the 
U.S. softwood market . . . 

 
The industry has been, or has seen its production double since 
1996 when the SLA was imposed on four lumber-producing 
provinces, and that was British Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, and 
Quebec. Saskatchewan was not in that group. 
 
According to industry sources, Saskatchewan lumber 
production was about 300 million board feet in 1995, prior to 
the agreement. Last year, production reached almost 600 
million board feet, much of this going to the United States. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Five years ago our mills were exporting about 60 per cent of 
our lumber to the United States and 40 per cent to the domestic 
market. Mr. Brock Folkersen, executive director of the 
Canadian . . . or the Council of Saskatchewan Forest Industries 
in Saskatoon said now everything is shipping pretty much . . . 



864 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2001 

 

now we are shipping pretty much everything to the United 
States. Those organizations represent the seven largest forestry 
companies in the province, including Prince Albert-based 
Weyerhaeuser Canada. 
 
Mr. Folkersen also went on to say that sawmills in Prince 
Albert, Meadow Lake, and Hudson Bay benefited from the 
quotas imposed by the SLA on other provinces. But the expiry 
of the agreement means that they will be competing with more 
Canadian mills for a smaller chunk of the US market. 
 
To make the matters worse, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the slowdown 
in the US economy and North American overcapacity has 
combined to push lumber prices to the lowest levels in recent 
memory. The price is about the lowest that it’s been in 10 years. 
With many Saskatchewan sawmills operating at a close to 
break-even point now, the additional duties would force some 
plants to close temporarily and lay off workers. 
 
If you add 20 per cent duty and prices remain low, there will be 
many losses and many losses will be in Saskatchewan. And 
those duties could send the industry into one or maybe a 
two-year slump. Saskatchewan could not afford a two-year 
slump in the forestry industry. In fact, the Saskatchewan 
forestry industry has been slowly going downhill since last year 
thanks to the low prices of our forestry products. 
 
Weyerhaeuser shut down its old oriented strand board, OSB 
plant at Hudson Bay and laid off 70 to 75 workers. The oldest 
plant may not reopen because Weyerhaeuser’s OSB plant in 
Hudson Bay is coming on stream. That was a loss of some 
workers that was detrimental to that area. All because of the 
low prices in the forestry industry. And the company will 
temporarily shut down its sawmill at Big River for two weeks 
which has commenced already, and extend the maintenance 
shutdown in its pulp mill in Prince Albert as we speak. 
 
Meanwhile voices on both sides of Canadian/US border warned 
that further restrictions on Canadian softwood lumber imports 
into American markets would hurt consumers there. 
 
Proposed softwood lumber tariffs may signal the end of some 
lumber operations across the country. Only the most effective 
operations will be able to withstand the drawn-out legal battle, 
and in the case of Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
operations of the . . . (inaudible) . . . facilities in the province 
will fair better than most. And if Saskatchewan industry begins 
to crumble it will create the end of our . . . (inaudible) . . . 
forestry nationwide. 
 
While many of our major issues . . . there are many major issues 
to be discussed before any agreement is reached. At the end of 
the day, more free trade is better for Canada than less free trade. 
Not every dispute will be avoided unfortunately, but opening up 
trade will help avoid them more than erecting new barriers. 
 
I urge the members opposite to support our amendment and 
while they’re at that, to call on their federal counterparts to 
embark on them the wisdom of not only extended free trade but 
also fair trade agreements. 
 
I support the amendment put forth by the member from 
Lloydminster. Thank you. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say 
that I support the motion and amendment before us. We 
certainly know how vital trade is to Saskatchewan. 
 
Might I say that it is important for us to get the message through 
to Americans though that this is not a dispute between Canada 
and the US. It is a dispute very much between the interests of 
US lumber companies against US consumers. They are trying to 
sell their Congress for nationalist reasons for being opposed to 
free trade. But of course if the US lumber companies get their 
way in this dispute, it will amount to substantially higher costs 
for homes to American consumers and American homebuyers. 
 
So this is not a Canada versus the US dispute. This is a dispute 
between companies and consumers which is also I think what 
the free trade agreement is all about. It is about protecting 
consumers. 
 
And I agree with the point made by the member for 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood. The federal NDP, I believe unlike the 
provincial NDP, has taken a strong stand against free trade. I 
believe that the dispute settlement mechanism will prove that 
Saskatchewan and Canada are in the right. I believe that we will 
find that the system will work, and it will work for American 
consumers and, therefore, for Canadian lumber producers. 
 
But I would say that the federal NDP cannot at one and the 
same time claim the benefit of the Free Trade Agreement and 
the dispute settlement mechanism, while repudiating the 
concept of free trade. If we repudiate free trade, then we 
abandon our right to sell softwood lumber into the US market. 
And of course this is particularly devastating for a province like 
Saskatchewan where our primary products have such a tiny 
domestic market. We really have . . . Frankly there is very, very 
little we produce in Saskatchewan that would be of value if we 
did not have trade. 
 
As I used to say, without trade every man, woman, and child in 
Saskatchewan would have to consume 68 loaves of bread per 
day, buttered with 72 litres of canola margarine, and all washed 
down with 68 bottles of beer. And while I promise to do my 
share, while I promise to do my share, I think that’s a daunting 
task for most of the residents of our province. What we 
produce, we don’t produce a lot of, we don’t produce a lot of 
products, but the products we do produce we produce in vast 
quantity, and therefore we must be a trading province. 
 
Now as a trading province we need access to the world market, 
especially the US markets. We are gaining that access through 
free trade. 
 
The NDP federally say they do not want free trade. And I would 
encourage members of the government caucus to talk to people 
like Lorne Nystrom and Dick Proctor, who are in the Regina 
paper this week saying they do not want free trade. I’ve 
encouraged members opposite to talk to them and say, this is 
wrong, because if there is no free trade then the resolution put 
forward by the government caucus falls. We have no right to 
access into the US market. So we can’t ride both horses. 
 
I suppose in an absolutely perfect world, the ideal situation 



May 1, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 865 

 

would be if everybody else had open borders to our trade and 
we could close ours. Wouldn’t that be perfect? But of course 
that isn’t the way it works — we are either going to have open 
borders for trade purposes or we’re going to have closed. And 
clearly it is to Canada’s benefit to have open borders to trade 
into the US market simply because the American market is so 
much larger than ours and we do not have a large domestic 
market in Canada. 
 
So while I support the motion that is before us, I think that the 
New Democratic Party has to work this through intellectually to 
see where they stand . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well they 
have to decide where they stand in order that they can . . . 
 
I hear someone say about stab in the back. Now I guess they’re 
worried about loyalty to the Liberal leader. They must have 
great problems with the Minister of the Environment who 
bailed on the Liberal leader two years before I quit. 
 
So I don’t know why they’re so worried about loyalty to the 
Liberal leader that they’re heckling me, because I think I 
showed a lot more loyalty to the Liberal leader than their 
colleague, the hon. member for Athabasca. So if they are so 
worried, as New Democrats, about loyalty to the Liberal leader, 
they better take it up with their Minister of the Environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — However, I digress. I digress. 
 
What are we after here? Do we want access to the US market? I 
think we do. If we do, we cannot condemn the Free Trade 
Agreement. We must strengthen it. We cannot condemn the 
Free Trade Agreement and ask that our softwood lumber have 
access into the US market. 
 
And I think if we are going to convince the Americans of the 
benefits of free trade, it is those American consumers we have 
to speak with, because it is the American consumers, it is the 
American consumers who clearly will benefit from free trade. 
And if for nationalist reasons they close their borders to our 
softwood, it will penalize American homeowners and home 
purchasers. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I think that this is an example of how free 
trade can work for North America. And as the hon. member has 
pointed out, we have built a trade industry in this province. We 
have built a lumber industry. 
 
But our lumber industry is frankly worthless unless we have 
trade. So we need to strengthen trade. We need to strengthen 
free trade with our American neighbours. 
 
And the federal NDP wants to throw out the Free Trade 
Agreement. Now if they throw out the Free Trade Agreement, 
they also throw out the softwood lumber industry of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I encourage, with all humility, I encourage my friends across 
the way to talk to their federal counterparts and say cancelling 
the Free Trade Agreement is not the way that we will be able to 
build a lumber industry in Saskatchewan. If we want to build a 
lumber industry in Saskatchewan, we need access to the US 

market. And that is what the Free Trade Agreement is going to 
guarantee for us, and that is the way that we will be able to offer 
hope and jobs, especially to the Aboriginal population of the 
North. 
 
And if the federal NDP were to get its way and shut down the 
Free Trade Agreement, that would destroy hope for the northern 
population. It would destroy the softwood lumber industry and 
it would mean that northern Aboriginal population would have 
no future in the economy. 
 
So let us commit ourselves to free and fair trade, a free and fair 
trade that will allow the softwood lumber industry of 
Saskatchewan to grow and build and develop. I support both the 
motion and the amendment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
are a number of aspects to this issue that I think need to be of 
concern to us as citizens of this province, one of them being that 
we really are trying to and want to develop the lumber industry 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
The protectionist attitudes of the United States are destructive to 
many aspects of the economy for here and throughout this 
country. When I was down in Washington recently, we ran into 
a number of senators who were very clearly protectionist. We 
had members from Prince Edward Island who were there who 
were dealing with the potato dispute and were very, very 
concerned that the US was simply using the potato war issue as 
a means of protectionism. They wanted to build up the potato 
industry for Idaho and they didn’t care what happened to Prince 
Edward Island and to their industry. And it was $30 million lost 
— it could have been $300 million lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would very much like to continue the remarks 
because protectionism is a real problem, but given the hour I 
must ask that we adjourn debate . . . move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 


