















































Hansard: May 11, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1071 
 May 11, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and good morning. 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Richmound, Saskatchewan are 
concerned about the possible loss of their ambulance service if 
the consolidation and recommendations contained in the EMS 
(emergency medical services) report goes ahead. They will be 
about 50 miles from their nearest ambulance service and that 
will leave them in very desperate straits. They have signed a 
petition that reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by 
residents of the community of Richmound. I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today on the EMS. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley 
and Nora, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from some concerned citizens of Saskatchewan who have 
expressed interest in the maintenance and upgrading of our 
Saskatchewan road network. And the prayer goes: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 
increasing the funding to $900 million over the next three 
years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good citizens of Pelly, Sturgis, 
Canora, and Amsterdam. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition, this one is dealing with health care. And I’ll read the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people from the 
communities of Redvers, Parkman, and Bellegarde. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
conversion of some paved highways to gravel. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Rouleau, Avonlea, Prince Albert, Briercrest, 
Regina, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan concerned about the cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer 
Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this signed by the good people from Assiniboia, Scout 
Lake, Willow Bunch, and Coronach. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again on behalf of the 
people from the city of Swift Current and surrounding area 
that are concerned with the state of the hospital. And the 
prayer of the petition that I read today is as follow, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 



1072 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by residents of 
the city of Swift Current, and also from the surrounding 
communities of Success, Consul, and Wymark. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens of the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy who are concerned about drug and 
alcohol abuse in our area. And the Weyburn Council on 
Alcohol and Drug Abuse, a charitable, non-profit organization 
has submitted this proposal for an in-patient treatment centre 
to the Government of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre and provide funding 
for the same. 
 

And it’s signed by citizens of the city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here, citizens 
concerned with the high cost of natural gas. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens from Craik, Girvin, Outlook, 
Moose Jaw, Aylesbury, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding citizens that 
are concerned about the energy rate rebate program. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Chitek Lake, Leoville, Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition to stop further cuts at Assiniboia 

Pioneer Lodge, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Assiniboia and Lafleche. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
The first petition is: 
 

To cause the government to continue to increase the 
foundation operating grants to school divisions. 

 
Other petitions are addendums to previously presented sessional 
papers nos. 3, 4, 10, 58, 110, and 136. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 40 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: for the 2000-2001 fiscal year, 
what arrangements or agreements through special permits 
from your department did the Saskatchewan Valley Potato 
Corporation receive to move potatoes to primary highways 
in Saskatchewan; and what were the terms of these 
arrangements or agreements; and what are the details of 
any financial agreement surrounding this? 
 

While I’m on my feet, I’d like to . . . another question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: so far in the current fiscal 
year, what arrangements or agreements through special 
permits from your department did the Saskatchewan Valley 
Potato Corporation receive to move potatoes to primary 
highways in Saskatchewan; and what were the terms of 
these agreements or arrangements; and what are the details 
of any financial agreements surrounding this? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
pleased today on behalf of my colleague, the member for 
Regina Lakeview, to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly, a group of visitors from Athabasca 
School in the constituency of Regina Lakeview. 
 
These are grade 7 and 8 students, there’s 27 of them in total — 
so I’m informed, I didn’t check — and they’re accompanied by 
their teacher, Mr. Aaron Anderson. They’re here to watch the 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1073 

 

proceedings, to tour the Legislative Assembly, and I’m looking 
forward to a visit with them later in the day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in extending 
them a warm welcome. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a group of 27 students travelling from quite a 
distance, from Fairview Montana Jr. High School. These are 
students from grade 6 to grade 8 and they’re accompanied by 
their teachers, Tim Johnson and Karen Shaide; chaperons, Vicki 
Cayko, Kelly Sloan; and their bus driver, Dennis Duda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have relatives in Montana and I’ve visited there 
on a number of occasions and I’ve always been welcomed by 
the good folks of Montana, and so I think it fitting that we 
welcome them here to Canada, to Saskatchewan, and to our 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to introduce to you and through you to this Assembly, a most 
distinguished guest, Professor Jack Vicq of the University of 
Saskatchewan, College of Commerce, who is seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker, along with the deputy minister of Finance, 
Dr. Paul Boothe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to announce to this Assembly 
that effective June 1 of this year, Professor Vicq will be 
assuming the role of A.W. Johnson Distinguished Chair in 
Public Policy. Members will recall that this position was 
created last year fulfilling a commitment by our government to 
improve our research capability by attracting recognized 
authorities in specific fields. 
 
Professor Vicq, as members will know, is a highly respected 
professional with expertise in government policy and 
specifically in the administration of tax and revenue measures. 
His background encompasses a notable career with both the 
federal government and the Government of Saskatchewan, a 
tenure of several years with the University of Saskatchewan, 
which he now serves as Professor Emeritus and a variety of 
professional and volunteer activities in the private sector. 
 
He has published a number of articles on public policy and tax 
compliance and has served on several boards and committees. 
Most notably for members here, Mr. Speaker, Professor Vicq 
chaired the provincial Personal Income Tax Review Committee 
which provided our government with an excellent proposal for 
personal tax reform implemented in last year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last year, all Canadian provinces have 
established their own income tax rules, separate from the 
federal income tax rules. At the same time, the Canada Customs 
and Revenue Agency has become more independent in its 
dealings with provincial governments as well as the federal 
government. 
 
These changes and others have created significant pressure on 

both orders of government to redesign and rework our federal 
provincial tax collection agreements. There’s a very big job to 
be done here, Mr. Speaker, and Professor Vicq’s expertise and 
experience will be a tremendous asset to Saskatchewan as we 
work to negotiate a favourable arrangement for our province 
and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the A.W. Johnson Distinguished Chair in Public 
Policy provides a vehicle for the Government of Saskatchewan 
to access the knowledge and research of leading Canadian 
professionals in academia and business. 
 
So on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan, I extend my 
sincere congratulations to Professor Vicq and I ask all members 
to join me in welcoming him to the Assembly and the public 
service. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and to other members of the 
Assembly, a gentleman seated in the west gallery, a long-time 
friend of mine and many members on certainly this side of the 
legislature, Bob Ivanochko. 
 
Mr. Ivanochko is a librarian working at the Provincial Library. 
In addition to that and many, many other things, I’d like to 
single out Bob’s long-time activity with the Regina and District 
Labour Council. 
 
I ask all members to join with me in welcoming my friend, Bob 
Ivanochko. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

March of Dimes Mothers 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every year on 
Mother’s Day we pay tribute to our mothers and to mothers 
everywhere, as well we should. This year, Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the Assembly, I want to comment on a particularly 
special group of mothers and a couple of events to recognize 
them. 
 
This weekend, polio survivors from throughout the province 
will be honouring Saskatchewan’s Marching Mothers of the 
1950s. These were mothers involved with the March of Dimes 
campaign to raise funds for the treatment of polio victims and 
for research. As we know, this ultimately led to the discovery of 
the Salk vaccine and to the defeat of polio. 
 
This horrible disease struck mainly children, as its medical 
term, infantile paralysis, suggests. Mr. Speaker, as someone 
whose childhood was in the ’50s, I remember the dread with 
which mothers faced each summer. They warned us about 
playing in the dirt. They shivered with dread about the daily 
counts on the news of how many cases of polio had been 
reported. They worried about their children in iron lungs. 
 



1074 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

Tomorrow in Saskatoon, Sask Abilities will hold a reception to 
honour the Marching Mothers. And today plaques will be 
placed on two flower beds in front of the legislature which will 
read, quote: 
 

We proudly honour Saskatchewan mothers who marched 
for dimes 50 years ago to raise funds for the medical 
treatment of people struck down by polio in the 1950s. 
Their tremendous effort saved hundreds of lives. 

 
We all pay tribute, Mr. Speaker, to those Marching Mothers 
who dedicated themselves to eliminating this disease from our 
lives. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Nurses Day 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House to 
raise awareness of International Nurses Day celebrated every 
year on May 12, which is the birthdate of Florence Nightingale, 
founder of the first school for nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow will mark the 30th anniversary of 
International Nurses Day, and all members on this side of the 
House would like to take this opportunity to personally 
recognize all nurses involved in the health care profession, not 
only in our own communities but all across our province. Their 
hard work, dedication, and commitment have been defining 
measures of health care in Saskatchewan. This group of talented 
and hard-working professionals deserve our utmost respect and 
sincere thanks. 
 
We must also remember that nurses across the country have 
spoken out about their concerns regarding health care and 
overall working conditions. It’s shocking to hear that 44 per 
cent of nurses believe the quality of care in their workplace has 
deteriorated in the last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is facing a severe and critical 
nursing shortage. Much more must be done to recruit and retain 
these important members of the health care team. 
 
Once again, in celebration of International Nurses Day 
tomorrow and on behalf of all members on this side of the 
House, our thanks and appreciation to nurses across the 
province for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Partners in Motion Win Awards 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, on this beautiful, sunny 
Saskatchewan day I bring tidings of a good bit of sunny news 
for the province of Saskatchewan. Partners in Motion, a Regina 
production company has received seven awards at the 2001 
Worldfest International Film Festival in Houston, Texas. This 
year, Houston, Mr. Speaker; next year, Cannes. 
 
Two of the company’s productions, Disaster of the Century and 
Men of Valour — Heros of the Victoria Cross, took platinum, 
the highest award given, for best reality-based and 
biographical/autobiographical documentary programs. 

Disaster of the Century was produced by Nova Herman, and 
was directed by Chris Triffo — and it had nothing to do with 
Stockwell Day — with Ron Goetz as executive producer. 
 
Men of Valour — Heros of the Victoria Cross was produced by 
Paul Millar and directed by Chris Triffo, with Ron Goetz as 
executive producer. 
 
13 Seconds, The Kent State Shootings received a bronze award 
for the best documentary. A commercial for SGI, Santa’s Little 
Helpers, took bronze in the public service category. 
 
A video for the city of Regina called Climate Change took 
bronze in the educational/instructional category. 
 
And finally, closing out the seven winners, was a print 
advertisement for Saskferco called Total Quality-Total 
Commitment. This production was awarded silver in the 
newspaper campaign category. 
 
The people responsible for these productions, Mr. Speaker, 
truly represent the spirit of Saskatchewan. I would like all the 
members of the House to join with me in congratulating, in 
particular, the Regina-based production company, Partners in 
Motion and on all the winners in the festival. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

School Bus Driver Disappointed 
with Question Period Conduct 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
received a faxed letter from a constituent and I’d like to share 
portions of it with the House. 
 

As a parent and a bus driver, I offered my services to 
transport over 60 high school students on a four-hour trip 
from Shaunavon to Regina, to tour the legislature on May 
1. I was impressed with the tour . . . However, we had the 
misfortunate of having to sit through an hour of Question 
Period. We as visitors were instructed to be quiet at all 
times, however the only thing we could hear were the 
insults, the cat calls, and general confusion on the floor . . . 
We could (only) . . . pick up bits and pieces of petitions that 
were being read. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the writer compares it to a wrestling match where 
individuals are posturing for the camera, the chaos, the 
name-calling, and the insults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the writer goes on to say: 
 

As a taxpayer, I am not amused at this shallow performance 
and the waste of time and money . . . I was ashamed and 
embarrassed that the formative minds of our kids had to see 
this disgusting performance, for what was supposed to be 
an educational field trip. 

Mr. Speaker, the writer also goes on to say: 
 

If you are concerned about your image as politicians, please 
break with tradition and change the situation. I want to see 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1075 

 

order in the legislature, sincere, honest, hard working 
people. A legislature I would be proud to take our children 
to see. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to table this letter if anybody is 
interested in it. 
 

Mental Health Week 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand 
before the House today to recognize this week as Mental Health 
Week. The theme of this year’s week is Emerging Into the 
Light. That theme is very significant as there is often a stigma 
attached to discussing mental health. 
 
Our challenge is to strive to increase awareness in order to 
understand the factors contributing to good mental health. One 
organization that does much work in Saskatchewan on this issue 
is the Mental Health Association. 
 
The Mental Health Association has been providing services for 
Saskatchewan residents for 50 years. And on behalf of my 
colleagues I would like to offer congratulations for the very 
meaningful work that has been accomplished by this 
association, its staff, and volunteers. 
 
In Saskatchewan the Mental Health Association provides direct 
services in the areas of day programs for people with long-term 
psychiatric problems, in a number of districts. They are also 
involved with public education and advocacy. One very 
tangible example of the Mental Health Association’s effort to 
create public awareness of this issue is their sponsoring of 
Mental Health Week. 
 
We must not lose sight about one of our society’s most 
important principles — that our health system should support 
those who are most vulnerable. With the help of the 
organizations like the Mental Health Association, we can work 
together to address the challenges facing many members of our 
society by offering practical solutions and hope to those who 
are in need. 
 
Again, congratulations to the Mental Health Association. We 
are grateful for the valuable contributions you make towards 
bettering the lives of Saskatchewan people. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current — A Caring Community 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Swift 
Current is a city known for its heart. We have a proud track 
record of coming together as a community to help those when 
they need it the most. On April 28 friends, families, and total 
strangers to four-month-old Clark Anderson gathered together 
and added to that great tradition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Clark is the son of Adam and Rebecca Anderson 
of Swift Current and he needs open-heart surgery. He and his 
parents will have to travel to Edmonton for the surgery. And so 
the staff of the Aquatic Centre where Rebecca worked 
organized and hosted a chili supper and auction on April 28 to 
raise funds to help meet the cost of the trip. 

About a hundred people from Swift Current and surrounding 
area turned out for the event, Mr. Speaker, and raised over 
$3,700 to help meet those costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to draw 
attention to the generous work of the organizers, those who 
donated items for the auction and the chili supper, including the 
co-op, Wal-Mart, Thrifty Foods, Shaw Cable, Coca Cola, just to 
name a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was also a quarter of beef that was donated 
for the event. And a special thanks to Mr. Chandler Powell who 
filled in as the auctioneer at the last minute to make the event a 
success. 
 
Congratulations again to Danielle Poole, who’s the manager at 
the aquatic centre; to her staff; to all of the volunteers and those 
who participated in the event. And most importantly, Mr. 
Speaker, best wishes to little Clark as he heads for Edmonton 
for his surgery. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emergency Preparedness Week 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week has been 
proclaimed Emergency Preparedness Week across Canada. The 
theme for this year is Reducing the Risk Towards Safer 
Communities in the 21st Century. 
 
During this week, communities across Canada will be 
participating in activities aimed at increasing awareness of what 
each individual community and each individual person should 
do to reduce the risk of emergencies. 
 
Those who work in the field of emergency preparedness must 
have an odd feeling about what they do because their job is to 
see that their expertise is never called into action. Ninety-nine 
per cent of the time our communities are safe and our lives are 
secure. But we live in a world where there’s always the 
possibility of fire, flood, blizzard, chemical spill, crash, or other 
natural or person-made disasters. We hope they never happen. 
We must be prepared in case they do. That is the paradox of 
emergency preparedness. 
 
I am pleased to note that this year seven communities in 
Saskatchewan will receive over $500,000 under the joint 
emergency preparedness program, a joint effort of federal, 
provincial, and municipal governments. Saskatchewan 
governments will provide over 300,000 for the projects, which 
involve purchases or upgrades to rescue equipment and 
emergency communication systems, as well as for provincially 
delivered training programs. 
 
Since this program began in 1980, over $10 million has come to 
Saskatchewan for emergency preparedness projects. Money 
well spent for a use we hope we never see. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1076 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Funding for Communities with Water Quality Problems 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Environment minister. Yesterday we 
asked the minister for a list of the 121 communities with water 
treatment deficiencies. It turns out now that this is not a new 
list. The Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of the detailed 
analysis of the cabinet decision item we released yesterday. 
 
It says the government conducted a drinking water safety 
assessment back in 1992 and identified 130 communities with 
deficient treatment systems that required upgrading. Since 
1992, only nine have been upgraded. This means, and I’m 
quoting from the document now, “121 communities still have 
water treatment deficiencies.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New Democratic Party) has known 
about this problem since 1992. Why are there still 121 
communities with deficient water treatment facilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Once again, as I’ve indicated time and time again that we’re 
going to be open, honest, and accountable on some of the 
strategies that are required to address the water quality 
problems of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I pointed out, Mr. Speaker, some of the things that we 
initiated as a government. And this morning I’m very happy to 
announce that my colleague, the Minister of Municipal Affairs, 
committed to $19.4 million to fund infrastructure projects, Mr. 
Speaker. The majority, the huge amount of that money is spent 
for water quality — $8.2 million to upgrade water services, and 
$6.6 million to upgrade waste water plants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We put a plan in action. The cabinet knew of this challenge four 
months ago, approximately four months ago, Mr. Speaker. On 
this side of the House, we’re putting our money where our 
mouth is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’ s interesting 
to note that the minister indicates that they’re going to be open 
and transparent on some of their communication strategies, and 
I’m wondering which of those they might be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in 1992 the government identified 130 
communities with deficient water treatment systems. Since 
then, only nine — nine — have been fixed. That’s one per year. 
At this rate, with the old funding in place, it will only take . . . 
it’ll take the NDP 121 years to fix the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this document estimates it would cost about $30 
million to upgrade these systems. And while that’s a lot of 
money, surely your government could have found $30 million 
in your budget over the course of the last nine years to ensure 
safe drinking water in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, safe drinking water is a fundamental responsibility 

of government. The NDP has millions of dollars to invest in 
places like Guyana. Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP been 
ignoring its responsibility since 1992? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I sense that the member 
opposite is virtually attacking small-town Saskatchewan. He’s 
attacking local governments, municipalities, who were made 
aware of problems and recognize those problems and were 
working towards correcting those problems, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(10:30) 
 
The government on this side, two years ago committed $10 
million to infrastructure programs for two years running to 
work with local governments. And this morning, the 
announcement underlined how serious the situation all levels of 
government see good quality drinking water for their citizens. 
 
The federal government has recognized that, hence the 
announcement this morning. And, Mr. Speaker, I will send over 
this document to the opposition — the number of communities 
that have upgraded their water treatment plants, Mr. Speaker; 
that have upgraded their waste water projects, Mr. Speaker; that 
have upgraded their rural roads projects, Mr. Speaker. And the 
monies that are committed over the next five years — $170,000 
million. 
 
I’m not sure what the members opposite expect more can be 
done. I wish they would not attack those small communities that 
have been working to improve the quality of life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
Minister of Environment very proudly announced that North 
Battleford isn’t one of the 121 communities on this list. That’s 
even more frightening. If North Battleford isn’t on this list, how 
many more communities have deficient treatment systems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is this is an old list. It dates back to 1992. 
How many more water treatment systems have deteriorated 
since then, to the point that they can no longer guarantee a safe 
water supply. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cabinet decision item said Sask Water would 
evaluate the current state of all water treatment systems in the 
province of Saskatchewan in every single municipality and 
report back to the government by March 2001. Will the minister 
release that report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just go back to . . . 
the mention of North Battleford was there. North Battleford 
applied. They took their own initiative and they applied for a 
program where they felt they needed some help. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they were approved. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say something else. Both SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) and SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1077 

 

representatives at the announcement this morning, appreciated 
the efforts of the Saskatchewan government, the coalition 
government, and the federal government in offering assistance 
to all the communities throughout the province to take care of 
these very important issues — places like the RM (rural 
municipality) of Bjorkdale, village of Broderick, RM of 
Buchanan. The list goes on and on. I shared it with the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is attention being paid to this situation by all levels of 
government, and there is co-operation. There is not insults and 
attacks on one another. It’s a co-operative effort to deal with a 
serious issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister 
keeps telling us everything’s fine. The problem is, no one 
believes him. No one believes him because they have a 
communication strategy that says to assure the public that 
everything is fine. And the Minister of Municipal Affairs is 
following those very same marching orders right now. 
 
No matter how bad the situation is, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan deserve the truth. We deserve a straight answer, 
and we know we’re not getting it from the minister. 
 
The only way to clear the air is for the minister to release the 
information he’s hiding; release the list of the 121 communities 
with deficient systems; release the Sask Water report on the 
state of water treatment systems; release the Sask Health report 
on enhanced testing and communication. 
 
Stop hiding behind their phoney-baloney, don’t worry, be 
happy communications strategy, and tell the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I can’t believe, Mr. Speaker, the continued 
attack on small communities in rural Saskatchewan and the 
efforts of good people that are working across departments to 
address the concerns that people have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the village of Broderick is going to upgrade their 
water treatment plant. The village of Benson is going to 
upgrade their water treatment plant. The RM of Flett’s Springs, 
upgrade water treatment plant. Village of Gladmar, chlorine 
injector plant. RM of Golden West, filtration system. RM of 
Hudson Bay, upgrade water treatment plants. Town of Imperial, 
develop well and pipeline. Town of Kipling, upgrade water 
treatment plant. 
 
The list goes on and on and on. And, Mr. Speaker, we add up 
the money, and there’s a great deal of investment by the federal 
government, by the provincial government, and the local 
communities who work together to solve any problems that may 
be there. 
 
And the inquiry, Mr. Speaker, will also produce the information 
that the opposition continues to ask, immediately. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Department Responsible for Water Quality 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of the Environment. Who is 
responsible for water quality generally and waterworks 
specifically in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Number one is SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) is going to help all the municipalities 
worry about waste water and water treatment throughout the 
province. Very important for people to understand that the roles 
and the responsibility of all the players are something that 
people have to take seriously. 
 
SERM certainly helps regulate and also helps monitor and 
certainly will help inspections of these plants if that is 
necessary. 
 
And certainly what we do is make sure that some of the 
communities that are having challenges and problems with their 
water treatment plant or sewer, then they certainly contact 
SERM and we’ll make the appropriate calls and we’ll make 
sure we have assistance there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are responding to this challenge as a province. 
There’s no question about it in my mind. One year, 10 million; 
the next year, 10 million; this year, 19 million. Mr. Speaker, we 
have put our money where our mouth is and we will continue 
being diligent in this challenge that all the people of 
Saskatchewan face. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That particular 
cabinet decision item that was released yesterday, on page 9, 
and the minister should have read this — the Saskatchewan 
Justice review of the legislative mandate of the Minister of 
SERM. And it says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

SERM has been assigned regulatory and supervisory 
control over water quality generally and waterworks 
specifically. 

 
It states that the minister has general supervision, control, and 
regulation of all matters concerning water quality and its 
impairment by pollution. 
 
That document, Mr. Speaker, was prepared for cabinet by the 
minister’s own environmental staff, explains exactly the 
minister’s responsibility for the water in the province, and what 
needs to be done to improve the water quality across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister ignore his responsibility by 
not implementing the recommendations of that report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — That is a draft document. That 
document was prepared in September. The cabinet did not see 



1078 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

any documentation on this until late winter — November to be 
exact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the most important things that I want to point as 
well, is that we have a three- or four-pronged approach in this 
government to make sure that we stay on top of this challenge. 
 
Number one, Health is also involved. District health boards 
have a very crucial role to play. Sask Water is also involved; 
we’re involved as SERM. A lot of the villages and towns across 
the province are also involved. So there’s a lot of people that 
are involved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we are not going to shrink away from the responsibility as 
a government to make sure the message is out there that we all 
have to be diligent. And we will our do our part, Mr. Speaker, 
as a government. This is very important. 
 
And what I would also say to the members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, all the improvements we’ve made over the last number 
of years, they all voted against it. And secondly, is why don’t 
you take the advice from the leadership of the people of North 
Battleford instead and what they say — let’s get on with life 
and let’s build more for the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, wrong answer. He 
tried to drag in the health departments and everything else. He’s 
responsible. Wrong answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — It’s time the Premier removed the weakest 
link. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the most shocking information in this 
whole CDI (cabinet document item) has to do with Justice’s 
recommendations for SERM. It goes on to say that 
Saskatchewan Justice suggested three ways in which potential 
liability can be reduced or eliminated, three ways. 
 
One, to amend or repeal SERM legislation to relieve SERM of 
supervisory and regulatory responsibilities. 
 
Two, Mr. Speaker, to provide sufficient funding to enable 
SERM to perform its legislative responsibilities. 
 
Three, Mr. Speaker, make a decision at the cabinet level to 
reduce SERM’s budget, which the government could then argue 
was a policy decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is, the question is, Mr. Speaker, to the 
minister: which option did the cabinet or SERM choose to 
approve? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The option from the final CDI — not 
the draft copy that those members have — the option that this 
government done, Mr. Speaker, is in year one they put $10 
million into infrastructure. Year two, they put $10 million into 
infrastructure. Year three, they put $19.4 million into 

infrastructure, the majority of which is being spent on waste 
water and water treatment plant upgrades. 
 
The option that this government took, Mr. Speaker, is they put 
10.5 additional water quality staff members in place to support 
all the people operating water treatment plants across this 
province. 
 
The option that this government done, Mr. Speaker, is they 
increased staff at the provincial lab by four and a half staff 
members, $500,000 to help with water quality testing. 
 
The option that this government done, Mr. Speaker, was to not 
to stick their head in the sand and pretend that this problem did 
not exist. The option on this side, Mr. Speaker, was not to play 
doom and gloom, to play politics with a very important issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
On this side, the option was leadership; that side voted against 
the budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, it’s absolutely amazing that one 
of those three options presented by the Justice to this document 
basically admits that SERM is underfunded to the point where it 
can’t carry out its legislative responsibilities. 
 
But it’s even more amazing that the other two options were to 
reduce the provincial government’s responsibilities for 
providing safe drinking water to Saskatchewan residents. And 
it’s very clear after the spring budget that SERM or cabinet 
chose to go with option three, Mr. Speaker, which is reducing 
SERM’s budget and downloading responsibilities onto the 
province’s municipalities, Mr. Speaker. Because in this year’s 
budget SERM’s environmental protection grants received less 
funding, and we all know how the municipalities across this 
province feel about the lack of any increase to their municipal 
revenue-sharing grants. 
 
To the minister: is SERM preparing to amend existing 
legislation or enact new legislation to absolve themselves of the 
responsibility for provincial drinking water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The weakest link in this Assembly was 
the days that the Tory government was in power and that 
member was part, that member was part of that particular 
movement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I want to clarify as well, Mr. Speaker, to answer his 
question. To answer his question is that SERM certainly has 
increased their budget, Mr. Speaker. We have increased our 
budget. We’re going to respond to this challenge. We’re going 
to put our money where our mouth is. They voted against it. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, the review that’s going to be 
happening, the inquiry — we asked for the inquiry. We’re 
asking people, ask the questions of SERM and we’ll give you 
the answers, Mr. Speaker. We have nothing to hide. We want to 
be open, honest and accountable, as we’ve said 10,000 times in 
this Assembly. 
 
Now what I would suggest to that member is clear as day. North 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1079 

 

Battleford people are saying can you guys please fix our water 
supply and stop playing politics with our lives. And that’s the 
message we heard in spades. 
 
And I would ask the Sask Party guys to not play politics with 
this and to point out that SERM is going to take a strong role; 
we’re going to continue playing a strong role in water quality in 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Water Quality Issues 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions 
are again for the Minister of Environment — the very same 
minister who just refused to release the Sask Health and Sask 
Water reports as required by his own cabinet document. 
 
This morning the Saskatchewan Party released the detailed 
communications plan presented to cabinet in November 2000 to 
deal with the drinking water crisis. One of the objectives of the 
government’s communication plan, and I quote: 
 

. . . was to avoid criticism of former cuts to programs and 
lack of provincial action. 

 
And how was the NDP advised to achieve that lofty goal? Well 
according to the communications plan the NDP was advised to 
tell the public, and again I quote, Mr. Speaker, “. . . the systems 
currently in place are effective.” 
 
(10:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister cover up serious threats to 
the health of the people of Saskatchewan by telling them that 
the systems currently in place are effective when he knew that 
was not the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Once again, that draft that he has of the 
final CDI that was presented to cabinet several months later is 
incorrect. There’s a lot of things in there that change over the 
course of several months. 
 
And I want to point out the review indicated that the drinking 
water quality program was as good as any in Canada but there 
were areas that we could improve. 
 
The goal of the final — not the draft — communication strategy 
was to, quote: 
 

reassure the public that provincial drinking water is a 
priority. 

 
The key message of the final — not the draft — communication 
strategy said, quote: 
 

The current system is effective but improvements are being 
made. 

 
The communities with known risk were communicated with 
immediately through drinking water advisories and through 

personal contact of SERM field staff, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And once again, our plan sees increase in funding. Our plan 
sees increase in communication. Our plan sees increase in staff. 
Our plan should be proactive. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that CDI was passed four months ago — 
four months ago. We responded. What would you have done? 
Nothing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the minister in his total 
response to continue all of his remarks through the Chair, 
please. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, last fall, the minister was 
presented with overwhelming evidence that Saskatchewan’s 
crumbling water infrastructure was a significant threat to public 
health. And yet, the NDP continued to tell people everything 
was okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the fundamental responsibilities of 
government is to take every possible step to protect public 
health. People expect their government to provide safe drinking 
water and to tell the truth about it. 
 
But the documents we have released over the past two days 
clearly show the NDP knew there was a serious problem with 
Saskatchewan’s drinking water. The NDP knew that public 
health was at risk, and yet they chose to cover it up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister tell the people of 
Saskatchewan that the drinking water systems currently in place 
are effective when he knew that was not the truth? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we issued boil-water 
advisories and that is not a government that’s sitting on their 
hands hoping that this problem is not noticed. 
 
We took the proactive step in saying to these communities: we 
have come in; we have determined that you have a variety of 
water quality problems and challenges. We want you to be on 
the safe side; boil your water. We’ve told them that. And we 
have documented that information. That information has been 
readily available over a number of months. 
 
And the opposition, Mr. Speaker, never even bothered to check 
with that list. But now all of a sudden there’s a crisis and 
challenge; all of a sudden, they’re the champions of change in 
this area. Mr. Speaker, they are not the champions of change, 
they are the doom and gloomers, and they’re political 
opportunists. 
 
And I say to you again, take the leadership in the city of North 
Battleford and its residents when they say, don’t fearmonger 
with our community and our lives. Let’s fix the problem, and 
get on with our lives, and let us build a system that works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we take our role very seriously. That’s why we 
issued boil-water advisories on a steady basis. Thank you very 



1080 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, it’s bad enough that 
government officials recommended the minister mislead the 
public in this document, but it’s even worse that the NDP 
government decided to take that advice. 
 
We also know the NDP went so far as to seek advice from its 
own Department of Justice about how to avoid legal liability for 
drinking water systems that they knew posed a serious threat to 
the health of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this NDP government has failed in one of its most 
fundamental responsibilities — to take every single possible 
step to protect the health of its citizens. For that fundamental 
failure, Mr. Speaker, the whole NDP cabinet should be fired, or 
at the very least, the Environment minister should be tendering 
his resignation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Will the Premier ask the Environment 
minister for his resignation, and if the minister refuses, will the 
Premier fire him immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again this is a feeble 
attempt by the opposition to find a smoking gun by referring to 
a draft document that is at least a year old. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the summer of 2000, SERM developed a new 
protocol to allow quicker response and action when water 
samples with bacteriological contamination were found. 
 
November 2000, drinking water CDI was delivered to the 
cabinet. December 2000, SERM issued the boil-water 
advisories to 28 towns and their waterworks, which do not 
possess minimum treatment operations. There were six to nine 
precautionary drinking water advisories and 10 emergency 
boil-water orders that were issued SERM, Health, in the year of 
2000. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we are not hiding anything. We’re taking a 
very proactive step, everything from infrastructure money and 
on. We have proven our value, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. 
 
We have a minister here who has clearly indicated this morning 
that he’s going to pick and choose when he is going to be open 
and transparent with the public. We have a minister who was 
very well aware of the serious threat posed to the public health 
and safety of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you ask that minister to tender his 
resignation? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member please rephrase his 
question through the Chair? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will the 
Premier ask that minister to tender his resignation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Premier, when it came to the 
attention of this minister and other ministers that we had 
concerns and issues around water quality in Saskatchewan last 
fall, this minister, his leadership, and other ministers put 
together a package of action, Mr. Speaker. A package of action 
that has been talked about today in terms of municipal 
infrastructure programs leading the nation. A package of action 
which immediately, publicly — publicly — went to 
communities who had problems and issued drinking water 
advisories and boiled drinking water advisories. 
 
When members over there talk about hiding information, I 
don’t know how they figure that out when this very minister has 
gone to those communities and issued those advisories very, 
very publicly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not going to ask for that minister’s 
resignation or any minister’s resignation. I’m going to ask them 
to keep up the very good work that they are doing with the 
communities of Saskatchewan. That’s what . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Student Assistance 
and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 29, The 
Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 
2001 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the Opposition Whip on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, with a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you state your point of order, please. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, during question period, the 
Minister of Environment and Resource Management quoted 
from a cabinet document. He had stated that we were using a 
preliminary document, a draft document, and he quoted from a 
cabinet document, which has not been laid on the Table of this 
House. 
 
And when you look in Beauchesne's, page 151, rule 495.1, it 
says that it must be tabled if he’s quoting from a cabinet 
document. So I’d like you to check into that, please. 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1081 

 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s a 
well-established . . . I would recognize, first of all, the Deputy 
House Leader. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. In response to the 
member’s point of order, Mr. Speaker, I would argue that the 
Minister of the Environment was quoting from his own notes 
and he was not quoting from the actual cabinet decision item, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s a . . . members 
of the Assembly . . . Order, order. 
 
It’s a well-established practice that any documents that the 
minister may be quoting from should be tabled, if it is a direct 
quote. And I will have to depend on the minister’s judgment 
whether this or not was a direct quote. 
 
We will look at the record, but I would say that if it is a direct 
quote, the minister is required to table the document. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely happy to 
stand and table responses to questions 171, 172, and 173. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 171, 172, and 173 are 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Item 174 is converted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 14 — The 
Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to add one 
or two comments, if I could, regarding The Provincial Auditor 
Act that is before the House at this time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very important Act that is coming before 
the House for a number of reasons. It is a particular function of 
this legislature to make sure that there is a Provincial Auditor in 
place and that a Provincial Auditor has the independence 
needed to do his job on behalf of the legislature and on behalf 
of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that I was part of the Public 
Accounts Committee that looked at the amendments as they 
were being put forward. The independence of the Provincial 
Auditor was a very important part of the discussion in that 

committee. And part of that . . . an essential part of that decision 
was to ensure that the Provincial Auditor’s independence was 
ensured now that we had the opportunity to debate that issue in 
a new . . . in a new amended Act. So that was the first criteria 
we looked at in that committee. And I’m pleased to say that that 
was addressed in that committee. 
 
The Provincial Auditor functions is a very important part . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask all members to 
afford the member from Lloydminster the courtesy of being 
able to place his remarks so that everybody can hear them. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, a 
very important role of the auditor in this province is to make 
sure that he has access to all the records of the government and 
all the records of the Crown corporations, or at least in 
conjunction with other auditors of the Crown corporations. 
 
So the independence of the auditor is a very crucial issue, and 
again I would like to reinforce the fact that the committee took 
that part of it very seriously. 
 
(11:00) 
 
The amendments that are being put before the House were in 
fact by unanimous agreement of the Public Accounts 
Committee, and I think it was . . . the procedure and process 
was done very well. There was a committee that was struck by 
the Minister of Finance to offer suggestions from that point of 
view. 
 
We had recommendations from the auditor that was in place, 
and between those two entities, the Public Accounts Committee 
had an opportunity to look at those recommendations and come 
up with I think, a very positive and a responsible set of 
amendments that we’re going to be reviewing. 
 
Some of those amendments we’re going to look at, besides the 
independence, would be to set a term of 10 years, or at least set 
a term, and we’re recommending that this be a 10-year term for 
the auditor. That will give the auditor a period of time that he’ll 
be able to do his job knowing that he has that period of time to 
get the work project together. 
 
Also that 10-year term doesn’t preclude him from reapplying 
for that job afterward so it can be continued on at the discretion 
then of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
The auditor will be selected by the unanimous agreement of the 
Public Accounts Committee, and that unanimous agreement 
will be put forward for the appointment of the political auditor. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — I ask for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to thank 
the member from Lloydminster for allowing me to intervene. 



1082 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
the members of the House, Mr. Jim Jones, who’s sitting in your 
west gallery. Mr. Jones is a long-time acquaintance of mine and 
Mr. Jones is a resident of Last Mountain-Touchwood 
constituency. I know he’s very involved in the agriculture 
industry and I imagine he’s in town today on some business. 
 
So I ask all the members to offer him a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Auditor 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There was a 
couple of other items that we looked at in the Public Accounts 
Committee that I think should be recognized as rather 
important. We set the auditor’s salary; that will be tied directly 
to the deputy minister’s. That’s another improvement that 
wasn’t in place before. That is now clarified. 
 
Part of the amendments will be a requirement for a business 
plan that the auditor must put forward. That in fact was in place 
when the former provincial auditor, Mr. Strelioff, was in that 
position. It’s a good function and we think that that should be 
carried on and we’re going to be . . . that will be part of the 
amendment. 
 
One of the other important things just before I close, Mr. 
Speaker, was that we want to reappoint an audit committee. 
That has been in place before. I don’t think it’s been used a 
great deal, but with discussion in the committee, the 
wide-ranging scope and terms for that audit committee, I think 
will have real value for that committee. And several of the 
opinions that the Public Accounts Committee will come 
forward with, will be on the basis of the audit committee’s 
recommendations, I am sure. 
 
This is a . . . putting it into the Act is somewhat of a departure 
from the past. What we’re doing is we’re conferring with other 
provinces that have used audit committees in the past, and we 
want to just take a little more time to see if we can’t find their 
experience, and their recommendation. 
 
And other members of our caucus would like to add their voice 
to this, so at this time I would move that we adjourn debate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 7 — The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, it’s my pleasure to speak to Bill No. 7 this morning, 
and to identify some of our concerns and some of the conditions 
of the Bill that we support at this moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a revision is proposed to pension Acts, and 
we seem to be seeing pension Act revisions almost each and 
every year in this Legislative Assembly, we have to pay very 
special attention to the effects that this type of revision will 
have on everyone in the province. 
 
You have to remember, Mr. Speaker, that there are many people 
in the province of Saskatchewan who belong to pension plans. 
And it is in those golden years that, of course, they are . . . 
having worked for many years, some you know in excess of 35 
years, they have a great reliance on pension plans. So what this 
Legislative Assembly does has a great bearing on those years 
that people have in retirement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 7 affects a number of defined benefit 
plans. It affects the Liquor Board Commission; it affects the 
Saskatchewan Power Corporation; it affects the Workers’ 
Compensation Board pension plan, the Public Service pension 
plan, the Saskatchewan Transportation Corporation plan, and in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, it even affects the Anti-Tuberculosis League 
pension plan. 
 
These plans were all closed, as been pointed out by the minister, 
back in 1997 — in 1977, I’m sorry — and since then of course 
no new membership to these plans because now, of course, we 
have defined contributory plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the major changes that we see that is being 
proposed by this plan is that the surviving widow or widower of 
someone who has not reached the age of retirement and passes 
away, that the maximum benefit allowable under the plan will 
be put in place. That is to say that the person who was an 
employee did not have to select that option prior to his or her 
passing. And, Mr. Speaker, we do believe that that will be a 
significant change, and we think that of course most people will 
support that change. 
 
But you know, Mr. Minister, Mr. Speaker, we had the 
opportunity to meet with a number of officials from the 
Saskatchewan Superannuates Association and they pointed out 
a number of things, Mr. Speaker, that they lobby for on behalf 
of all of their membership. 
 
These executive members, Mr. Speaker, pointed out a number 
of concerns, but they identified three that have become very 
problematic. And I want to share those concerns with you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Firstly, they said that the SGSA — which is the Saskatchewan 
Government Superannuates Association — pensions have fallen 
behind and continue to be adversely affected by inflation. 
That’s number one concern. 
 
The second concern, Mr. Speaker, is that on retirement all 
superannuates find themselves in a new financial dilemma with 
the complete loss of health, dental, and related benefits. 
 
And their third concern is that the pensions of many 
superannuates or their surviving spouses are completely 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1083 

 

inadequate. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those three concerns were raised by the 
executive members. And as I’ve pointed out, we believe that a 
small step has been taken in addressing the third concern, in 
that the surviving widow or widower will indeed have their 
pension affected by the clause that is proposed in this Bill. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think of greater concern to many, many 
pensioners who belong to those plans that I identified, are 
concerns number one and number two. The second concern, I 
think, is one that has been raised very, very prominently by the 
members of the executive. 
 
When someone retires . . . most of the employees of course 
have their own health, dental plans that they have while they are 
employed, but the moment they retire those plans are lost. They 
have to revert back to what is in existence for anyone who does 
not have a plan. And, Mr. Speaker, we are very aware that in 
the province of Saskatchewan the deductible for drug 
prescriptions is $850 semi-annually — or in other words, 
$1,700 total annual amount of money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many pensioners are telling us through their 
executive and directly to us, that this is just not affordable for 
them. They are on a fixed income that is not indexed, as many 
have pointed out. And that is as inflation continues to lower 
their amount of actual dollars in their pocket, they find it very 
difficult to be able to meet the costs of drugs and other related 
prescriptions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know of course that as one ages, the 
possibility of having to purchase more prescriptions is there. 
And that type of financial burden is something that they cannot 
meet. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they’ve been lobbying very extensively for 
this government over the last number of years to recognize this 
— to recognize the fact that many employees lose those 
benefits and they need to be addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill does not address that. This Bill says 
nothing about the costs and the additional burden that is placed 
on the people that have given so much in all of their years of 
work to any of the plans that they belong to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this idea has been before the minister for a long 
time. And I know that . . . I’m sure he’s done some calculations. 
We have some numbers that have been provided by the 
executive of the SGSA and they indicate that about 10,000 
people belong to the pension plans. Some of them are in the 
Power corporation plan. There are others that are in the Liquor 
Board. 
 
Each of those plans, Mr. Speaker, has different benefits. And 
they’re looking for a standardization. They want to be assured 
that all people . . . no matter who your employer was prior to 
retirement, you should all be entitled to the same kind of health 
benefits. 
 
We know that the prescription cost for a particular drug for 
someone who worked for SaskPower or someone who worked 
in the Public Service Commission is going to be the same cost. 

So they are asking this government to meet that. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the financial cost for putting in place a 
plan for some of these people is not super expensive. The 
Group Medical Services has identified that a single monthly 
premium for an individual for health benefit would be as little 
as $55 or a little over $600 a year. 
 
That’s for a whole year, $600 benefit that would be able to 
provide someone who is having a large cost for expenditure on 
prescriptions of more than the deductible — which in this 
province is $1,700 — that expenditure of $600 for each of those 
superannuates would cover that. 
 
And that’s what this government has to look at. It has to look at 
a plan to be able to assist the persons that are on the current 
pension plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other things that the Bill No. 7 proposes 
is that it must change some of the regulations to comply with 
the federal tax guidelines. And of course, Mr. Speaker, those 
are vital changes and they need to be made to ensure that the 
pension plans do not lose their registration. And we support 
those changes as do the members of the executive of the 
superannuation group. 
 
One concern though, Mr. Speaker, that has been raised is that 
one of the clauses indicates that the plan will be able to charge 
fees to its members for certain services rendered. No 
explanation about what these fees are, no explanation about 
how much those fees will be, and in fact it doesn’t even identify 
for what service there could be a fee. 
 
So we would encourage the minister that when this Bill does 
move forward to Committee of the Whole, that he be able to 
provide . . . that the minister be able to provide a complete 
explanation of how those fees will be set, for what services 
people will now be expected to pay a fee, and the entire 
projected cost and how those costs will be controlled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are people that will be relying on the 
benefits plan and the services provided by that plan. And now 
all of a sudden we’re saying to them, well we’re going to charge 
you a fee for asking a question or for providing you with some 
information. And the people in these pension plans are very, 
very concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, as I’ve indicated, consulted with a 
number of superannuates, a number of people on the executive 
of the SGSA, and they have indicated some concerns. And we 
want to continue to have that discussion with that executive to 
be able to determine whether or not there are other 
improvements that could be made to this Bill, or for that matter, 
what are the real identified concerns as raised by the minister. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t finished that review of this Bill 
and our consultations are ongoing, so I would ask for 
adjournment of debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(11:15) 
 



1084 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

Bill No. 17 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 17 — The 
Professional Corporations Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to be able to stand in this legislature and enter the 
debate on Bill No. 17, The Professional Corporations Act. And, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll also have the opportunity later this day, I 
believe, to speak to Bill No. 1. And I’m appreciative for both of 
those opportunities because the remarks I have in the case of 
Bill No. 1 and 17 are very similar. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they are based, they are based around a 
belief that I have had for some time, formerly as an economic 
developer, and that I maintain today, and that belief 
fundamentally is that there are many things that a government 
can do. Short of measures that actually cost the treasury, there 
are many things that a government can do that assist, that can 
assist small business — and frankly, medium-sized and large 
businesses as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In the case of Bill No. 17, we’re talking about an Act that if 
passed by this legislature would enable professionals in our 
province to incorporate. And, Mr. Speaker, no doubt 
government members have heard the same sort of thing that we 
have heard on our side of the House as it relates to this 
particular issue, specifically that professionals in the province 
of Saskatchewan have for some time wanted this opportunity. 
 
They have noted for us other jurisdictions where it’s currently 
allowed and have noted for us how it is working in those 
jurisdictions and how, if implemented here, would not come at 
a great cost to our treasury. And yet, Mr. Speaker, would be 
very important from the perspective of professionals who wish 
to stay in the province of Saskatchewan and who wish to 
compete successfully in the province of Saskatchewan and with 
their colleagues in other jurisdictions. 
 
And so when the Bill was introduced by the Hon. Minister of 
Justice, I think there was a good deal of support for the 
introduction of that Bill on this side of the House. This is an 
element, Mr. Speaker, that was in the election platform of the 
Saskatchewan Party, heading into the 1999 election. 
 
This is an issue that we spoke to as individual candidates and as 
a party. A measure that the government could take at no great 
cost to the treasury, that would be welcomed by our business 
community, and indeed would be an asset to one of the business 
. . . one of the sectors of our economy where there is great 
growth potential I think, that being the professional services 
side of our economy. 
 
And so we have been calling for this kind of a measure for 
some time, and we’re happy that it has finally been introduced 
by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was mentioning at the outset of my remarks, I 
think that members on this side of the House, and arguably the 
Minister of Justice who has introduced this Bill, understand 
clearly that there are things we can do as a government for 
small business, for our small business sector in this province, 

that do not cost the treasury a great deal of money, and yet can 
have a profound effect in terms of enabling our business 
community to compete, both within the province and across our 
country. 
 
There are other things, Mr. Speaker, that this government can 
do as well, I would point out, in addition to Bill 17, along those 
lines. And we will continue to encourage and exhort this 
government to do those things, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to red 
tape that small business faces in our province. 
 
And I can think specifically of the lag between trying to register 
and incorporate your business, and when you’re actually 
registered and incorporated in this province, which is still 
unfortunately measured in weeks, Mr. Speaker, while other 
jurisdictions are measuring that time period in days. There is 
another improvement that this province can strive for, and I 
believe it also falls under the purview of the Minister of Justice. 
 
And so that gives us hope on this side of the House as well, that 
some action may occur in light of the fact that it is the Minister 
of Justice who has the opportunity to make this change. And so 
far, specifically on the Bills I’ll be speaking to today, he seems 
to be the one that’s introducing these measures into this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would also point out that this government can also do 
something else as it relates to . . . as it relates to the issue of 
labour regulations in our province. Mr. Speaker, we can make a 
great improvement in the business environment in our province, 
in the environment in which our business community can thrive 
and grow, if we make some fundamental changes to the labour 
laws and the labour regulations here in our province. 
 
And like the action that has been taken in Bill No. 17, this 
would come at very little cost, if any, to the treasury of this 
province, and would represent a major change and a major 
improvement in the environment that business can operate in, 
here in the province. 
 
I think specifically of the Bills that we’ve introduced on this 
side of the House in the two sessions that I’ve had the honour of 
participating in, Mr. Speaker. The one Bill would simply bring 
a secret ballot to the workplace in terms of people’s desire to 
organize or not to organize their workplace. 
 
And the other would simply allow employers and unions to 
share with the employees of any particular company the reasons 
why they should or shouldn’t organize. Very common sense 
measures, Mr. Speaker. Very common sense measures that 
would be fair to employees and employers that would improve 
the business climate in our province and would come at no cost 
to the treasury. 
 
And it was in those terms and those parameters, Mr. Speaker, 
that I looked at Bill No. 17. And it’s why, Mr. Speaker, I 
initially, on the face of it today, can tell you that I see a lot of 
merit in this particular Bill, in how it’s been drafted and how 
it’s been presented. 
 
But I know, Mr. Speaker, because it has been a platform issue 
of our party for some time, because it’s something we have 
called on this government to do for some time, I know my 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1085 

 

colleagues in the legislature will also want to speak to it, 
because they’ve talked about this issue on the doorsteps in the 
election. They’ve fielded calls in their constituency offices. 
They’ve met with their business community. And I know they, 
like me, will want to enter this debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, as it relates to Bill 17, at this time I would move that 
we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 1 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 1 — The 
Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I indicated in my 
remarks on Bill 17, I would be entering the debate on this Bill 
as well, and it’s an honour to do so. 
 
Frankly, the remarks that I have for this Bill are very similar to 
the remarks that I had on Bill 17, primarily because I believe 
these two pieces of legislation accomplish the same thing and 
speak to the same principles that we have been speaking to in 
terms of the official opposition and the business environment in 
our economy. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, at the risk of sounding repetitive, again I 
would indicate to you and through you to my colleagues in the 
legislature, that both of these pieces of legislation are a clear 
indication to this government, this government, that you can 
improve the business climate and the business environment in 
this province through measures that the government can enact at 
no cost to the treasury, to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
And certainly Bill No. 1, The Partnership Amendment Act, is 
another example of that. If passed, this particular piece of 
legislation would bring us into line with legislation that’s 
available currently in only two provinces in the Dominion — in 
Ontario and in Alberta. And once again, it’s been introduced by 
the Justice minister who on many different days, Mr. Speaker, 
some would argue may be perhaps the only member opposite 
that understands what you can achieve for small business on the 
government side of the House through legislation without the 
expenditure of tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, we on this side of the House have heard 
from professionals because primarily The Partnership 
Amendment Act is going to have an impact on professional 
services in this province. They are the ones that use the 
partnership structure of business more than any other. 
 
So again we have heard from those groups on this side of the 
House. We have heard from them in our constituencies, we 
have heard from their professional associations from across the 
province, and they have called on this government to enact 
these kinds of changes. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that the important balance 
that must be struck with respect to these two pieces of 
legislation, and more specifically with respect to Bill No. 1, is 

the balance between providing the business community and the 
partnerships the protection that they should have from actions 
that individual partners simply had no control over. In other 
words they didn’t contribute to any negligence or wrongdoing 
and there should be protection for them. 
 
And the balance of course, Mr. Speaker, is to also enable those 
who were at fault or perhaps were negligent or perhaps not 
enabled, but at least to ensure that they can be held liable, and it 
appears on the surface that Bill No. 1 also is able to accomplish 
that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting to note that the only two provinces that have 
introduced similar legislation to this, Mr. Speaker, are the 
provinces of Ontario and Alberta. And, Mr. Speaker, we often 
cite those two provinces as examples of governments that 
understand very clearly . . . that understand very clearly how it 
is you can grow an economy in this modern world. They 
understand clearly how to succeed in terms of governing a 
jurisdiction that you want to grow, that you want to create jobs, 
that you want to develop. 
 
And it’s interesting to note that they are the only other two 
jurisdictions that have implemented these changes to date and 
the Minister of Justice seems to be following suit. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, both of these Bills this morning I think they 
afford us all room for hope that at least one or maybe two 
members opposite understand fundamentally the importance of 
improving and maintaining a positive business climate in our 
province, Mr. Speaker. And for those reasons, I’ve been very 
pleased to offer my remarks to you and through you, to the 
members of this Assembly. 
 
And again, as is the case with the previous Bill, these are the 
kinds of issues that we’ve heard about as an opposition from 
individual constituents, from firms in our ridings, and from their 
associations. 
 
And for that reason, I know that many of my colleagues will 
want to offer their remarks and demonstrate to the government 
that this matter is indeed important to them as well. And so as it 
relates to Bill No. 1, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 3 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorje that Bill No. 3 — The Historic 
Properties Foundations Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise today to speak on this important piece of legislation that is 
before us, An Act to establish Crown Foundations for Historic 
Properties, Bill No. 3. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the intent of this Bill, and I’m quoting, is to make 
it possible for the Lieutenant Governor to establish foundations 
to receive gifts to the Crown, including corporate and individual 
gifts, bequests, donations, and grants for the purpose of 
preserving, developing, and enhancing historic properties in the 



1086 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, when my colleague from Redberry Lake spoke 
about this Bill a few weeks ago, he raised a very important 
point of the need to protect and enhance historical sites. But 
recovering the costs of operating these sites for future 
generations must also be looked at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are thousands of historic property sites all 
over the world including libraries, homes, and old buildings, 
many of which we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have many historical properties which have already been 
preserved and many more which should be. But when an 
organization is attempting to restore a historical site, one of the 
biggest obstacles that they face is financial. 
 
It is my understanding, Mr. Speaker, that one of the first 
foundations that will be established will be to support 
Government House. When the minister spoke in her second 
reading speech about this legislation, she spoke about the 
important history that Government House holds for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is not every day that I will agree with the 
members on the opposite side of the House, but in this 
particular instance I will agree that Government House is an 
important symbol to Saskatchewan and is a real showpiece for 
the many people that come from across Canada and visit the 
site, which in very recent days has been hosting royalty. 
 
My grandfather, an RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
officer attended the Lieutenant Governor and so Government 
House has a special meaning to me. And I believe all people of 
Saskatchewan are agreed that this house should be preserved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main crux of this Bill is an important one. 
However, the only concern that I have is ensuring that the 
monies collected through the foundations actually go to the 
organizations they are designated to rather than through the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this type of legislation in its true form will assist 
many of the small communities that members on this side of the 
House represent to establish sites in their towns as historical 
properties. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the most important gifts that we can give to 
our children is the gift of knowledge and restoring historical 
sites for their future benefit. And this is very important. I 
always find it fascinating when we have a group . . . a school 
group visit the legislature and the children marvel at the 
structure and the historical significance of this building. And 
that is what is the key here, Mr. Speaker, is leaving a legacy for 
our children to appreciate the significance such wonderful 
buildings in Saskatchewan offer. 
 
There are just a few points in the Bill that are of concern to 
members on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
just like to outline those briefly now. 
 

One is that the Crown agent, under Crown agent, section 5(2): 
 

All property of a foundation, all money acquired, 
administered, possessed or received from any source and 
all profits earned by a foundation are the property of the 
Crown and are, for all purposes, including taxation of 
whatever nature or description, deemed to be the property 
of the Crown. 

 
I think that this should be of great concern to the people who 
now have these items in their community and that we are going 
to, through this foundation, make them the property of the 
Crown. 
 
The second point is under board of trustees, 10(1): 
 

A foundation consists of a board of not more than 20 
trustees appointed by the Lieutenant Governor in Council. 

 
And again, this is taking away control from the local 
communities where these historical sites are located. 
 
Also under board of trustees, 10(7), and I quote: 
 

A foundation may pay any allowances for trustees and any 
other costs of administering the foundation from its own 
money. 

 
And so, again we see where these foundations will be able to 
pay their trustees and also allocate other costs for 
administration. Again, that is concern to members on this side 
of the House. It is our belief that most of these historical 
properties have been preserved through the willingness of 
volunteers to give of their time and not to be paid for these 
services. 
 
Another concern is under investments, and no. 13(1): 
 

A foundation may: 
 
And I read, quoting from (3): 
 

The costs incurred pursuant to this section are a charge on 
and payable out of the money held by the foundation. 

 
And again it is giving free rein of the monies that are donated 
and given, to be used by this foundation under their discretion, 
and taking away local decisions. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, under direction of donors, no. 14, and I 
quote: 
 

A foundation shall consider the directions of the persons 
who have made gifts, grants, . . . (bequeaths) or donations 
to a foundation but the foundation is not bound by those 
directions. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think this is very serious in that local 
communities want to be able to do what they will with these 
historical properties. And when someone makes a donation or 
bequeaths gifts, they should have the right to say where those 
dollars are going to go and those dollars should be spent 
appropriately. 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1087 

 

And I think this is something that is of grave concern to the 
people of Saskatchewan, that they would give these monies and 
then the government, through the foundation, would make the 
decision of how this was going to be spent. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, there are still some concerns with this Bill 
and we have sent out letters to third party groups that are 
directly involved with historical properties. We are waiting their 
return letter with their concerns, if they have any, and we will 
be bringing forth those concerns when we receive them. 
 
We also have other members on this side of the House that 
would like to speak on this Bill and also have concerns about it, 
and so at this time I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 27 — The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2001. 
On June 30, 2000, SaskTel became regulated by the Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission, 
commonly referred as the CRTC, which is a federal agency. In 
other words, SaskTel has come under federal regulation. 
 
This Bill that I’m speaking to today introduces a technical 
amendment to enable SaskTel to maintain its existing rate 
structure for services offered to its competitors. In other words, 
what it charges competitors for providing use of its 
infrastructure and so on. SaskTel’s competitors use SaskTel’s 
infrastructure in delivering services to their customers. The 
CRTC regulates the fees that SaskTel can charge the other 
telephone companies. 
 
SaskTel’s existing rate structure for services offered to its 
competitors includes a notional charge for corporate income 
tax. And the reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is if Bell telephone, 
for example, is charging SaskTel for its services, Bell telephone 
would have as a component of the charge the amount of 
corporate capital tax or other tax that Bell might be paying in 
the province of Ontario or some other province. 
 
SaskTel similarly would charge its competitors who use some 
of its services a notional charge for corporate income tax so that 
they’re on a level playing field. 
 
What this Bill does is to replace the notional income tax charge 
with an actual capital tax charge. In other words, what SaskTel 
charges the private sector for, it will now actually pay to the 
province. The new capital tax will closely represent the 
Saskatchewan corporate income tax that SaskTel would have 
paid if they were not exempt from income tax. 
 
I want to assure you and the other members of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, and the public, that this change is strictly a technical 
change to satisfy CRTC requirements and it will not result in 
any rate increases for any SaskTel customers. It is purely a 
technical change in the way things are done because SaskTel 
has come under federal regulation and it’s required pursuant to 

CRTC rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Corporation Capital Tax Act. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank the 
minister for his remarks. It was certainly enlightening on this 
side of the House to have a different perspective of what this 
Bill is presenting to us. As we take a look at the Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, we were trying to understand on this side of the 
House, as we read through the Bill and the explanatory notes, 
what this Bill is going to mean to the people and the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We understand and we know that in this province that the 
corporate capital tax is one of those excessive burdens that are 
put upon the corporations in this province, a tax that is 
excessively higher than other provinces charge their 
corporations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we see here in this Bill that the government 
is trying in some small part to address the problem, although as 
the minister has stated that the reason they’re addressing this 
issue as it pertains to telecommunications Crown corporations 
in this province, Mr. Speaker, that the reason they’re addressing 
it is because of a CRTC ruling and not because of any 
forward-looking taxation proposal that is being brought by this 
government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it will still continue though to be a Crown 
corporation exempt from corporate capital tax. What the 
minister has led us to believe in the House, Mr. Speaker, is that 
this tax will only be charged on services that SaskTel will be 
providing to other telecommunications in this country and 
throughout the world, as they do business to and through 
Saskatchewan. And certainly it’s going to be, in small measure 
bring some tax dollars, further tax dollars into the province. But 
again, we’re going to be seeing that the monopoly of the Crown 
corporations exempted from being on the same level playing 
field as other Corporations in the province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as we go through the Bill and we’ve listened 
to the brief . . . the statements that have been made by the 
Minister of Finance, it certainly raised probably more questions 
than we originally had about this Bill. 
 
I think it’s important that as we spend the next several days and 
weeks of examining the motives for this Bill and the wording of 
it, that we have an opportunity to be able to talk to other people 
in the industry as to what kind of effect it’s going to have on 
them, and whether there’s some way that we’re going to be able 
to assist the government in being able to become more 
progressive in dealing with telecommunications in this 
province. 
 
So, I think, Mr. Speaker, what we should do at this time is we’ll 
adjourn debate for another day. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, further to my point of order. 



1088 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

It’s come to my attention that a document has been tabled 
regarding the point of order, and I just wanted to make a 
comment on that. 
 
The Speaker: — I’d just like to mention this: that the members 
are not to comment on any rulings on a point of order. 
However, if the member is intending to raise another point of 
order, I would invite him to do so now. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s what this 
will be, is another point of order regarding the statement made 
by the minister and how he had not quoted from a document. 
 
And looking at what was tabled, it clearly says that . . . and I 
just, from the document that was tabled, a goal of the final, and 
it says in brackets, not draft, so it was the final communication 
document that the cabinet had. And it quotes. It’s got in 
quotation marks what that document said. 
 
So I want that to be taken under advisement, that the issue that 
the minister raised was quoting from a cabinet document, and 
it’s got it in quotation marks here. What is said here is, just 
because it’s on a different sheet of paper and not from the actual 
document, is not applicable. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Speaker, a couple of points. 
First of all the hon. member, under the guise of presenting a 
new point of order, simply comes to rehash a previous point of 
order that he raised and that has been ruled upon. 
 
Also the point that he makes, Mr. Speaker, he says that if a 
minister would quote from something that exists somewhere 
else, that . . . Mr. Speaker, do I have the floor? 
 
He says if the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. I regard this . . . 
Members, I regard this as a serious matter. Order. I regard this 
as a serious matter and I would like to be able to hear the 
member’s comments in full context please, and I do not 
appreciate interruptions during this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, when a minister is . . . the 
rules of the House require that when a minister is quoting 
directly from a document, that it be tabled. And what the hon. 
minister provided was his note that he was referring to. 
 
(11:45) 
 
If it is interpreted that whenever a minister should say 
something that is in another document that exists somewhere 
else, that somehow that has to be tabled at the Clerk’s Table in 
this Assembly and be made public, Mr. Speaker, that would be 
an extreme stretch from any ruling ever previously made. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, ministers are entitled to work from their 
own notes in bringing information to the House. That is what 
the hon. minister has done and that’s what he’s provided to the 
House. 
 
And I would ask that you would find this point of order not well 

taken and, in fact, I think there may be grounds to rule it as 
frivolous, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members — order — I thank 
both members for their comments on the second point of order 
that has been raised. 
 
Before making a comment on that, I note that the member has 
received the original document from which the quotation was 
made. The document that has been provided is a note that the 
minister was using from which he was making his remarks . . . 
Order, order. Order. Order. The document that was provided is 
from notes that the minister was using in making his remarks to 
the Assembly. 
 
He has fulfilled perhaps even more of an obligation that he was 
required to, as I understand that he was not quoting directly 
from any type of a CDI. Therefore, the — order — therefore, 
the second point of order that was raised is not well taken. 
 
The members will proceed with the agenda. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 The Commercial Liens Act/ 
Loi sur les privilèges à base commerciale 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Commercial Liens 
Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, existing statute law and common law currently 
provide for the creation of a legal right known as a lien, where a 
value is added or improvements are made on personal property 
in exchange for money. If the promised money is not paid, the 
lien provides the lien holder the first right to that personal 
property in order to secure the funds that are owed to him or 
her. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill before this Assembly is intended to 
provide much needed updating of the existing outdated Acts 
and common law rules regarding the creation and enforcement 
of liens. 
 
The Commercial Liens Act will codify the procedure for a lien 
attachment and enforcement for the following types of liens: a 
repairer’s lien where a person has provided services for the 
purposes of improving, restoring, or maintaining the condition 
of goods. 
 
Secondly, a storer’s lien where the goods are maintained by 
storage. 
 
And finally a carrier’s lien where the transportation of goods 
from one place to another where they are needed or will be 
capable of being sold or repaired. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed Bill would restrict the value of a lien 
claim to the agreed upon amount to be paid between the parties. 
If no such agreement was made, the lien would be restricted to 
the value of services actually provided. 
 
Even more significant from the perspective of a person who 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1089 

 

faces a lien claim is the innovation in this legislation whereby 
the amount claimed in a lien or the validity of the lien itself 
could be easily and quickly challenged before a court. 
 
From the perspective of a small business, the updated lien 
attachment and enforcement procedures set out in this Bill are 
an improvement as they adopt the well-established and 
well-known procedures under the personal property registry 
system. 
 
Generally speaking, Mr. Speaker, once a lien is duly registered 
that lien will gain priority over all subsequent interests and 
certain prior interests as well. This Bill has been well received 
within our consultation groups, which included the legal 
community, Saskatchewan Trucking Association, the 
Saskatchewan Association of Automotive Repairers, the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business, and the Centre 
for Public Interests Advocacy. 
 
By setting out clear rules for how and when a lien will attach, as 
well as providing fairness to consumers by making the process 
for challenging the amount or nature of the lien quick and 
relatively simple, this new Act is a step forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, businesses will now be able to pursue the 
enforcement of legitimate liens from other provinces, thereby 
avoiding the need to entirely re-litigate a matter where the 
subject of the lien claim has simply crossed the provincial 
border. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, what this Bill also does is abolish certain 
common law liens and a series of existing liens statutes such as 
The Garage Keepers Lien Act, The Hotel Keepers Act, The 
Warehousemen’s Lien Act, and what is left of The Mechanics’ 
Lien Act to replace them with this modern, uniform legislation. 
 
Rescinding these obsolete Acts and common law rules will 
make it easier for both consumers and businesses to locate and 
understand the applicable lien law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask this Assembly to join with both consumer 
and business communities in supporting this important initiative 
regarding commercial liens. I move second reading of An Act 
respecting Commercial Liens and making consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after 
reviewing the Bill, there are a number of questions that we will 
have, and we’ll be outlining those questions in the Committee 
of the Whole. But at this time, in order to give us the 
opportunity to speak with the various stakeholder groups across 
the province that would be interested in this piece of legislation, 
we would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 

Public Service Commission 
Vote 33 

 
Subvote (PS01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll recognize the minister and ask her to 
introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. Today I have with me Wynne Young, Chair of the Public 
Service Commission; Rick McKillop, executive director of 
employee relations division; Clare Isman, executive director, 
human resource development division; and Lynn Jacobson, 
director of administrative and information services division. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I also would 
like to thank the minister for being here and her officials for 
being here as well. 
 
The first question that I have is can you provide us with a brief 
overview of anything new in initiative or direction that your 
department will be heading in during this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The two major things this year would 
be the Aboriginal internship and management development 
program, and as well, the development of an out-of-scope 
classification and performance management and compensation 
plan. 
 
I don’t know how much detail the member would like on this, 
but the Aboriginal internship one is intended to further the 
recruitment and development of Aboriginal employees at the 
management level of government and professional positions in 
the public service. So there’s been funding of 690,000 and 15.3 
full-time equivalents for this purpose. 
 
And the out-of-scope classification performance management 
and compensation plan is a very interesting development 
because there’s been a project underway in Finance for the last 
couple of years very much focused on outcome measures, 
performance requirements, and part of this out-of-scope 
classification and performance management plan will involve 
requiring managers to have outcome measures and 
accountability plans that go along with their job description and 
job duties. 
 
So we see this as being, I guess, a little more focusing of the 
mandate in the various departments. And for that purpose, 
funding of 230,000 and three full-time equivalents was 
approved. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, the full-time staff complement went up in your 
department by an astounding 20 per cent this year over the last 
year. Can you tell us why a relatively small department needs 
an increase of 20 per cent in staffing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The positions that are new over the 
previous budget — 15.3 are the Aboriginal internship and 
management development positions. These are new positions 
for those trainees, if you want to put it in that terminology. One 
position for communication staff, and three positions that will 
only be there for two years to work specifically on the 



1090 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

out-of-scope classification and compensation plan. And as well, 
I might note, that there was 4.4 positions reduced in the CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees) classification plan. 
 
So there’s been some additions, some deletions, but the 
majority of it is very specific to the Aboriginal internship and 
management program. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So you said 
that presently you have 15.3 people that are enrolled for the 
Aboriginal program, or that are staff to look after the Aboriginal 
program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s 1.5 FTEs (full-time equivalents) to 
look after the program, 10 actual interns, and 4 summer student 
positions. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Can you describe the program a 
little more in depth in terms of the tasks performed and the 
length of terms, as well as the pay scales that will be paid for 
this department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I didn’t hear the member’s question 
well. If you could maybe just . . . 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Sure. Can you describe that department a 
little more depth just in terms of the tasks that will be 
performed within the Aboriginal program and the length of the 
term of the interns that will be in the program, as well as the 
pay scales that are being paid? 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’ll learn a few things together here. 
It’s not until September that they will actually be selected and 
be in place. Recruitment is taking place right now. They’ll be 
approximately at the out-of-scope level 2, which is 30 to 
35,000. 
 
And what’s envisaged for their training will be some specific 
training courses. But as well to rotate through all the central 
agencies so they would understand, you know, the functions of 
Treasury Board, the functions of the various planning and other 
departments of government, but also through the line 
departments that relate specifically to their areas of study. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What kind of 
qualifications . . . for the applicants who are applying for this 
program, what kind of qualifications are you asking? Is it just a 
high school diploma, a college, you know, education, or what’s 
the prerequisite? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The applicants will have to be within 
five years of graduating, but they have to be university 
graduates. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Is it the intention of the department that the 
interns that will be enrolled in this program, will they then stay 
on with the government — is that the intention of the program 
— on a permanent basis? And will there be more brought into a 
program again the following year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There is no guarantee of employment, 

but I think we can have a fairly high comfort level that with the 
amount of retirement that will be taking place in the public 
sector over the next 10 years, that certainly there’s very good 
opportunities right across government. And given the 
commitment to making sure that Aboriginal people fully 
participate in government, in the economy, certainly I think 
there’s every chance that they would be successful. 
 
I’d be very surprised if anyone didn’t continue on. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you tell 
us what percentage of the workforce of the government is of 
Aboriginal descent now and compare that with approximately 
five years ago, like with the past — have we increased? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can start out just generally by saying 
that the goal overall in terms of being representative according 
to the number of working-age people in the workforce would be 
12.2 per cent. Right now we’re at 9 per cent, and in 1992 we 
were at 3.1 per cent. So we’ve been making, I guess, about a per 
cent of progress a year. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would you 
also have the stats, in terms of other minorities and in the case 
of people with disabilities, of how we’ve increased using that 
staff for our government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’d be happy to answer this question, 
and I’m pleased that you’re interested in this area because this 
is an area I’m very interested in as well. 
 
The desired representation of persons with disabilities, again, 
going by the representation in the workforce, is 9.7 per cent. 
This is one where we don’t feel we’re doing as well as we need 
to and that’s at 2.8 per cent right now. 
 
For members of visible minority groups, the target is 5.4 per 
cent. At the moment, we’re at 2.8 per cent. 
 
Women in management, the target is 45 per cent; we’re at 36.1 
per cent. And women in non-traditional occupations, the target 
is 45 per cent and we’re very close to the 20 per cent mark there 
now. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We’re going 
to move on to a different area. Last year in estimates the 
minister was questioned as to why the administration costs had 
increased over $100,000. And the reply from the minister at that 
time was that there was an increase of $57,000 for pay equity 
and that there was a $65,000 increase for a return of a one-time 
information technology funding that was being reduced later 
and this would help for reductions in the later years. 
 
However, this year we’re seeing yet another increase of an 
additional $125,000 in administration costs and I was 
wondering why this had occurred? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Most of this is made up with the 
negotiated economic and salary increases that are part of the 
ongoing change in people’s incomes with each bargaining 
cycle. So 75,000 of the increase was for those economic and 
negotiated increases. The communications person actually 
reports within the administration area, so 45,000 of that was the 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1091 

 

new position in communications. 
 
In operating expenses there was an increase of 25,000 for the 
actual work of the communications unit operating expense, and 
13,000 reduction of miscellaneous administrative expenses. So 
there was a bit of balance off there. 
 
And then . . . that’s about it really, with that area. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When you say 
salary increases, are you including pay . . . salary increases due 
to the pay equity program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, that would include the pay equity 
adjustments. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Can you give us an update on 
the status of the pay equity program that you are following? Is it 
now fully in place, or are we looking at this graduating over a 
few more years yet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’m just trying to think of an easy way 
to express this. We’re about 85 per cent completed, and keeping 
in mind that the out of scope are some of the last to be brought 
under this umbrella. And CUPE, we haven’t completed the 
CUPE part of the whole sector yet. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. As I 
mentioned earlier, because of this, the administration cost 
budget has increased over the last two years. Do you have an 
estimate as to what the final tab will be for the taxpayers on the 
pay equity program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because it’s job by job. There’s two 
ways of going at it. Most pay equity settlements are usually in 
the range of 4 to 6 per cent of payroll. So if you look at the total 
payroll you get an estimate. But at the moment the cost of 
implementation within SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and 
General Employees’ Union) were 16 million. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Do you have 
an estimate of how many current government employees will 
see a raise once the pay equity is fully in place in the 
government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Because of the way that pay equity was 
done by the government, we tried to, I guess, solve two 
problems at once. One problem was a lot of the classification 
work was out of date, and because of a lot of changes that took 
place in government, some years of cutbacks and whatnot, a lot 
of people’s job duties changed. 
 
And so rather than do all the pay equity, then do a 
classification, which would have necessitated pay adjustments 
again, the classification process was rolled in with the pay 
equity process so that it could all be done in the most affordable 
way and all at once. 
 
And because our plan is also gender neutral — it doesn’t just 
affect women; it affects anybody who’s not appropriately 
classified — it would be altogether about 80 per cent of 
employees that would . . . 75 to 80 per cent of employees that 
would receive pay adjustments, some due to reclass, some due 

to the pay equity adjustment. But overall it would be about 75 
to 80 per cent. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You say that 
there’s . . . okay there’s pay equity adjustments and there’s also 
classification adjustments. Are we looking at solely increases in 
salaries? Is there anyone that is going to realize a reduction in 
their salary due to either of these factors? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No one gets any salary taken away, but 
people who have exceeded their classification are . . . it’s what’s 
called red-circled, and don’t receive adjustments until they 
come to the level of their classification. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Many people 
in Saskatchewan don’t understand the whole pay equity 
concept. They understand the concept of getting some pay or 
the same pay for doing the same work, but equal pay for work 
of equal value is quite a grey area for a lot of people. 
 
Can you give us the process of assigning values to different 
jobs. And who does this and what are their qualifications to be 
making these decisions, and what criteria do they use when 
they’re making these decisions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — First of all, I guess to understand I 
guess the theory behind this, and the theory of course is that if 
you look across government and start to graph women’s wages 
compared to men’s, the main distinguishing feature seems to be 
that all women are paid lower than all men throughout the 
public service. 
 
So there is the equal pay for equal work, but the equal pay for 
work of equal value takes into account not just the exact job 
that’s being done, but the value of the work that’s being done. 
And the criteria includes working conditions, skill, the effort 
required, the level of responsibility. 
 
And these things are worked out jointly with the union. But also 
there’s people who specialize in classification, whose job is to 
assign jobs to classification categories, and they work closely 
with this process. And at the end of the day, people have the 
right of appeal and whatnot, if they feel they’ve been 
inappropriately classified. 
 
But it’s trying to get beyond rating a job. I mean I don’t want to 
get too controversial about this but I’ve been aware of, not 
within government but in some community agencies where if a 
woman applies for the job, they get offered one salary, and if a 
man applies for the job, they increase the salary by 10 or 
20,000, because how can you expect a man to work for that 
little. 
 
So I mean there’s that kind of a thinking that goes deep within 
all of the pay systems. And I think a lot of women who are now 
supporting families, either jointly with their husbands or solely, 
basically said, we want to be recognized equally for the work 
we do. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. As I said, 
equal pay . . . or same pay for the same work, I think everyone 
does understand. 
 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

But in the area of jobs, you named four areas of evaluation to 
define the classification of a job position. Are there more than 
four areas of evaluation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It really is a point system. The 
categories I gave you — working conditions, skill, effort, and 
responsibility — are the broad categories. And then within that, 
there’s factors to help you decide where that fits. And within 
those factors, there would be a rating, you know, on a scale of 
one to ten. 
 
And so all those work into an assignment of points to the job 
categories and the different conditions. And then based on that, 
an overall rating would be given to the job. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can I get a list 
of the criteria that’s used or the evaluation that’s used for 
deciding the classification of a job? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’d be happy to provide that. Yes. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. And who does this evaluating 
and what are their qualifications to give them this position? 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — When I was assistant director of 
personnel for DNS (Department of Northern Saskatchewan), I 
found out that there was a whole science and art of 
classification for which people were classification 
professionals, and this is the work they do. And those kinds of 
people work within the Public Service Commission, so they 
would be very involved in this process. They are specialists in 
doing classification work. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I suppose my 
question that quickly jumped to mind is how do you become a 
specialist in classification. Is there no job qualification here? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They would be people who graduate 
from university courses in the human resource personnel. 
Probably some of the B.Com. (Bachelor of Commerce) courses 
actually probably include some of that as well. 
 
But a lot of it’s learning on the job as well, because no matter 
who you’re paying, you have to figure out on what basis you 
pay them. And whether it’s the discussion about how you pay a 
teacher, how you pay a nurse, how you pay a public servant, 
you have to have some rational basis on which that pay is 
decided, because otherwise people would accuse you that you 
pay that person more because you like them better, or you pay 
that person more for whatever reason. 
 
So classification is really an attempt to find as fair and 
comparative a basis as possible for pay so that you can give a 
reason why jobs have the pay that they have, and to remove the 
controversy of there being a bias based on other things. But 
those people would have a general type of university degree in 
the human resource area or related area, and do the rest of their 
learning on the job. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. When you’re 
talking in the area of pay equity I think the rationale of equal 

pay for work of equal value is quite a concern, because it’s 
whose rationale are we using here. Are you . . . is this a Made in 
Saskatchewan set of classifications or have we reviewed those 
in other provinces? Is it also within the same classifications as 
what would be used by the federal government? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Most of the work done on pay equity 
across Canada, people have relied on each other’s work in this 
area, in developing it. And ours would be fairly similar to other 
places. 
 
One of the factors that was different from ours because we 
decided to do our whole classification review at the same time, 
is that it’s gender neutral. So that would be one feature that 
makes it slightly different from pay equity plans in other places. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I was led to 
believe that there was a union/management committee that was 
looking at . . . okay, can you tell me who sits on this 
committee? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — They’re appointed both by their own 
representative organization, so the Public Service Commission, 
or the department in a particular case would appoint someone, 
and the union would appoint their reps to the process. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. How many 
people are on this committee, what are their backgrounds, and 
what are they getting paid to do the committee work? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Committees are composed of three and 
three representatives, so it would be six. The people on the 
Public Service Commission part of the committee would be 
people who are already in the employ, and therefore it’s part of 
their work to continue doing the work that needs doing in the 
public service. And the people from the union part would be 
able to be on union leave, and being paid as a recognized part of 
being part of the unionized workplace. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Also in the 
area of concern of equal pay for work of equal value, and we 
have a committee that’s doing the classifications and looking 
after that, but jobs . . . they evolve for what’s necessary at the 
time in a lot of cases. So how often will we have to be 
reviewing this and redoing our classifications? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We believe that the plan will have 
integrity over the long term and that we won’t have to keep 
redoing this. Now if a person’s individual job changes, there 
always has been the ability, even back 25 years ago when I was 
involved in this, there always was the ability to ask for a 
reclassification if your job duties changed significantly. But 
aside from that, we believe the plan will stay intact and we 
won’t see the wage gap start to spread again as it has through 
some of the systems in the past. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Okay, moving 
on to another area. In last year’s estimates the minister in charge 
of the department at the time stated that the Public Service had 
moved to a new location which would produce a savings of 
$352,000 per year. And yet the estimates this year under 
accommodation and central services, there’s an increase of 
13,000 and not a decrease. 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

 

Can you explain why that happened? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I can verify that there was a saving of 
$350,000, and the increase of 13,000 this year is a very small 
portion of that 350,000 saved. And it was just that the lease 
rental charges changed at the head office, because this is leased 
space. So I guess the landlord would be the one who effected 
that. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’m sorry, Madam Minister. I don’t 
understand how an increase of 13,000 is the effect of a decrease 
of 352,000. I didn’t understand that. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Decrease was the year before. Last year 
350,000 was saved. This year 13,000 was spent. So net 332,000 
over two years was saved. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The travel 
expenses in the last . . . going by the Public Accounts 
1999-2000, which is the last report that we have, we see an 
increase in the travel expenses, in particular for the minister. 
She went from 90,000 to quite considerably more than that in 
the last Estimates, or from $90 to 8,939. Can you explain why? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Okay. I’m going to give this a go. It 
might be a little tricky to understand, but I think I can explain it 
clearly enough. 
 
The total listed for travel there, $9,888, was actually related to 
the previous minister’s two portfolios — Liquor and Gaming 
and Public Service Commission — and they were reimbursed 
$9,644 from Liquor and Gaming. 
 
So the only actual travel charged and not recouped by the 
Public Service Commission was a trip to Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well then if 
the reimbursement was the minister’s travel, then there was 
little reimbursement for the other travel which I’m assuming is 
for training and whatnot. So travel overall has increased. Can 
you explain why employees in the Public Service Commission 
are incurring travel expenses? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The areas that would likely have the 
most effect on travel in this particular year is we are in a 
collective bargaining year and that means travelling for 
purposes of bargaining sessions. 
 
And as well there were two conferences held to improve the 
development and functioning of union/management committees 
across the province, and the employees’ costs were paid for 
participation at these conferences and this was a special 
initiative. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Under the 
supplier payments, can you explain to me what Henry Birks & 
Sons Ltd. is? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I believe this question was asked last 
year as well, when I look back in Hansard, and it’s basically the 
watch is for 25-year-service employees. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. There was 

$69,168 spent on this. Could you please tell me how many 
employees got watches this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There were 431 employees who 
received their 10-year pins and then there was 400 employees 
who had either 25 or 35 years of service. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Last year that 
expense was around 25,000; this year it’s up to 69,000. Is it not 
a concern that perhaps we should be looking at something for 
employees as they retire rather than every five-year increments 
of a gift? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s only three increments. One is 
at 10 years, the next is at 25, and then the next is at 35. It’s not 
even as good as your wedding anniversaries. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Expensive gifts. Thank you, Madam 
Minister. This year there was an expense at the Radisson Plaza 
Hotel here in Regina of 24,000. What was that for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That’s the long-service banquets that 
are part of this process. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you. Recently it was announced that 
nearly 700 government managers are being forced into the 
union. Can you give us a brief outline on how this came to be 
and the events that led up to the latest example of forced 
unionization by the government? 
 
(12:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Since 1981 actually, there was a 
commitment to review the scope status of positions within 
government, and every contract there’s a renewed commitment 
to review the scope positions in government. So on April 30, 
1999 that commitment was finally fulfilled. It had been sitting 
there since ’81, and a joint application of the union and the 
government was presented to the Labour Relations Board. 
 
On April 5, the board made its decision and as a result 
approximately 645 out-of-scope positions moved into scope of 
the SGEU bargaining unit. 
 
So this was a ruling of the board that these positions were more 
appropriately in scope. And we do recognize that this was, you 
know, a big lapse of time, but in fact it was based on an 
assessment of the scope of those positions and whether that 
scope was appropriately in scope or out of scope based on the 
duties of the job. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Who actually 
made the decision that this was going to be reviewed and that 
these managers should be part of the union? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again, whether or not managers are 
part of the union isn’t a matter of personal preference; it’s a 
matter of their job duties and what their relationship is to the 
employees in the workplace. And so it’s not an arbitrary kind of 
thing. It’s based on the rules of how those positions are in scope 
or out of scope. 
 
And just as part of every collective agreement for years and 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 11, 2001 

 

years, there’s been an agreement to review which positions 
should legitimately be in scope or out of scope and that’s what 
happened in this case. And the Labour Relations Board looked 
at the information put forward and decided that 645 of the 
out-of-scope positions should more appropriately be in scope. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So it’s not the 
manager’s personal preference. So the board takes a look at all 
the positions and they make a decision, all on their own, as 
who’s going to be in scope and what positions are going to be 
out of scope? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, they do. And I will point out again 
that the Labour Relations Board is 50 per cent employers, 50 
per cent representatives of labour, and that they jointly make 
that decision. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So what percentage of all the out-of-scope 
managers did this latest number represent that were put in 
scope? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It was about 5 per cent of the total 
public service. And in fact, that now brings us in line with most 
other provinces who are at 15 per cent of their public service 
being out of scope. We were different before. This makes us 
more like every other province now. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Five per cent 
of the public service is in scope or 5 per cent of the public 
service is out of scope? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — No, you’d asked me what the change 
was. The change was about 5 per cent. It went from about 20 to 
15. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We 
understand that while the Labour Relations Board was 
deliberating over whether or not to move these management 
positions in scope, half, if not more, of the people affected 
lobbied against becoming members of the union. Is this your 
understanding as well? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I suspect there was all kinds of 
opinions on all sides of the discussion but the fact of the matter 
is there is a process, and even at this point people always have 
the ability to appeal a decision. And certainly if people decided 
that was what they wanted to do it’s certainly within their rights 
to do that. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Did the 
Government of Saskatchewan, who is actually the employer in 
this situation and as the entity that will ultimately pay the cost 
for this move, intervene at all in this case either in support of or 
in opposition to this forced amalgamation of government 
department managers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Again what you would do in this 
process is you would agree which positions should go forward 
to the Labour Relations Board for a determination. This was 
done jointly. The Labour Relations Board made their 
determination. And what was appropriate for us was to — in the 
integrity of the agreements made to review scope — is to put 
forward those positions where there was a legitimate question 

about whether it should be in or out of scope. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It’s interesting 
you use the word integrity. As the minister in charge of the 
Public Service Commission, does it not concern you in the least 
that half or more of the managers did not want to become 
members of the union and yet they find themselves there 
anyways? Does this not strike you as being unfair? And is it 
what you consider to be the most democratic way to run things? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There are rules that govern a workplace 
and so what is appropriate is to follow the rules that govern that 
workplace. And I think that’s entirely fair and appropriate. Why 
have rules in a workplace if you ignore them? So these are rules 
that are jointly negotiated. They’re agreed-upon rules that 
govern that workplace. 
 
And I will reiterate: just like a teacher who becomes a teacher 
becomes a member of the teachers’ union, just like a nurse who 
becomes a nurse if she’s in a unionized workplace becomes a 
member of the union, so does somebody whose classification 
appropriately is in scope become a member of the union if 
they’re a member of a unionized workplace. 
 
And these are the rules that these have operated under for years 
and years. And I think a lot of the associations would take great 
exception to anybody suggesting there should be a different 
rule. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So who makes 
the rules? Like who decides ultimately the in-scope and 
out-of-scope positions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I’ve mentioned several times that 
it’s negotiated. That means both parties come together and they 
come to an agreement under the rules that govern those 
agreements. 
 
And certainly if you were of a different philosophical bent, I 
suppose you could decide to change the rules and take your 
chances with the results. But these are the rules we operate 
under at the moment and this is very normal to all of the public 
sector workplaces in the province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Madam Minister, who makes up the rules 
that the board has this kind of power? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Those are governed by the labour Acts 
in the province, The Trade Union Act. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Madam Minister, we have a number of 
managers now who have gone public and said that they’re very, 
very unhappy. So does it not concern you that this will damage 
the morale within the Public Service Commission and 
negatively affect the government service? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well one of the very sad side effects of 
governing is that you can’t make everybody happy. So what 
you try to do is follow some rules so that at least you can be 
fair. And even if everyone’s not happy they may see the 
inherent fairness in the process. 
 
And the fairness in this process is that there is a process by 



May 11, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

 

which this is done, and either party has the opportunity to 
appeal if they don’t feel that process, which is mutually agreed 
on, has produced a result that they can live with. 
 
But at the same time, I’ve also been around long enough to 
know that once people get an opportunity to look more closely 
and perhaps adjust to the new situation, that initial reactions do 
not always continue. 
 
But again, I’m not going to prejudge for people what they like 
or what they don’t like because I think you would find people 
all through this discussion that would have a variety of 
positions. And I don’t think it would be appropriate for me to 
jump in the pile with one or the other point of view. This has 
gone through a process. Independent people who are not me 
have made the ruling, and people have a right to appeal. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. The fact that 
these managers are now part of a union brings to mind what 
will happen in the unfortunate event of a strike of public 
employees. How much more difficult will it now be to continue 
even providing bare services of the government with these 
managers now part of the union? Or was it the intent of this 
move to absolutely paralyze government services in the 
unfortunate event of a strike? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The fact of the matter is we would be 
no more paralyzed or less paralysed than every other 
government in Canada who’s at the same 15 per cent. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We 
understand that the movement in this positions are . . . of these 
positions into union will cost in excess of approximately $2 
million. Is that more or less accurate? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think that’s a pretty good estimate of 
the cost because, of course, when you’re out of scope quite 
often you do a lot of overtime without additional compensation. 
When you’re in scope, overtime is paid. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Was this 
money accounted for in last year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We weren’t able to budget for it until 
we knew the cost, but we feel that with careful management, 
and looking through all other areas, that we can manage to 
absorb these costs. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I thank 
your officials. That’s all the questions I have for today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I thank the member for her thoughtful 
questions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave of the 
Assembly to present two motions, one related to a referral to the 
Estimates Committee and a second related to broadcasting of 
proceedings. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Estimates and Supplementary Estimates Referred to the 
Standing Committee on Estimates 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, with leave of the 
Assembly: 
 

That the estimates for: the Legislative Assembly, Vote 21; 
the Provincial Auditor, Vote 28; the Chief Electoral 
Officer, Vote 34; the Information and Privacy 
Commissioner, Vote 55; the Ombudsman and Children’s 
Advocate, Vote 56; the Conflict of Interest Commissioner, 
Vote 57; as well as the Supplementary Estimates for the 
Legislative Assembly, Vote 21; be withdrawn from the 
Committee of Finance and referred to the Standing 
Committee on Estimates. 

 
This is seconded by the hon. member for Saskatoon Nutana. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Legislative Assembly Proceedings Broadcast on the Internet 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

That this Legislative Assembly authorize the broadcast of 
its proceedings on the Internet; and, further, that the 
broadcast be made through the web site of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. 

 
And that is seconded by the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I wish everybody a good weekend. 
This House stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:46. 
 
 


