















































Hansard: May 03, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 899 
 May 3, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition here regarding the provincial government’s 
report, the Saskatchewan EMS Development Project, which 
calls for provincially run and centrally operated ambulance 
services. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirms its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Biggar and 
Kinley and Rosetown. 
 
I’m pleased to present this petition. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today regarding the EMS report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Yellow 
Quill Reserve. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition regarding health care in the province and reading the 
prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan, and southwest Manitoba and beyond. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people 
from the communities of Storthoaks, Parkman, Redvers, 
Fairlight, and Antler. I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — I rise to present a petition signed by citizens 
concerned with the possible conversion of some paved 

highways to gravel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest and Moose Jaw. I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about ambulance 
services. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of the Yellowquill Reserve. I so 
present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from southwest Saskatchewan concerned with the state 
of the Swift Current hospital. And the prayer of this petition 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Swift 
Current, of the Saskatchewan Landing, of Hodgeville, of 
Stewart Valley, Kincaid, Waldeck, and Webb. I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the loss of their ambulance 
service. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Radville and Tribune. I so 
present. 
 



900 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
a petition from citizens concerned about health care in Blaine 
Lake. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
overrule the Parkland Health Board to change its decision 
and allow the Blaine Lake Medical Clinic to have a 
permanent physician with consistent hours and days. 

 
It’s signed by the citizens from Blaine Lake and Leask. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from concerned constituents of mine and constituents from 
members opposite concerned about the high costs SaskPower 
and SaskEnergy rate increases: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil, gas revenues to provide a more 
substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The constituents are from Moose Jaw, Chamberlain, Regina, 
Whitewood, Waldheim, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the centralization 
of ambulance services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Leslie, Foam Lake, Wynyard, Elfros, and Jansen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition from 
folks concerned about the health care and particularly the 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Limerick 
and Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
with a petition to stop further cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. 

And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed this petition 
come from Mazenod, Assiniboia, Crane Valley, Limerick, 
Willow Bunch, Fir Mountain, Mossbank, Moose Jaw, all over 
southern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the petitions presented yesterday 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received. These petitions are addendums to sessional 
papers nos. 3, 4, 10, 58, 65, and 121. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Monday give the first reading of The Election 
Amendment Act, 2001 (Financial Disclosure). 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management: what monitoring is done of 
river water entering Saskatchewan; and specifically, does 
the province of Saskatchewan receive regular reports of 
sewage treatment for effluent from the city of Edmonton 
entering the North Saskatchewan River? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker: 
 

To the minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network: how much has been spent on the 
Saskatchewan Health Information Network (SHIN) to date; 
when will it be operational; are any pilot sites pending; are 
any attempts being made to market this system beyond 
Saskatchewan? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. To 
you and through you to the rest of my hon. colleagues in this 
Assembly, I would like to introduce some very fine people that 
represent the Saskatchewan Council for Community 
Development. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce Linda Pipke 
who is the executive director. Mitch Ozeroff who’s the 
chairman and Louis Hradecki who’s the vice-chairman. And I’d 
like you all to welcome these fine people who have very 
positive attitudes towards the spirit of Saskatchewan and truly 
believe in our rural areas. Please welcome them. 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 901 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you and 
through you to the members of this Assembly I’d like to 
introduce 20 grade 11 and 12 students who have come in from 
the community of Windthorst. Actually, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
coming from a community where there’s a lot more water than 
there is in the rest of the province of Saskatchewan. But they’re 
with us today. They’re joined by their teacher, Mr. Mark 
Edmonds, and chaperone, Mrs. Trudy Kerslake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was talking with the students just before 
we came into the Assembly, just chatting with them, asking 
what they had done this morning. I believe they have toured 
some of the provincial court and I think they learned a few 
things about the court and about why they really wouldn’t want 
to be in there on any specific occasion. And we trust that this 
afternoon, they’re going to . . . indeed as they join us in the 
Assembly, just to learn a little bit more about the proceedings of 
this Assembly. And I certainly wish them well in the rest of 
their day. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to welcome this 
group here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of this Assembly, 15 students ranging from ages 6 to 
18, students from Morning Star Christian Academy located in 
Regina Elphinstone, my riding. They’re here today with their 
teachers, Mr. Shawn Allen and Ms. Julie Povey. 
 
And I look forward to meeting with them later, although I hope 
that the opposition won’t conspire to move a motion to take me 
away from them as . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you and to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce a number of guests in your gallery that are associated 
with the air cadets, air cadet movement. And you’ll notice some 
uniforms in your gallery. And I’d just like to introduce from the 
Cadet Detachment in Regina, a long-time friend, Maj Peter 
Garton, and Capt Rhonda Notschaele. From the Air Cadet 
League, Maureen Drolet, Ernie Callow, and Richard Petrowsky. 
 
And what the program is all about, Mr. Speaker . . . we have 
two parents also, Ms. Sharon Dogett and Mr. Phil Noonan. But 
the program is really about cadets and I would just like to 
introduce the cadets from 34 Squadron that are in your gallery. 
It’s WO Saxby, Sgt Noonan, LAC Enright, LAC Gamblin, Cpl 
Gibbons, LAC Dogett, Cpl MacDonald. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would everyone join me in welcoming these 
people to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you, and I know all members will want to welcome 
back to the Assembly, a former member, Mr. Ian MacDougall, 
now of Regina, member of this Assembly from Estevan for the 
years 1960 to 1971. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to join 
with the member from Melville in welcoming guests. Although 
he’s already mentioned the one gentleman earlier, I would like 
to join him in welcoming Louis Hradecki, a constituent of mine, 
Mr. Speaker, to this honoured Assembly. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, just to refresh everyone’s memory, if you’ll 
remember on Monday I also made a member’s statement which 
included Mr. Hradecki as I spoke about volunteerism in this 
province. 
 
I’d like all members of the Assembly to please join me in 
re-welcoming Louis Hradecki. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly a young 
student from my constituency that’s seated in your gallery 
Jonathon Turner. Jonathon Turner is a high school student who 
is spending a week of work experience in my office and today 
is his day to come and see what we do here. He’s keenly 
interested in the political process and I’m sure he’ll enjoy 
today’s proceedings. 
 
I would like all members to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Women Entrepreneurs Week 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, today marks the start of 
Women Entrepreneurs Week in Saskatchewan. This is a week 
when we pay tribute to the many contributions Saskatchewan 
businesswomen are making to our economy. 
 
Today more women than ever before are expanding their 
employment opportunities by operating their own businesses 
and enjoying such benefits as independence, creativity, and 
personal satisfaction. 
 
Statistics show that women run roughly one-quarter of the 
province’s businesses and that those businesses employ 90,000 
Saskatchewan people. Statistics also show that women are 
starting their own businesses at a rate faster than that of men. In 
fact, there are four times more women under 30 starting 
businesses than men in the same age group. 
 
One of the main organizations that support women is the 
Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan. Since it was formed 
six years ago, Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan has 



902 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

played a valuable role in getting businesswomen started. It has 
lent more than $4 million to new and existing businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the legislature and all citizens 
of the province to join me in recognizing Women Entrepreneurs 
Week and in celebrating the many accomplishments of the 
province’s talented, bright, and ambitious businesswomen. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Air Cadet Movement Marks 60th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I’m very proud to rise in the House to announce that 
Canada’s air cadet movement is celebrating its 60th 
anniversary. While the official birthday was April 9, 2001, 
individual squadrons will be marking the anniversary with 
various activities throughout the anniversary year ending May 
30, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s air cadet movement came into being in 
1941 in response to critical need for trained young men and 
women to fly in defence of freedom. Since 1941, Mr. Speaker, 
approximately one million young Canadians have participated 
in air cadets. 
 
The focus of today’s air cadet movement is on citizenship and 
leadership with an orientation towards aviation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canada’s air cadet movement is recognized as one 
of the most successful youth movements of its kind in the 
world. There are approximately 25,000 air cadets presently 
enrolled in Canada’s 450 squadrons. Each year they turn out 
about 320 licensed air cadet glider pilots. One out of every five 
private pilots in Canada at the present time is an ex-air cadet. 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan currently boasts 38 air cadet 
squadrons and approximately 1,500 young men and women. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of this House I’d like to offer 
congratulations to all air cadets, past and present, and I’d like to 
also like to commend and thank the officers, instructors, 
parents, and support sponsors for their dedication to helping 
young Canadians successfully meet the future challenges of our 
province and our country. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Campaign Profiles Successful 
Businesses and Individuals 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Every day 
Saskatchewan people are achieving great successes in business. 
They’re developing new products, they’re advancing new 
technologies, and they’re exploring new markets. To recognize 
and celebrate those many business achievements, the Premier 
and the Minister of Economic Development this morning 
announced a new campaign called The Saskatchewan Dream. 
 
The Saskatchewan Dream is a series of radio and television 
vignettes that’ll be aired several times a week over the next 
year. The vignettes will profile successful businesses and 

individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the campaign is an innovative partnership of 
government, the private sector, and media sponsors. As a result, 
it will be an effective way for us to help combat an issue of 
disparaging attitudes and misunderstanding of Saskatchewan 
business opportunities. Many people, including our business 
leaders, are telling us we need to do more to promote a positive 
attitude in Saskatchewan. We need to do more to boast a little 
bit about all of our accomplishments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is filled with hard-working, 
imaginative people who have many success stories to share. It’s 
time we all started — all started — to remind ourselves and tell 
others what Saskatchewan people have done and continue to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to encourage all members to join with us in 
telling these stories of our successes and to remind 
Saskatchewan people there are many wonderful opportunities 
right here at home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mill Rates in Kelvington-Wadena Constituency 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs seems to have difficulty 
understanding that tax reassessment and reduction in the mill 
rate may still mean taxpayers are paying more in property and 
education taxes. 
 
The Melfort Journal had two articles relating to the effects of 
reassessment and mill rates which will have an effect on the 
constituents within Kelvington-Wadena. The first one entitled 
“Drop in mill rates will have little impact on taxpayers” states: 
 

At its meeting Tuesday night the Melfort school division 
set its 2001 mill rate at 18.4 mills down from the 20.3 mills 
last year. However, the actual amount of revenue gathered 
from this mill rate will be an increase of $490. 

 
Another article, “Tiger Lily mill rate cut may not help once 
again” states: 
 

The board approved the new mill rate of 16.24 mills, a drop 
of more than 3 mills from last year. But the mill rate will 
generate 5 per cent more increase in revenue. 

 
I have a letter to the editor from Prince Albert which doesn’t 
agree with the minister of Municipal . . . assessment of 
reduction of the mill rate either. Mr. G. Leybourne states: 
 

Last year when I paid my taxes on property in the RM of 
Lakeland, school taxes cost me $645. This year it’s going 
to be $1,690. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it concerns me that the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs doesn’t understand reassessment and the impact on 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for allowing me the opportunity to 
educate the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 903 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

White Buffalo Youth Lodge 
 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, there is more good news for the 
province of Saskatchewan. The White Buffalo Youth Lodge in 
the heart of Saskatoon, previously called the Saskatoon City 
Centre Project, is now providing new programs for at-risk 
youth. 
 
In the past month or so several new programs have been added 
to the array of services that are already offered at the White 
Buffalo Youth Lodge. These new programs have a focus on 
traditional culture with storytelling, drumming, and singing 
programs, accompanied by an elder-in-residence. 
 
There is also an evening woodworking program that has hopes 
of expanding to a day-program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program is aimed at the children and youth in 
the core area of Saskatoon. Its goal is to offer an intersectoral, 
holistic approach to meet the needs of the high-risk child and 
youth population in the city. As well, 80 to 100 youth access the 
programs available at the lodge on a daily basis. 
 
This project is an excellent example of collaboration at the 
community level, Mr. Speaker. The original partners have 
undertaken extensive community consultation and as a result, 
the project has broad support among many agencies including 
Aboriginal and Metis youth. 
 
The White Buffalo Youth Lodge truly represents the spirit of 
Saskatchewan — youth and elders working together for the 
common good of the whole. The White Buffalo Youth Lodge 
works in partnership with parents, families, and the community 
to provide educational and social supports to promote success at 
school and in life. Success, Mr. Speaker, in implementing 
programs such as this to keep our most abundant natural 
resource — youth — in our province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

St. Gabriel’s School Presents Play 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Tuesday 
evening I had the privilege of attending a play by Tim Kelly, 
“Meet the Creeps.” The play was presented by the students of 
St. Gabriel’s School in Biggar, Saskatchewan. The presentation 
was warmly received by members of the audience who reside 
not only in the constituency of Rosetown-Biggar, but also 
Battleford-Cut Knife and Redberry Lake. 
 
The cast included many talented actors and actresses. The 
leading roles were performed with great skill and determination 
by Lisa deBussack, playing the part of Mrs. Tarantula Creep, 
and my son Marshall Weekes who played the part of Mr. 
Sinbad Creep. 
 
The storyline took place in a fictional town of Edible Falls and 
included a corrupt civic politician, an illegal subdivision, a visit 
by an Egyptian prince, hiring of non-union staff, romance, 

suspense, attempted robbery, and a hostage attempt. The good 
news was that the prince was not forced by union picket line to 
go to another town to spend the night. And also, the writers and 
producers did not go on strike. 
 
The bad news, Mr. Speaker, was that there was a bribe offered 
and accepted. The bribe came in the form of pizza and pop after 
rehearsal and was enjoyed by all. The bribe had its desired 
effect by encouraging the cast members to work hard and 
deliver their lines with a great compassion and skill. 
 
A special thank you to all the cast and crew, the teachers who 
gave up class time, put up with interruptions and helped with 
props and set. Also Bill and Bryce at North American Lumber. 
Please join me in congratulating the cast, students, staff, and 
parents at St. Gabriel School for a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Pioneer Co-op 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. Another successful business thriving in our 
province. This time the news comes from Swift Current and the 
local Pioneer Co-op. 
 
The Pioneer Co-op annual sales reached a record of $99 million 
the past year, Mr. Speaker. It now has its sights set on the $100 
million mark. The management believes that the current 
renovations to both the gas station and the grocery store, along 
with the support of the community, the bottom line will 
continue to go up. 
 
The Pioneer Co-op service station renovations were completed 
in early 2000. As well, Mr. Speaker, the pharmacy and grocery 
department upgrades have now been completed, with additional 
work to be completed at the photo department and cafeteria. 
 
All of these recent renovations have allowed the Pioneer Co-op 
to remain competitive in a changing marketplace. In the words 
of Co-op’s general manager, Stuart Dryland, and I quote: 
 

We can’t make a return without an investment. We believe 
that this investment in our community will provide us with 
good returns in years to come. 

 
This government also believes in investing in its communities, 
Mr. Speaker, making smart, fiscally responsible investments, 
ensuring the continued growth of Saskatchewan as an important 
role for our government, business, and community. We believe 
that working alongside the people of this province is the key to 
the future success for all those who call Saskatchewan a home, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Reasons for Resignation of Former 
Minister of Crown Investments Corporation 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, over the past few days we have 



904 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

seen a systematic effort by the NDP (New Democratic Party) to 
discredit the legitimate concern raised by one of its own former 
ministers about NDP mismanagement of Crown corporations. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Justice called her concerns 
groundless. The CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) minister said pretty much the same thing. So 
this got us wondering — why did she really quit cabinet? She 
doesn’t seem like the kind of person who’s prone to rash 
decisions; like accepting a senior cabinet appointment and then 
quitting less than three weeks later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so answer our curiosity. To the Premier: what is 
the real reason the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld quit your 
cabinet less than three weeks after being appointed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I could refer the Leader of 
the Opposition back to the very public statements made by the 
former minister of Finance and former minister of Economic 
Development and myself at the time she made a very personal 
decision to step from cabinet. A personal decision based on her 
desire to, as she indicated, to leave political life at some point. 
Her desire to write and publish, what we know is going to be a 
very significant work. 
 
And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet — while 
I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker — this House and all 
Saskatchewan people, I think, should be united in their gratitude 
for the work that the member from Idylwyld gave while serving 
as Minister of Finance and as Economic Development. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m certainly looking forward to reading the last chapter of the 
book. It may read a little different than the Premier’s story that 
we’ve just been given. Because here was a minister, Mr. 
Speaker, who was prepared to rein in the Crown corporations. 
Yet she quit after less than three weeks of being the Minister of 
CIC. 
 
Mr. Speaker, isn’t this the real reason the minister quit? 
Because she wanted to rein in the Crown corporations but the 
Premier would not back her up. Mr. Speaker, nobody believes 
the Premier’s little cover story. And he went into it today but he 
omitted the part about it would help select a new Speaker 
because of course the facts proved that to be wrong as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has far bigger problems. He has 
Crown corporation heads running all over the world losing 
millions of taxpayers’ dollars. And then, Mr. Speaker, his first 
Minister of CIC tries to rein them in and he would not back her 
up. 
 
My question to the Premier: is this not the real reason, the true 
reason, why the minister resigned? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, point number one: I’m 
relatively confident that when the former minister of Finance, 

former minister of Economic Development authors her book, 
we’ll know what’s going to be in the first few chapters, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s the job that she and others had to cleanup the mess 
left by that political organization when they were in 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, if the member 
opposite’s got some questions about organizations in a 
government or in a political party, he may want to phone up his 
federal cousin, Mr. Stockwell Day, and ask what’s going on 
down there. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m telling you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 
Speaker, they ask questions in this House but . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. The 
Premier will continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, they obviously like to ask 
questions but they obviously don’t like to hear the answers. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this again. At the time of the 
minister’s choice to leave cabinet, it was very, very clear her 
reasoning and my willing, but not glad, acceptance of her 
stepping aside from cabinet related to her circumstance to step 
beyond public life and into other endeavours, her desire to be 
working on what we know will be an important piece of history 
of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve learned from the member from North Battleford 
that this government likes to put up a cover to obscure from 
people what’s actually going on. And we see the Premier 
practising that same practice, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the truth is leaking out. There was a March 2 column in The 
Leader-Post about the minister’s resignation. It suggested she 
wanted CIC to place less emphasis on risky public investment 
and more emphasis on efficiency. However, that didn’t go over 
too well with the new regime and with the new Premier, who is 
described as socialist in today’s Leader-Post. 
 
The column goes on to suggest that Frank Hart, Ron Clark, and 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. The Leader of the Opposition will put the 
question, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, at least there are six 
socialists that clapped for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Frank Hart, Ron Clark and Don Ching opposed 
the new direction. Three weeks later the Minister of Economic 
Development was ousted and replaced by a do-nothing minister 
who’s prepared to let the Crowns gamble and lose as much 
money as they want. 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 905 

 

I ask the Premier this question. Who is running things over 
there? Why was your first minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just remind the hon. member 
to phrase all of his questions through the Chair, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Leader of 
the Opposition seems to have a certain amount of envy in his 
question today about the nice headlines I’m getting in The 
Leader-Post. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want the Leader of the Opposition to know that 
yes, sure enough, right here in today’s Leader-Post, the 
headline reads: Calvert delivers socialist message. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I want you to know that the message I delivered was to 
the . . . a large, large gathering — 600 people — involved in the 
business community in Regina and southern Saskatchewan. 
And as a result of this socialist message, Mr. Speaker, I got a 
standing ovation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would invite the Leader 
of the Opposition, there are many issues of concern to the 
people of Saskatchewan, to the public of Saskatchewan, many 
important public policy issues that we should be debating in this 
legislature — health care, transportation, taxes, the economy — 
can we move on to what is a substantive issue for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Debt Restructuring 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is also for the Premier of the province. 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool 
announced a major restructuring of its debt totalling over half a 
billion dollars. My question to the Premier, Mr. Speaker, is: did 
the Saskatchewan government have any involvement 
whatsoever in helping the Pool restructure that debt? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of the 
government to say to the member opposite and to this House, 
that in this province the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool has made a 
tremendous contribution to the welfare of not only rural 
communities but to the economy of our province. 
 
And as we look at the restructuring decisions that the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool makes in this province, we’re 
encouraged that they’ll continue to play that role in 
Saskatchewan, and want to say to the member opposite and to 
this Assembly that there has not been any government funding 
that has gone into the restructuring of the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — To the Minister of Agriculture. Mr. Minister, 
while you’ve indicated that there has been no loan to the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, can you confirm to the people of 

Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to rephrase his 
question once again please, through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask the minister to 
confirm to the people of Saskatchewan that there has been no 
loan, no loan guarantee, or any other commitment to the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool of Saskatchewan taxpayers’ dollars 
in their restructuring of their debt. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, there has not. 
 

Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for Saskatchewan Valley Potato 
Corporation. Following my questions on Tuesday relating to the 
taxes the corporation owes the RM (rural municipality) of 
Rudy, we received a call from the RM of Canaan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. I’m sure the members 
would like to hear the preamble to the question and the 
question. Order. Order. I assure you that the Speaker would like 
to hear the preamble and the question. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. These are good 
questions and they should be heard. My question again is for 
the minister responsible for Saskatchewan Valley Potato 
Corporation. We received a call from the RM of Canaan. 
 
Sask Valley Potato Corporation owns land with potato storage 
facilities and other buildings near the town of Lucky Lake in 
this RM. They’re in the exact, right now, they’re in the exact 
same situation as the RM of Rudy. They sent Sask Valley 
Potato Corporation a tax notice based on the assessed values of 
the property at just over $155,000. In return they received a 
cheque for $469. 
 
Some government official pulled out a big black pen and 
basically rewrote their own tax notice. In one stroke, they 
knocked off a cool $155,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation owes 
two RMs that we know of over $300,000. Will the minister 
explain why this corporation refuses to pay their 2000 taxes to 
the RMs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those are 
good questions and I’ve heard those good questions a number 
of times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will repeat the very good answer that I gave the 
other day as well, Mr. Speaker. It is my understanding, Mr. 
Speaker, that my officials within the Sask Valley Potato 
Corporation are working with the RMs to try and find 
resolution to this problem that the member legitimately raises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



906 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, we know members of this RM 
council met with the Minister of Finance at the SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
convention. They also met with the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs at the SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities 
Association) convention. And they met with Zach Douglas and 
Murray Gettle at CIC on April 6. 
 
At that meeting one of the CIC officials suggested the taxes 
owed by Sask Valley Potato Corporation should be based on its 
ability to pay. Mr. Speaker, I’m sure many taxpayers in this 
province would love to be able to pay taxes using this method. 
 
But maybe that is the problem. Maybe the Sask Valley Potato 
Corporation can’t afford to pay its taxes to the RMs because of 
the money they lost in SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) — on account of the money they’ve 
lost and are going to continue to lose. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a huge amount of money for these RMs. 
And other ratepayers are being told they may have to pay more 
because this Crown corporation, established with ratepayers’ 
own tax dollars, refuses to pay its tax bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the holdup here? Will you commit to the 
ratepayers in the RM of Rudy and Canaan that the Sask Valley 
Potato Corporation will pay their tax bills immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well again, 
it’s my understanding that my officials are working with the 
RM to try and find a resolution to this problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me speak more broadly of the issue as well. 
Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporations have invested across the 
province, and across the country to try and bring revenues back 
to the province. Part of the investment here is to try to grow an 
industry, Mr. Speaker, that I believe is seeing real progress. Mr. 
Speaker, we’ve been seeing real progress. 
 
My officials will continue to try to find resolution to this. I am 
assured, Mr. Speaker, by my officials, and I’m confident that 
they will find resolution in the very near future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker. I have a letter written by the 
Minister of CIC to the reeve of the RM of Canaan on April 18. 
It says that Zach Douglas would be, and I quote: 
 

. . . in touch with the management and board of Sask Valley 
Potato Corporation . . . out that CIC is desirous of attaining 
a resolution to this issue as soon as possible. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the RM says on April 25 during their budget 
meeting they phoned Mr. Douglas and asked him if the tax bill 
would be paid. And he said he would still urge Saskatchewan 
Valley Potato Corporation to settle the matter. But to the date 
the RM has not received payment, or any further dialogue with 
the government or Crown officials on this issue. 
 
They’re concerned that the resolution of this issue, or settling 

the matter may not necessarily mean that the corporation will 
pay its tax bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the RM of Rudy and RM of 
Canaan receive their total grants in lieu owed from the 
Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation, and when will they 
receive them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve instructed my 
officials to try to bring resolution to what is an obvious 
disagreement around the amount of tax that should be paid, Mr. 
Speaker. My officials I am confident will work with the RM. 
They say they are making progress on this issue. I am confident 
that they will find resolution to this problem in the very near 
future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment in Clickabid.com 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker my 
question is for the minister responsible for CIC. I’d like to ask 
about another one of the NDP get-rich-quick schemes that 
we’ve learned about. It’s called Clickabid.com. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 the NDP decided SaskTel should enter the 
Internet auction business and take on eBay. Clickabid launched 
its services in June of 1999 with a lot of fanfare and a huge 
advertising campaign. And by December 2000 they were out of 
business. Clickabid.com was in business for exactly 18 months 
and they lost $2 million taxpayer dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: who approved this investment and 
what were they thinking? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, just to point 
out a correction, they were not taking on eBay — eBay wasn’t 
in Saskatchewan or in Canada and the member knows that from 
the questions he asked this morning in Crown Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you and the public of Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to, through 
you, to the member and to the public of Saskatchewan tell you 
why our Crown corporations are investing to try and bring 
revenue to the people of Saskatchewan. Here’s why, Mr. 
Speaker. This morning SaskTel Mobility is investing — 
announced that they would be investing — $24 million over the 
next three years to expand digital cellular network in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, blanketing much of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask that member what private cellular utility would provide 
that kind of service in rural Saskatchewan? I’d guess none. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 907 

 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister wants, maybe 
the minister wants to explain how losing $2 million on a 
dot-com company helps you bring digital service to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s just review Clickabid’s financial statements. In its first six 
months of operation, they spent about $770,000 on advertising 
generating a total of $12,600 in revenue. At this point most 
other businesses might have said, well, maybe this isn’t 
working. 
 
But not SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. Oh no. SaskTel ramped up their 
advertising. The next year they spent $1.1 million to generate 
— and get this — $14,000 in revenue. $300,000 in new 
advertising to generate an extra $1,400. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why do the NDP let Clickabid keep throwing 
good money after bad? Why didn’t they shut them down when 
it became apparent that nobody was clicking on Clickabid? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, there’s obviously 
something not clicking over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member asks why, Mr. Speaker, the member asks why they 
make those investments? Here’s why, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel 
made $176.7 million in just five investments, Mr. Speaker. 
They made those investments, Mr. Speaker, so that they could, 
Mr. Speaker, so that they could make investments in rural 
Saskatchewan — most ridings that they represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I quote out of the news release: 
 

This is the largest expansion project ever for SaskTel 
Mobility as an example, and is an example of our 
commitment to all of our Saskatchewan customers (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, this morning at the Crown 
Corporations Committee meeting we asked SaskTel’s president 
Don Ching if he would show us the due diligence and business 
plan SaskTel did before launching Clickabid. And he said, oh 
no he couldn’t do that; they might be giving away some 
valuable information to their competitors. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this is just a hunch. But I don’t think you 
have to worry about eBay wanting to steal the Clickabid 
business plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for days now we’ve been asking the minister what 
kind of due diligence CIC is doing before it makes these 
investments? This is a defunct company. It’s no longer in 
business. Why doesn’t the minister just release the business 
plan to show us what kind of due diligence is done before you 
risk taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about due 
diligence again. I’ll talk about the due diligence that occurred in 
the 1980s when they spent over a billion dollars a year more 
than they earned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s the due diligence, however, that our government and our 
Crown corporations did, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the due 
diligence around Leicester cable earned the people of 
Saskatchewan over a hundred million dollars, Mr. Speaker. The 
due diligence on Saturn/Austar earned the people of 
Saskatchewan $37 million, Mr. Speaker. The due diligence on 
Regional Cable earned the people of Saskatchewan $8 million, 
Mr. Speaker. The due diligence on Alouette earned the people 
of Saskatchewan $6 million, Mr. Speaker. And the due 
diligence on ISM Westbridge earned the people of 
Saskatchewan $23 million. And that’s what due diligence on 
this side of the House does. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investments by Crown Corporations 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My questions are for 
the Minister of the Environment. The provincial government 
has spent 1.2 million on foreign travel for the Crowns. In the 
case of IQ&A the travel was to sell health information the 
Minister of Health says wasn’t for sale. 
 
In the case of ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) 45,000 was spent by one official, mostly visiting 
the United Kingdom to flog an incomplete and unproven 
technology that is not yet functioning in Saskatchewan, much 
less ready for the international market. 
 
This year’s budget calls for a $9 million increase on the cost of 
fire suppression. The fire season in Saskatchewan is only three 
to four months. If we want a truly modern, mobile firefighting 
force would it not make more sense to have a public-private 
partnership that would make available the fire suppression force 
to other parts of the continent outside of our fire season? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
things that the province of Saskatchewan does is take their 
firefighting responsibilities very, very great. 
 
As you travel to northern Saskatchewan you will see that there 
are many community people that are involved with the 
firefighting efforts that have to be undertaken, and a huge 
amount of people that work for SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) in firefighting are 
Aboriginal people in the North. And what we’re going to do, 
Mr. Speaker, is we’re going to build a very solid firefighting 
force of northern people so we’re able to respond very quickly 
to protect all the people of Saskatchewan’s interests. 
 
And I think that’s a very sound investment on behalf of the 
government and I think we’re going to stay there, and that’s 
where we’re heading, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, while Saskatchewan turns in the 
worst job creation record in the country, the NDP continues to 



908 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

drive business away. In the case of ISC, the former minister 
said we were investing in international schemes where there are, 
quote, “no concrete opportunities for new revenue.” Worse than 
that government policy is discouraging private investment in 
information technology. In the case of home security systems, 
the NDP is trying to drive private operators out of the province. 
 
Would it not make more sense to partner with private enterprise 
to develop a mobile fire suppression team that would work the 
year around and could earn money for Saskatchewan rather than 
put the entire expense on Saskatchewan taxpayers? That would 
be an innovative approach that would require the NDP to 
consider partnering with private enterprise rather than 
considering private enterprise the enemy. 
 
Has the minister considered offering private enterprise the 
opportunity to invest in a fire suppression service that could be 
marketed in places such as the US (United States) during our 
off-season? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we’re doing exactly that. 
As we speak, SERM is looking at various options to not only 
make sure that our aircraft are working all year around and 
helping suppress fires right across the country and right across 
the continent and all throughout the world. We’re doing some 
of that work. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we’re also partnering with the First Nations 
communities in northern Saskatchewan and the Metis 
communities. In fact, Mr. Speaker, we have a five-year fire 
suppression agreement where we’re hiring hundreds of people 
over the next five years to fight the fires in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker? Because we believe in northern 
Saskatchewan communities, we believe in the Aboriginal 
communities, and we believe above all else that we have the 
best forest firefighting force in all of Canada. 
 
And what we want to do, Mr. Speaker, is we want to market 
that force. We want to be able to export that force throughout 
other jurisdictions so we’re able to create some value for the 
people that are out there now taking training, that we’re able to 
create employment opportunities year around and above all else 
market some of the solid work being done in SERM’s forest 
firefighting exercises. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things the NDP were 
rightfully critical of the old Tory government for was Crown 
corporations paying dividends to the General Revenue Fund 
when, in point of fact, there were no revenues. There were 
losses. ISC paid dividends in $8 million when, in fact, the 
corporation was not making money but losing money. 
 
My question for the minister is why would dividends be paid 
when there is no revenue but a loss and how many other Crown 
corporations are in that same position of paying dividends to the 
GRF (General Revenue Fund) when there is no revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, for once the member is right. It is not often the case, 

but in this case he is right. 
 
The ISC transferred $8 million to the GRF for the licence fee to 
operate the land system and, Mr. Speaker, that’s an annual 
obligation of the land corporation. And as the member rightly 
points out, that accounted for almost all of the paper loss that 
ISC experienced last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very, very pleased 
to stand up and table responses to questions 133 through 146 
inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip is submitting 
responses to questions 133 to 146 inclusive. They’re hereby 
tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — 147 is converted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — I’d invite the minister to introduce those 
officials with him here in the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my 
immediate right is Stuart Kramer who’s my deputy minister. 
And to my immediate left is Dave Phillips; he’s the assistant 
deputy minister of operations. Directly behind me is Bob 
Ruggles, the assistant deputy minister of programs and . . . 
Sorry to the, to the left . . . or to the right of me is Bob Ruggles. 
To the immediate back of me is Lynn Tulloch, who’s the 
executive director of corporate services. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Good 
afternoon, Mr. Minister, and once again welcome to your 
officials as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to start if I could with a situation that has 
been in the media a lot lately and that is the situation in North 
Battleford with respect to the water supply there. And I’m sure 
that you are well aware that not only are the residents of the 
community of North Battleford concerned, but I think people 
right across the province are concerned when they hear of a 
situation such as that. 
 
I was wondering if you could give us an update as to the 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 909 

 

situation in North Battleford, where things are at, and 
specifically what is your department doing at this point in terms 
of assisting the community and the officials in the community 
in dealing with this difficulty? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
There’s no question that this is a very serious matter. The 
Government of Saskatchewan certainly wants to do as much 
and all that they can to help the city and the people of the 
Battlefords ensure one thing — and that’s the safe quality of 
water. 
 
In terms of the situation, the city of North Battleford, SERM, 
the health district, and Health Canada were looking at all the 
circumstances that led to the situation in North Battleford. 
 
As the Minister of SERM, we have provincial water regulations 
and we have the belief that these water regulations are sound; 
they meet or exceed the national standards. 
 
And the preliminary results indicated cause of cryptosporidium 
entering the North Battleford water system, and we believe that 
an operator restarted the plant before the filtration system was 
operating properly. The way to prevent crypto from entering a 
treatment system is to properly maintain and to operate that 
system. 
 
It’s still very early in the initial stages of looking at what may 
have went wrong, but anything that we can learn to improve the 
water quality in Saskatchewan we will implement. This could 
include a wide area, whether it’s infrastructure testing, 
monitoring, and even if there’s room to increase the levels of 
our standards, we certainly will do that. But again as I 
mentioned we believe that our regulations are adequate. 
 
What I do want to point out is that from our perspective the 
response was immediate. We called a gentleman off of holidays 
to go into North Battleford the moment we heard that there may 
be some problems. The next day of course, if my memory 
serves me correct, we ordered a precautionary boil-water 
advisory just to make sure this particular problem, if it was 
water-borne — we couldn’t be for sure that it was water-borne 
— and once we determined that it was water-borne and there 
was some crypto in the water system, then that’s when we 
collaborated with Health and certainly Health made the call to 
have the boil-water advisory . . . sorry, the boil-water order. 
 
And that’s where we began to make sure that once you found 
out where the problem was and there was a lot of indication that 
it was water-borne, and that we would issue that boil-water 
order immediately. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: 
what are the total number of cases now of cryptosporidia and do 
you have an estimate of the number of people affected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I think the most important thing that we want to point out is that 
we are collaborating with Health on this particular matter. The 
health district is also involved. 
 
I don’t have any answer specifically as to what Health is doing 
in terms of this particular challenge. But what I can indeed tell 

you, and that’s the limit of my health knowledge, is that we 
have 20 confirmed cases. We don’t have an estimate as to how 
many may have, over the period of the month of April, may 
have gotten ill as a result of this problem. 
 
We have to make certain what we’re dealing with first of all and 
get very specific information. It’s very hard to speculate. 
 
But I can share with you without getting too much into detail, 
the fact that we have 20 confirmed cases. We know that there’s 
other people that have complained of other health challenges. 
So we expect that number to increase. And what the final tally 
will be, we don’t have an estimate for you. But Health would 
have the more specific details. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister. 
You indicated in your previous answer that there is a boil-water 
order in effect. Can you indicate if there are other communities 
that are affected by this order, and how long do you expect that 
the order would remain in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Ruddell, North Battleford, and the 
town of Battleford, have all been given the boil-water order. 
And we are simply not going to take any chances with this 
particular challenge. We will not lift the boil-water order until 
we’re absolutely certain, based on the tests that are done, to 
ensure that the water is as risk free as possible for consumption 
by the people of North Battleford and area. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
since the North Battleford incident, have you had any other 
communities either in that area or anywhere else in the 
province, for that matter, come forward with concerns about 
their own water supplies and cryptosporidia? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I just wanted to 
point out that there are the current orders in place for North 
Battleford and area. And those are the boil-water advisory we 
have now; there’s two of them. 
 
And at this point in time we also have 37 communities that are 
under a boil-water advisory, which we’re not certain whether 
. . . exactly where some of the problem lies, but we make sure 
that we tell the folks that if there is a problem with your water 
supply, that we would tell them to take precautionary boil-water 
approach. 
 
And I also want to share with you that immediately, we 
understand, that there is some information coming out of North 
Battleford. We don’t have all the specific details and what is 
being said, but I understand that the announcement is being 
made as we speak. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. 
Cryptosporidia from what I understand has never been tested 
for previously in North Battleford, and as I understand it, in any 
other community. Is this a test now that will be required and 
that your department will be making sure communities with 
water treatment facilities are testing for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just want to point out that there is two areas that do their 
testing for the crypto and one of them, of course, is in Medicine 



910 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

Hat and the other is in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
We are now looking at whether testing would be part of the 
North Battleford situation as to ways and means that we can 
increase and improve our standards as I mentioned earlier. At 
this stage in the game, that there is no jurisdiction in Canada 
that does regular testing as part of their standards for crypto. 
 
So certainly Saskatchewan wants to learn as much as they can 
from this particular challenge in the Battlefords. And so I think 
the key thing that I want to point out is that we want to ensure 
that we do as much as we can to learn from this particular 
exercise because as I mentioned before this is a very serious 
matter and we certainly want to do all that we can as a 
government to help address this particular challenge. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister. 
Last year after the Walkerton tragedy I requested some 
information from your department and your department was 
very helpful in providing a number of different documents to 
me that I found most interesting. 
 
One of them was a document that had the compliance rates of 
all of the communities in Saskatchewan, the compliance rates 
around meeting the regulatory requirements of the department 
in submitting water samples to the department. Now I think you 
and I will agree that probably the vast majorities of 
municipalities in this province are very, very responsible and do 
in fact meet the requirements, submit the samples on a timely 
basis as required. 
 
I was surprised however at the number of communities that 
have a very, very poor compliance rate. And if I remember 
correctly there were probably upwards of a dozen communities 
that hadn’t complied at all; in effect were being requested to 
provide, you know, six or a dozen samples over the course of a 
year to the department and weren’t supplying any. 
 
What is your department doing in order to make sure that these 
compliance rates are improved and that the rural and urban 
municipalities in this province understand the importance of 
complying with those regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — There is no question that as a 
government that we are working very, very hard in working 
with the communities to ensure that they do their testing of the 
water. Often, as the minister, in many of my addresses I 
encourage folks to get their water tested, and if you are a citizen 
of some of the communities that have continual boil-water 
advisories and especially if you have the boil-water order, that 
you would continue checking with your civic officials and folks 
within the health districts. And certainly SERM would be a part 
of the team to make sure that you would get up-to-date 
information. 
 
One of the things that we want to do to assist the municipalities 
and the RMs and the cities and the communities in terms of 
ensuring that we have compliance in the standards and the 
water testing, and certainly the operation of some of the water 
plants, was the additional 10 new staff that I spoke about. 
 
Obviously this is a new budget and these 10 staff members — 
while I don’t have the specifics as to where they will be 

stationed — their primary role is to be a support team to the 
municipalities that operate their water and sewer systems to 
make sure that they’re operating them right and within the 
standards. And if they operate them at optimum levels, the way 
the water plants should be operating, and if they follow the 
standards and if they take the team approach that we want to be 
a part of, then I think we would minimize the risk of the 
Saskatchewan people’s health to water-borne illnesses. 
 
That being said, there’s always the challenge and we must 
assume as people in the province to make sure that we continue 
being diligent in water-quality challenges that the province and 
the world faces. And as I mentioned before, standards, 
compliance, operations of the water systems — those are all 
things that we cannot and should not take for granted, as 
evidenced in the North Battleford area. 
 
And as well our approach in SERM is that we want to be part of 
the technical team, part of the operational team, to make sure 
that we afford as much and the total support that we can to 
some of the communities that are having this particular 
challenge with water quality. 
 
And as well, as a result of the increased awareness that 
occurred, we also of course have some new staff at the 
provincial lab and these tests, as I understand, are being done 
more quickly. And all that is intended to do exactly what you 
have mentioned: is to continue being diligent with this very, 
very serious matter. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, if we are 
successful in increasing the compliance of communities with 
the testing requirements — and certainly now there will be a 
whole new awareness around the importance and the 
seriousness of doing that — I am expecting that there will be far 
more pressure put on the department and on the people who do 
the testing for the department, just in terms of sheer volume. 
 
Do you have the capacity, do the people that you retain to do 
that have the capacity to meet an increased volume should the 
compliance rates increase and you get more requests for testing 
as a result of a higher awareness? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. The answer to 
your question, post-Walkerton we’ve certainly seen an increase 
in the activity of testing. And we certainly expected and 
anticipated more pressure on SERM for some of the volumes of 
testing that many of the communities will want. 
 
And that’s one of the reasons why, based on the increase of 
testing and the increase in activity and the awareness that’s been 
going on, that we anticipated the increase. And that’s one of the 
reasons why we had 10 new staff hired, as well as provincial lab 
folks to again meet the demand for that testing. 
 
As always, as we mentioned before, we continue to monitor the 
situation. We have, as I mentioned, 37 boil-water advisories 
that are out there and it’s for a variety of reasons. So as I 
mentioned time and time again, that we must not — the 
municipalities, the government, the communities, the average 
citizen — must not become complacent in water quality. It’s 
very important for us to, again, be ever diligent in this particular 
challenge. 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 911 

 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. I think you’re 
absolutely right. I think it’s incumbent upon all of us to never 
become complacent when it comes to water quality and water 
safety. 
 
And I think that particularly extends to the government. And 
this last budget . . . I mean we’ve seen another budget where 
there has been a zero increase in municipal revenue sharing. 
 
You yourself, Mr. Minister, are a former mayor of, I believe, 
your hometown, and I’m sure you understand the pressures that 
were put on your community with all of the off-loading that 
went on in the early ’90s, the decreases in funding. 
 
And I think communities have been put in an untenable position 
in the sense that they’re having to make some very, very 
difficult decisions out there and it’s been hard for them to 
maintain their water treatment plants, their water treatment 
facilities. 
 
And I guess the question, Mr. Minister, now that you’ve seen 
first-hand the results and the consequences of the lack of 
appropriate and proper funding, the lack of increase in revenue 
sharing, what will you be doing to encourage your colleagues 
and the Minister of Municipal Affairs to increase funding to 
municipalities in order that they themselves can better address a 
lot of these situations before they get to the degree that they 
have in North Battleford? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just want to clarify that the situation in North Battleford itself, 
I believe the application for the infrastructure work was 
primarily related to capacity and it was not really related to the 
quality of water. 
 
Certainly, as I mentioned before, this is a very serious matter. 
We have to look at all these things. And I understand that the 
Municipal Affairs branch, Sask Water, and SERM are doing a 
review of all the different systems that are out there to try and 
see how we can improve the system. And that review goes on 
and on; it continues on. 
 
And what I’ll also point out is that through our budget, through 
SERM’s budget, as a support towards municipalities that are 
having some difficult times — and I talk about the advisory 
committees — that have the boil-water advisory, have a 
difficult time with this particular challenge, we are affording 
them the support that is needed. And of course as always people 
would like more support and we’ll do our very best to meet 
some of that demand. 
 
I concur with you that as a former mayor we certainly seen the 
belt-tightening exercises in the early ’90s. But we understood 
that because of the deficit the province was facing, and the huge 
debt, that we all had to tighten our belts at that time. 
 
However, in Ile-a-la-Crosse we continued operating our water 
plant and we continued providing good service. We always 
were diligent in ensuring that the water quality testing went on. 
 
So while the challenges of funding is faced by many sectors, we 
certainly appreciate the fact that we have to do all we can to 
support the communities particularly with this issue of water 

quality. 
 
So we are not sitting on our hands; we’re supporting the 
communities and municipalities as much as we can when it 
comes to water quality testing. And there is always room for 
improvement, as I mentioned, and we’re looking for ways to 
improve. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
a couple of times now you have referenced reviewing 
procedures, current practices, that kind of thing. Can you 
indicate to me just what is being reviewed, to what degree, what 
are the different processes that you have in place, and I think 
maybe indicate how you see that ultimately impacting 
regulations. 
 
Because one of the things that very, very much surprised me 
was the director of the public works department in North 
Battleford saying that the city of North Battleford had been 
fully complying with provincial regulations, but that they now 
realize that that wasn’t enough. 
 
So does your review encompass regulation in its entirety? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the Government House Leader on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and to all members of the 
Assembly, and the officials who are here today helping the 
Minister of Environment during his estimates, to a group of 33 
students from Prince Albert. 
 
And these are grade 4 students; there’s 33 of them, Mr. 
Chairman, and they’re from W.J. Berezowsky School. Now I 
need to tell you a little bit about W.J. Berezowsky School. 
 
It’s about a block and a half away from my home, so many of 
these children will be neighbours of mine. Three children, the 
only three that I have, all attended W.J. Berezowsky. 
 
My daughter, my oldest daughter, was in the first kindergarten 
class at W.J. Berezowsky, and they’re all really proud of 
receiving the beginning years of their education at W.J. 
Berezowsky. 
 
I think they turned out pretty good from the tutoring they got in 
that school, and I’m sure you all will as well. 
 
So I’m asking all members to give a very warm welcome to the 
grade 4 students from W.J. Berezowsky, and I look forward to 
having drinks with them later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



912 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 

Subvote (ER01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I again point out 
the comment I made earlier that the standards that we have we 
believe are very good standards, and that if you follow the 
standards and you operate the water plant to your optimum 
levels, that you should certainly diminish the challenges 
associated with safe water quality to the people that you are 
serving. 
 
For the Saskatchewan perspective, Sask Water is leading a 
review of water treatment infrastructure across the entire 
province. And on a Canadian basis, Canada, SERM also sits on 
a Canada-wide committee to review and update standards. So if 
there’s other jurisdictions that have specific information and 
specific standard improvements that would be of value for all of 
Canadians, and certainly Saskatchewan as well, we certainly 
take great interest in that, and we’re certainly a part of that 
national committee. 
 
Now in reference to the North Battleford problem, the 
preliminary — and I underline preliminary —results show that 
there were problems with the operation of the plant. Now it’s 
still too early to draw the final conclusions, but the preliminary 
results show that there was problems with the operation of the 
plants. 
 
As we mentioned before, we set the standards as a province and 
we certainly work with the communities to have that 
compliance. And if you operate your water treatment plant as it 
should be operated, at its optimum level and following the 
standards, then you would minimize risks to the people that you 
serve. Thank you. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: 
can you confirm that M R 2-McDonald of Regina has been 
retained in order to review the city’s water system, the city of 
North Battleford’s water system. And can you explain what the 
expectation of their work will be and what their mandate is at 
this point. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I think the issue that we’re trying to ensure through this whole 
process is to provide very strong leadership and support. And 
we certainly want to thank the city of North Battleford for 
providing that leadership. 
 
I can confirm that it is again, it is our belief that the city of 
North Battleford has hired M R 2 consulting and I believe the 
mandate is to completely review their water system. So 
certainly, we want to thank the city for taking a strong 
leadership role. 
 
And again as we mentioned earlier, we’re primarily here to 
support their efforts to fix their problem and to ensure safe 

delivery of water to the people of North Battleford and area. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister, 
it’s my understanding that the Canadian Council of Ministers of 
the Environment held a two-day meeting just this past Monday 
and Tuesday in Winnipeg. One of the topics for discussion, 
ironically, was the protection of surface and groundwater 
sources for drinking water. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you tell us if you attended that meeting and, 
if not, did Saskatchewan have representatives there and who 
were they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Just to answer the question very pithy 
here. Stuart Kramer, deputy minister of Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management, attended on my 
behalf. As well, I believe Bob Ruggles, the assistant deputy 
minister of programs, also attended. And of course I could not 
attend, primarily because I was sitting in the Assembly here. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Minister, I’m just curious if the 
Saskatchewan representatives that attended were able to gather 
any information that might be helpful to us in this particular 
situation here or could be of use to us in the future. And if so, 
would it be possible that that information could be made 
available to my office? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well, thank you very much. That 
certainly is a very, very important question. I just wanted to 
again reiterate the statement I made in reference to SERM 
sitting on a Canada-wide committee to review and update 
standards. And a department staff attends these meetings on a 
regular basis. And that’s above and beyond the ministers having 
a meeting. 
 
And I can also advise the House and yourself that some of the 
issues that we discussed, that were discussed at the CCME 
(Council of Canadian Ministers of Environment) in reference to 
water was the longer term issues. 
 
The ministers there decided to put a lot of emphasis into two 
specific areas — and there’s other areas as well — but the two 
specific areas were the research into water quality and safety, 
and certainly the more important part of monitoring of water. 
Those were the two areas that primarily took a lot of the 
discussion time. 
 
And I can also tell you that through both SERM officials 
meeting on a regular basis of the Canada-wide standards, and 
the Council of Canadian Ministers of the Environment talking 
on a regular basis of water safety and the quality of water, that 
this is a very serious and important issue for all of Canadians. 
 
The follow-up meeting for your information will be held in 
October 2001. And while there wasn’t anything specific in 
short-term, certainly the urgency to begin to look at this 
particular issue was very prevalent at that meeting. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, at 
this point I would relinquish the floor to my colleague, the hon. 
member from Wood River. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I also have some 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 913 

 

questions with respect to water supplies for the minister, from 
my constituency. The town of Kincaid identified, in excess of a 
year ago, a problem with their water supply and have been on a 
boil-water advisory since last June. 
 
My question for the minister is can he tell me what action has 
taken place, if any, to assist or rectify the situation in the village 
of Kincaid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just wanted to report that on a regular basis we have met with 
all the communities that had either a boil-water advisory or a 
boil-water order, and Kincaid has been one of those 
communities. And I don’t have the specific details as to the date 
of our visits and certainly how many visits we had. 
 
What I will undertake to do is to get that member a complete 
update as to what Kincaid has been asking for, what the 
prevalent problems are, and certainly what our visits have 
found. 
 
As well I would also indicate to the member that as a result of 
us having 10 new staff that we would certainly, at your wish, 
continue to focus on Kincaid and all the other communities to 
ensure that we’re there to support them and to provide as much 
advice as we can to ensure that they do have the water-quality 
standards and the operation of the water plant are followed, and 
that the safety of the residents of Kincaid and all of 
Saskatchewan people aren’t put at risk. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, my 
next question would be the role of SERM in this water issue. 
This is a — as you’ve identified very correctly — this is a very, 
very serious issue in a lot of our communities. It appears to me 
that the role that’s been taken is to identify and depart. 
 
And I would like to ask the minister, Mr. Chair, what the role of 
SERM is. If it’s solely to identify water problems or if it’s to 
work with the communities to resolve the problems rather than 
just identify and leave? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things that we want to 
assure all the members of the Assembly is that it is not our 
premise to identify and then leave. What we’ve done is we 
have, without question, we have been very aware of some of the 
challenges associated with the water-quality problems in many 
of the small communities. 
 
And what we do is, we go into the communities and we advise 
people if they have a problem with their water. We look at their 
operations and we determine whether it’s an operational 
problem or whether it’s an infrastructure problem and we begin 
to work with them. And as a result of some of the increased 
pressure to respond more, we hired 10 additional people. 
 
So clearly SERM understands that the municipalities operate 
these water systems. We want to be as much a support role as 
we can. And this is where we certainly have the manpower to 
provide them with the advice that they collaborate to seek out 
different options to ensure that water quality isn’t compromised, 
and to make sure that we always are diligent in this partnership 
mode to work on this challenge. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, 
again I just want to reiterate the fact that it’s been 10 months 
that this community has been on a boil-water advisory. And I 
received correspondence from them some two or three weeks 
ago, which they haven’t received any information from any 
agency in the last number of months, which prompted myself to 
write a letter to you. 
 
And I wrote a letter and I included — because again, the 
seriousness of this, they’re worried about a Walkerton in the 
town of Kincaid — so I included the Minister of Health, the 
Minister of Sask Water, and the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
and Housing. And I asked in my letter if one of you would take 
the lead in looking into the problems and issues that come forth 
from all communities that have a water-related issue. 
 
Mr. Chair, can the minister tell me who the lead agency is for 
issues such as this? Because here we have a town that’s 
basically been left out of the process ever since it was identified 
they have a problem; or if they’ve not been left out, they’re 
getting mixed information from various agencies from 
government. 
 
So my question again is who is the lead agency and who can my 
people from the town of Kincaid speak to on this issue? 
Because it’s extremely serious and it’s 10 months old. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. I again wanted 
to point out that we’ll give you the history of how we’ve been 
dealing with the community of Kincaid. And what I want to 
point out is that one of the things that we want to do is when we 
issue a boil-water advisory, and certainly the order, we will 
keep that boil-water advisory or the boil-water order in place 
until we’re absolutely sure. And sincerely I apologize to the 
community of Kincaid. If they’ve been boiling their water for 
10 months, is we have to make absolutely sure that there isn’t 
any threat to the public. And that’s one of the reasons why we 
continue issuing the boil-water advisory or the order. 
 
Now what I’ll advise the member is that we will give you in full 
in writing exactly what we have been doing with the 
community of Kincaid. And as I mentioned a few seconds ago 
is that we’ll continue ordering or issuing an advisory boil-water 
statement until we’re absolutely certain that the entire system is 
purged of any threat to the public health of Kincaid. 
 
And certainly we’re continuing to work with the municipalities 
and the Municipal Affairs department to identify some of these 
communities that have infrastructure problems. And SERM, 
we’re certainly going to work with the communities that have 
operational problems. And that the team approach we’re taking 
is very, very serious. 
 
But as you may know that many of these communities have had 
these ongoing problems with water, and from my perspective as 
the minister, the direct orders are . . . number one is if there’s a 
problem, we will issue in concert with Health a boil-water 
advisory or a boil-water order. And we’ll not lift that order until 
we’re absolutely certain that there is no threat to the public 
health. And this is where public health and SERM collaborate. 
 



914 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

And furthermore that we would insist that we would identify 
these communities and work in collaboration with the 
Municipal Affairs minister to ensure that some of these 
communities are also prioritized to try and receive some of the 
infrastructure money to improve and upgrade their system if it’s 
an infrastructure problem. 
 
If it’s an operational problem of course we’d work very close 
with the communities and point out some of the deficiencies in 
the system and ensure again the safe quality of water. 
 
And finally, what I would point out is that as a result of us 
increasing our staff and the collaboration with Health, 
Municipal Affairs, working with the communities, we have 
established a kind of SWAT (special weapons and tactics) team 
approach where these communities are there, they have a 
problem, we go in there, we put these boil-water orders or 
precautionary advisories into place, we advise the community, 
and we work with that community until the problem is settled. 
 
If the problem takes more than 10 months we’ll continue on not 
taking a chance with people’s public health and we’ll continue 
having that boil-water or the precautionary order in place. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I 
very much looked forward to your reply, reference Kincaid. As 
you are aware, I’ve not received a reply yet from any one of the 
ministries to which I wrote. 
 
But I just wanted to follow up, Mr. Chair, because I did not get 
an answer to my question. Who is the lead agency in these 
water-related issues? Is it Health? Is it Municipal Affairs? Is it 
Sask Water? Or is it SERM? 
 
People in the communities are very concerned because they 
seem like they get a little blindsided when they go to one 
agency and they say, no, sorry that’s not under our purview. So 
I would like to know who is the lead agency for these issues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well first of all, I would point out that 
what you want to do is you want to encourage the communities 
that own their own water systems to be very careful in the 
manner in which they operate. We would also want to 
encourage them to follow the standards and to certainly operate 
their water plant systems in the optimum level that they should 
be operating. 
 
So the responsibility, we want to make sure we continue 
stressing that to the communities because we appreciate that 
many of these communities own and operate their own 
waterworks. But we don’t want to, as you earlier said, advise 
and then leave town. 
 
Certainly from health risk and the water analysis on specific 
questions to that particular area, you can certainly approach the 
provincial lab; and certainly the health officials at the 
community level or the health district officials could certainly 
provide specific information to Kincaid. 
 
With the Sask Water Corporation, their primary role would be 
the infrastructure and the source water supply, where they 
would work with the community if there is an alternative water 
supply that is necessary. And also in some of the infrastructure 

challenges that they have, they would also be able to talk to 
Sask Water as well. 
 
But in terms of trying to afford this process, a lot of leadership, 
SERM certainly is going to be setting the standards. And we 
want to ensure that people are following those standards. 
 
And also we have the direct contact with the communities. So if 
there is some challenge we’re the first one along with Health in 
the communities advising people and putting some of these 
orders — again, in collaboration with Health — putting some of 
these orders in place. 
 
So my comment to you would be in terms of specific health 
challenges and analysis of water at the provincial lab and the 
Health department would be the first initial place that you 
would go. 
 
And certainly for the infrastructure and some of the water 
source challenges the community may face, certainly Sask 
Water Corporation would also be an avenue that they can look 
at. 
 
But certainly in setting standards in communication and direct 
communication with the communities, SERM has been doing 
that and SERM will continue doing that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and to your officials 
welcome this afternoon. I have a couple of questions again to 
do with water concerns and mostly in small towns. 
 
I know that everyone is concerned about water quality. And the 
town councils and village councils are especially concerned, 
especially when they have very little funding to deal with their 
failing infrastructure. I’ve had many calls from small villages 
that are saying, I would love to be able to conform but we don’t 
have either the funding or maybe even the trained personnel to 
deal with this. 
 
How are your addressing this issue through your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things we do in terms of our 
role as SERM is that we immediately go into a community and 
we assist the community in making sure that they, if they have a 
problem there, that we advise them of the standards and work 
with their operators. 
 
And if there is a problem, in collaboration, in conjunction with 
Sask Health, we’ll either issue a boil-water advisory or a 
boil-water order. An advisory is not as stringent as an order. 
And what this is intended to do, first of all, is to find out if there 
is any threat to the public in terms of their water service. 
 
At this stage of the game, Sask Water is leading a review of the 
water treatment infrastructures across Saskatchewan. And we’re 
trying to collaborate with them and indicate where there is a 
problem with the infrastructure compromising water quality, 
that we would prioritize these communities and these systems. 
And we are doing our darnedest to make sure that much of the 
infrastructure dollars that are available is directed to water 
quality. 
 
And of course, we also want to continue promoting the 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 915 

 

responsible position that certainly SERM will do their part, 
Sask Water will do their part; and the communities since many 
of them own and operate the system, we want to make sure that 
we work with them to again ensure that their water-quality 
standards are being met and the operations of their water plants 
are at their optimum level. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe you could 
tell me how many communities are not testing their water right 
now and how many that are testing, are actually failing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And just to point out that every community that we license are 
required to do the monitoring. And while you can appreciate the 
past year the monitoring has gotten better, but there are still 
some communities that don’t comply as much as they should. 
And we continue working with them and pushing them to 
ensure that they monitor their water. 
 
And what I will do today as I mentioned to your colleague from 
Wood River, is that we would submit to you complete lists of 
those communities that are not complying and would look 
forward to your assistance to ensuring that the compliance 
would be there on their part, and your co-operation and help 
would be appreciated. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I assure you I would 
love to work with you. 
 
Mr. Minister, you said that there’s testing done by every 
community that has a licence. Do you mean there are some 
communities that don’t have a licence? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Just in terms of SERM licences, any system over 18 cubic 
metres of water that’s being delivered — that’s roughly 4,000 
gallons — so any system that operates on 4,000 gallons per day 
has to have a SERM licence. 
 
And some of the ones that are not regulated by SERM, and 
most of the communities are, but some of the ones that aren’t 
regulated by SERM would be for example a restaurant not 
connected to the community’s water supply. They’re in the 
middle of nowhere; they have their own water supply. 
Restaurants of that nature of course are being monitored by 
Sask Health. 
 
So to answer the question very specifically, most of the 
communities are licensed by SERM. Any water system over 18 
cubic metres of water use per day has to have our licences. And 
as I mentioned, the smaller ones, for example a restaurant out in 
the middle of nowhere, certainly Health does the regulation 
there. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, is there different regulations if a 
community is using an artesian well than the ones just pumped 
out of the ground? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Generally, the testing requirement for 
water is the same. However, there are some more stringent rules 
for surface water as opposed to groundwater because surface 

water, as you can appreciate, is subjected to more 
environmental challenges than the groundwater. 
 
But nonetheless, the standards and the testing are the same for 
both sources of water, but there are more stringent guidelines 
for surface water because of the close proximity to the outside 
world. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, before I close, I just want to ask 
you how closely you’re working with the Minister of Rural 
Revitalization when it comes to our small towns and their 
concerns with the water quality and the infrastructure that’s 
failing because of the lack of funding in the past number of 
years. 
 
We all recognize that in order to keep a small town viable, there 
are some things that are absolutely essential and water being 
one of them. So, for example, in my constituency, I have one 
small town who was wondering how they’re going to be able to 
continue to keep their water to their residents when they can’t 
afford to upgrade their infrastructure and the training they’ll 
need for their personnel. 
 
So the Minister of Revitalization should be . . . should have a 
lot of . . . should be working with your department, hand in 
hand, to make sure that this is happening, and also the minister 
of Municipal Government with the infrastructure money. 
 
So I’m wondering how you are working to ensure that our rural 
communities can remain viable when there seems to be three 
different departments that are pulling in three different ways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. And what I 
want to point out as well is that being from a small 
Saskatchewan community myself, I think the notes and the 
comments that you made are very important. 
 
And from our perspective, working with all the ministers, 
whether it’s in Municipal Affairs or Northern Affairs or Sask 
Water, I think there’s no question that water quality is very 
important to all of us. And we’re going to collaborate as 
efficiently and as quickly and often as we can to ensure that we 
are addressing some of those challenges. 
 
Now when you talk about being specific, one of the things I 
mentioned earlier is that the municipal branch has been doing 
an assessment with Sask Water and SERM on all the sites and 
the systems throughout the province to see where the problem 
and challenges lie. Once the assessment is done, we’re also 
going to try and direct some of the infrastructure spending to 
those specific communities that have problems associated with 
the safe delivery of their water that is due to infrastructure 
problems. 
 
If there’s other problems — say, for example, operational 
problems — then of course SERM would also go in there and 
offer some of the advice. 
 
So that work is ongoing. And from my perspective of being the 
Minister of SERM, if there is a challenge with water quality in a 
specific community, we are going to work in collaboration, in 
conjunction with Health to ensure, number one, is that public 
health is not at risk, and this is where you have the boil-water 



916 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

advisories. This is where you have the boil-water orders if 
necessary, because it’s certainly a more stringent form of 
control. 
 
We’re going to advise the public as well that this is a challenge 
with their water supply. And we’re going to again collaborate 
with Sask Water and the Municipal Affairs department to say, 
look, listen, we’ve had this ongoing problem with this specific 
community. We need to make sure that there is some 
infrastructure money that is designed to alleviate the stress. 
 
And certainly it would be perfect if we’re able to address all 
these infrastructure demands out there overnight, but our 
attitude is to try and do it overnight, and time of course is very 
important on this. And we’re continuing to be diligent in 
ensuring a timely response to some of the challenges of water 
quality in rural Saskatchewan, northern Saskatchewan, and 
urban Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, seeing as 
we’re discussing water and water quality, and issues that affect 
. . . as we’re finding out it’s an issue that’s coming to the 
forefront in many communities as they try to address their water 
problems. And one of the problems I think we face out there, 
Mr. Minister, is an aging infrastructure, and the ability to 
properly aerate water and treat it properly before it goes to the 
consumer. 
 
The question I have, Mr. Minister, is: while your department 
maybe works with communities to determine the quality of 
water, what does your department do when it comes to 
addressing infrastructure and some of the pumping, and the 
system, the maintenance systems that are in communities? 
 
Does your department make recommendations? Or would your 
department, if you’re checking water and you begin to 
recognize that there may be a quality problem here, do you start 
looking at the equipment, and do you then put forward 
recommendations to communities as to what you believe they 
should be doing to address that problem? 
 
And then when you’ve done that, if you actually do do that, 
what other positions do you take then as a department to maybe 
discuss with other agencies, like municipal government, 
avenues of funding that would be necessary to address these 
concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I just wanted to thank you for the 
question and to clarify some of the earlier comments I made to 
a couple of your colleagues. 
 
And first of all what SERM does in terms of working with the 
community, both on a provincial basis and a national basis, is 
we want to ensure that the standards are there and that people 
are following the standards and that they operate their water 
plants as they should be operated. And often when SERM is 
called in, when we do an inspection of the water system, we list 
some of the challenges that the water system may face. If 
there’s infrastructure needs, we certainly identify that as well, 
and if there is some operational problems, we work to identify 
that as part of the ongoing support to the communities. 
 
What I do want to point out though is that in terms of the 

additional 10 people that we’ve hired, we are directing our staff, 
as a minister we’re telling the staff that if there is a problem in 
the community upon investigation and testing of some problems 
with the quality of water, we want to send people in there to not 
only look at their site, but to advise the people through 
collaboration with Public Health that there’s a problem here. 
 
And I’ve mentioned time and time again that if there is a 
problem we will issue a boil-water advisory or a boil-water 
order alongside of the Health. 
 
So I think the first thing we want to do is to not put the people’s 
health at risk and this is why the boil-water and the immediate 
SWAT team approach is necessary. What we also want to do is 
to promote ownership and the responsibility that the community 
also has to ensure safe quality water to their residents. 
 
So we want to tell the community as well that as part of the 
support team that we’re affording this whole exercise, that the 
community has a role. They certainly own and operate the water 
systems and the waterworks, so we recognize that they have a 
role to play and we want to collaborate with them. Certainly 
this exercise is not about pointing fingers; this exercise is 
reducing significantly the threat to public health. 
 
So we got the community’s role, you have SERM’s standards, 
SERM’s viewing of the operations, and certainly a report of 
what challenges the water system has. And on a provincial basis 
we’re also collaborating with the Municipal Affairs branch to 
make sure that if there is an ongoing problem with a specific 
community, that we tell them infrastructure wise, we need some 
dollars here folks, and of course that work is continuing. 
 
Between Sask Water and SERM and the Municipal Affairs 
portfolio, we are doing a study to determine exactly what level 
of problem we’re dealing with and where we need to put some 
of those resources as soon as possible. 
 
Health — again the water analysis and the health risk problem 
areas — they are primarily the ones that take the lead on that. 
And the Sask Water Corporation in terms of the source water 
supplies and some of the infrastructure identification needs, 
that’s also a role that they would play. 
 
But clearly from SERM’s perspective, if we’re called into a 
community we go in there. We look at the site and if there’s 
some problems we identify those sites and we share the 
information with the owner, which is the community. And we 
tell them of the standards that they have to follow. And we 
come back here and say we need to afford as much support as 
we can to that community as quickly as we can to address some 
of those supplies . . . or some of those problems. 
 
And in the meantime we don’t lift any orders unless we’re 
absolutely sure that the water is safe, and we will not do that. If 
there’s a problem and that problem continues on for 10 months 
or a year and a half, we’ll continue issuing that boil-water order 
because it’s very important that people know we’re doing this 
to protect their interests as well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. So what you’re basically 
saying is when you’re called in and there’s a problem arising 
with water quality, and the question that I would really like to 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 917 

 

know, Mr. Minister, is when you’re looking at the water 
quality, then do the officials from SERM actually look at the 
facilities, look at the equipment? Do they start . . . if they 
suspect that part of the problem is the fact that there’s aging 
equipment and there’s going to need be a . . . major upgrade 
needed in this facility, is . . . are those some of the things that 
your department would look at and then make 
recommendations as to the . . . to the community . . . as to what 
needs to be done to address the quality of the water, including 
maybe getting . . . replacing aged equipment, so that the quality 
of the water is maintained in the future? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
To answer the question, when looking at the water quality, do 
we look at infrastructure? And the answer is yes. And what we 
do is we work with the Saskatchewan Water Corporation as 
they are the infrastructure . . . or they are the experts in the 
infrastructure area. 
 
And of course, as I mentioned earlier, we also work with Sask 
Health to ensure that if there is a problem in that particular area 
of water quality, that we continue putting the boil-water 
advisory or boil-water order in place to make sure that that is no 
public health at risk. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, having said that, would 
your department as well then, when a community realizes that 
they’re probably dealing with a fairly major capital cost 
expenditure to address the facilities that are wearing down and 
actually that have lost their usefulness — and you mentioned 
about dealing with Sask Water and addressing quality problems 
and municipal government in regarding funding for some of the 
infrastructure that’s out there — does your department inform 
communities of what is available in funding? Not only 
municipal but federal. I believe in the last two years we’ve had 
some substantial dollars available on the federal size to address 
some of the problems and municipal infrastructure regarding 
pumping stations and what have you. 
 
And I just want clarification there, Mr. Minister, that when your 
department is identifying the problems and, as well, pointing 
out areas where the changes need to be made whether it’s 
upgrading of equipment, realizing that this is a cost to 
community just to, for example, Mr. Minister, that you are as 
well saying, okay, here’s what needs to be done and we believe 
that this equipment is just obsolete and needs to be totally 
replaced. We realize there’s a substantial cost here. 
 
But there are some programs through other departments, and 
certainly with the federal government, that are available and if 
applications need to be sent in immediately, what I’m asking, 
Mr. Minister, is that type of communication also passed on to a 
community so that they’re not then . . . after you’ve set your 
orders in place, then they’re struggling to . . . coming to us as 
MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) in many cases 
asking us what’s available to help us address this problem. 
 
And I just want a clarification, Mr. Minister, that your 
department as well is doing everything it can and has the ability 
to assist communities by pointing out areas where they can 
maybe source funding for capital reconstruction or upgrade of 

their infrastructure. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Certainly that’s some of the work that 
has been ongoing. 
 
We of course work with the various portfolios in the 
government. Municipal Affairs and Housing, we approached 
them to help them set priorities for some of the infrastructure 
funding. 
 
And yes, we also make the communities aware of some of the 
potential funding sources, which also includes the Sask Water 
Corporation. 
 
And that’s why I mentioned earlier, between Sask Water, MAH 
(Municipal Affairs and Housing) and SERM and working with 
a number of other ministers, that we are taking a very thorough 
assessment of what the challenges are out there. And SERM is 
certainly making the other portfolios in government aware of 
some of the challenges that we have in some of these smaller 
centres and some of the other communities as well, when it 
talks about compromising water quality to their local folks. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I listened 
very intently when my hon. colleague from Wood River talked 
about who you approach first in regards to health when you 
have water problems — whether you approach Health or SERM 
or Sask Water or Municipal Government. And I listened very 
intently and I don’t think you answered that question, sir. 
 
I would like to know which branch does a small community like 
Kincaid, or any small community in rural Saskatchewan, go to, 
to get an answer? We feel rural Saskatchewan, small 
communities like that, get really frustrated when they don’t 
know where to go and who to approach. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Okay. Just to clarify the point. If you 
have some challenges with water quality, your first contact 
would be SERM. And one of the things we would do is we’d go 
and work with you to see where the problems are and to 
collaborate some of the other challenges that you may face. 
 
Now in assuming some of the lead on this particular 
challenging file, I also want to clarify that we have what I 
would envision as a SWAT team approach to this particular 
challenge. And one of them, first of all, is the responsibility that 
must also be incorporated in the overall management plan by 
the communities. We appreciate that the communities own and 
operate these water sites and water systems. And that we also 
appreciate that in terms of doing the water analysis in the public 
health of a particular community, that we would also have 
Health involved. 
 
So clearly SERM would be your first contact if there is a 
challenge with your water quality in the community. And we’ll 
go in there and we will work with Sask Water and Sask Health 
to see what kind of solution that we’re able to find out. 
 
So quite frankly in terms of setting standards and the initial 
contact with the community, SERM would certainly be that 
particular portfolio that you would approach. And then SERM 
would then turn around and say okay, well we better make sure 
we collaborate with Health. 



918 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

If there is a threat to the water quality problems and we’re 
certain that it’s from the distribution system of the water 
system, then we’ve got to put a boil-water advisory or a 
boil-water order depending on how soon we can make certain 
of that. 
 
And secondly is we’ve got to make sure that we keep that 
boil-water in effect to ensure that there is no threat to public 
safety. 
 
And then we turn around and we collaborate with MAH and we 
collaborate with the Sask Water Corporation to say we have an 
infrastructure problem here; what can we do? 
 
So while we are the initial contacts on water quality, there are a 
host of other ministers that we want to make sure that we stay in 
direct contact with. If there’s a health-related issue that has to 
be addressed and as the Minister of SERM I can’t do that. So 
clearly the responsibility certainly lies with other ministers as 
well. 
 
So it is something that we’re trying to show some strong 
leadership on. There is no question that we can’t stick our head 
in the sand and pretend that the water quality is not a problem in 
the province. We can’t stick our head in the sand saying that we 
don’t have an aging infrastructure. But we can’t stick our head 
in the sand as well by saying that we have all the resources to 
fix the problem overnight. 
 
Clearly, as I mentioned before, our primary goal is to be the 
initial contact along with Health to make sure there’s no threat 
to public health, and to issue those protective measures such as 
boil water, or boil-water orders, to ensure that the public’s 
health is not compromised. 
 
And the other thing as well is very, very important, is the 
municipalities own these water systems, the waterworks — they 
own them. So we want to make sure that we’re not coming 
down hard on them and pointing the finger at them and saying 
it’s all your fault. This thing is about collaboration and 
co-operation. 
 
So we want to certainly show leadership on this and we want to 
make sure that we do a number of things. But the most 
important thing is to make sure that the public health is not put 
at risk. And that has a lot of implications for a number of 
departments. And the second thing, of course, is to find a 
solution to ensure a long-term supply of safe water to all 
residents of Saskatchewan’s communities. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I just 
have a follow-up, a couple of questions for the minister relating 
to Kincaid. 
 
It was some time — and I’m going to just make a guess here, it 
was either in January or February — the urgency of this issue 
was front and centre, so I had done it verbally rather than in 
written form and asked for some assistance and have somebody 
from the department get in touch with Kincaid. 
 
One learns very quickly that phone calls don’t work. But I 
thought the urgency of this was such that it would be a little 
quicker. I received correspondence from Kincaid on March 28 

saying we’ve absolutely heard nothing from anybody of the 
names that I had given, which prompted my letter. And that’s 
why I took a small leave to go and retrieve this letter. 
 
And in my letter, which I have not received an answer to as yet, 
and it was dated April 11, I have asked if anybody in the 
department has contacted Kincaid or if anybody has taken the 
lead in this issue. 
 
And I gather now the minister has said that SERM is the lead 
agency. So my initial question is: has anybody contacted 
officials at Kincaid since January? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you for the questions. In terms 
of the boil-water advisory, the officials from Kincaid would 
have been contacted on the boil-water issue. There’s no 
question that you cannot issue a boil-water advisory without 
telling the officials from Kincaid that they have to be. 
 
And I sincerely apologize for the length of time in which I 
responded to your correspondence. I think that letter is in my 
office for a signature, and I look through all the letters that I 
sign. 
 
And I guess very briefly, if I can explain to you, is that what the 
letter . . . when I get a letter in my office, we often refer to a 
department person that looks at all the history of the issues that 
are brought up in that particular correspondence. And then the 
letter comes back to me for my signature, and sometimes that 
process takes a week to two weeks, and sometimes it may take 
three weeks. But I understand that letter is in my office for my 
signature. I’ll have a look at it and get it to you as quickly to 
you as I can. 
 
But as I mentioned before, that we will forward to you a 
complete list of what we have done in terms of contact with 
Kincaid, and the correspondence that we have received from 
Kincaid, in trying to resolve some of their problems. 
 
And as I mentioned to you before, our role is to not simply 
issue a boil-water advisory and walk away. We want to 
continue working with those 37 communities that have 
challenges. And as I mentioned, it’s certainly going to take us 
some time. 
 
But what we’re not going to do is put anybody’s health at risk 
by lifting an order before putting the solutions in place to ensure 
the delivery of safe water. 
 
And I think that you agree that the citizens of Kincaid should 
not consume water if it’s not safe, and that’s one of the reasons 
why we put in the boil-water, and that’s one of the reasons why 
it’ll stay until we’re convinced that it is no longer needed. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Maybe this is 
a double-barrelled question, Mr. Chair. You answered that 
SERM is the lead agency. Does the minister sit with the other 
agencies within government such as the ones I’ve suggested, as 
Sask Water, Health, Municipal Affairs? Do you actually sit as a 
group and discuss some of these issues? 
 
And I’d like to repeat my last question to the minister is, has 
anyone since January contacted people in Kincaid? I understand 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 919 

 

the boil-water advisory. It’s been there for 10 months. 
Everybody understands that. My question, more specific: has 
anybody since January contacted anybody in Kincaid reference 
the water problem? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The answer to your first question is 
yes, the collaboration is there. There’s no question, from our 
perspective, when I mentioned SERM being . . . having the 
initial contact is that when calls come in, we go out and we send 
some of the 10 new staff and other staff that we have to help 
with the water-testing problems that may show some significant 
challenge to public health. 
 
Health does that through the provincial lab, does all the testing; 
and so we continue working with MAH to ensure that the 
housing aspect, the municipal challenges in terms of trying to 
find some money for them, we also collaborate with the various 
portfolios involved. 
 
And the answer to your question is, again I don’t have the 
specifics of what contact that we have had with Kincaid. As I 
mentioned earlier, I will get you a letter that indicates the 
historical involvement that we have had with the community of 
Kincaid since the boil-water advisory has been put in place. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I move the 
committee report progress on the Department of the 
Environment and Resource Management. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Mr. Chair: — First of all I’d invite the Minister of Social 
Services to introduce his officials present with us in the 
Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me is Bonnie Durnford, the deputy minister; seated to 
her right is Bob Wihlidal, the acting assistant deputy minister; 
and seated behind her is Shelley Hoover, another acting 
assistant deputy minister. Seated behind me is Richard Hazel, 
the executive director of family and youth; and seated behind 
him is Darcy Smycniuk, the acting executive director of 
financial management; and seated behind Ms. Hoover is Phil 
Walsh, the executive director of income support. And behind 
the rail are Dorothea Warren, the associate executive director of 
family and youth; Deborah Bryck, the director of child day 
care; and Larry Moffatt, the executive director of community 
living. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair, 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to welcome the 
minister and his staff here this afternoon. Mr. Minister, I have a 
situation in my constituency that is very concerning both to me 
and to the parents . . . the parent of a young individual, a young 
male who is mentally challenged, lives in Kelliher, and during 
the winter months went into some homes in the community. As 

a result, this home invasion ended up in the court system. 
 
This young individual apparently, certainly as I mentioned, is 
mentally challenged. He was incarcerated for a period of time. I 
understand now that he’s in an approved home in Yorkton, 
awaiting his court appearance in May 15, I’m told. 
 
The mother of this young individual has contacted my office on 
a number of occasions. I’ve spoken to her and she is very 
concerned that it appears that in Saskatchewan we really have 
no programs that can deal with this young person. He requires 
some help that she feels is not currently available and she’s very 
concerned that if he ends up in jail it’s really not going to help 
him. 
 
And I was just wondering what programs do exist in your 
department? This person has some . . . I believe the charges are 
of a sexual nature although it wasn’t involving another 
individual, but it’s a combination of him being mentally 
challenged and these other problems. And he’s, as I’ve 
mentioned, he’s currently in an approved home in Yorkton. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, without knowing all of 
the details or particulars of the case in question — and neither 
are we in a position I guess to really get into that kind of case 
finding on the floor of the Assembly — what I can say is that I 
would encourage the mother of the young boy in question to 
contact the nearest regional office of my department. I guess in 
this case it might be Yorkton. And to bring this matter to the 
attention of the regional director. 
 
We will have the appropriate staff in my department work with 
whatever other agencies or departments may be affected — 
whether it’s Justice in this case, or mental health officials and 
the health district in the Department of Health — and to define 
what the boy’s needs are, and to develop some integrated case 
plan that is unique to his situation in making use of all of the 
resources that we have in Saskatchewan. That is how we 
propose that we are to proceed in a case such as this. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the mother has been in touch with 
your department — this young person I’m talking about is 20 
years of age — she was told or was made aware that a staff 
member of your department, Mr. Reddekopp, is running or is in 
charge of a pilot program that started in late 2000 and is to run 
until 2001. And she understands that the services offered by this 
pilot program may be very useful to her son, but she was also 
told that there is no space for her son in that program. 
 
I wonder if the minister could perhaps explain what this 
program is about and if there is any possibility of her son being 
placed in the program. Her greatest fear is that once her son 
moves through the justice system that there may be no other 
place for him other than the correctional facility and so on. And 
she really feels that this would do more harm than good. 
 
And I wonder if the minister could perhaps bring us up-to-date 
as to if this program exists and is it available to people? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the program that the 
member asked about is a pilot project for young sex-offending 



920 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

individuals that is taking place in Regina. It’s a pilot program 
which at this point includes seven individuals. There is no 
additional capacity in the pilot project to take on additional 
people. 
 
We have not done any evaluation as to the outcomes of this 
project to see what lessons can be learned from it, and how we 
might provide better programming of this nature in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So the only thing that we can advise in this particular case is 
that the mother contact the regional director. We will have staff 
sit down with her and the young man to develop a case-specific 
plan to make use of all other resources in the province of 
Saskatchewan. This is how we have done things typically in 
cases of this nature and we will do so again. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the mother has done a fair bit of 
research into this area. As I had indicated, she is very, very 
concerned about the future, her son’s future, and she was made 
aware of a program that is being operated in Winnipeg. It’s 
called Opportunities for Independence and the purpose of this 
program, from some of their information that I have, is . . . it 
deals with disabled youth who are in conflict with the criminal 
justice system. She feels her son . . . that it describes her son, 
and she feels that this program would be of immense benefit to 
her son but she doesn’t know whether . . . she herself would not 
be able to look after the financial requirements if . . . I’m not 
sure if there . . . I would imagine there would be financial 
requirements if her son was to go to Winnipeg and become 
enrolled in that program. 
 
Does your . . . does the Department of Social Services, do you 
help individuals with out-of-province programs, and 
particularly this Opportunities for Independence in Winnipeg? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, the Regina pilot is in 
large part based on the Winnipeg program that the member 
talks about. But I would point out that the program that we’re 
dealing with is not a residential treatment program that is 
geared to take people from other communities. 
 
What we’re trying to develop is a more effective response to 
help people in their home communities to begin to deal more 
effectively with the sex-offending behaviours that they have, as 
an alternative to the court system, based on the knowledge that 
sending people away to treatment facilities does not necessarily 
help them to develop that capacity, and that they’re better able 
to obtain treatment while residing in their home communities. 
 
The Regina project, as an example, is for people who live in 
Regina, who in addition to working with the individuals will 
work with the families, as I understand it, to ensure that the 
right kind of support is there all around to help them deal with 
the problem that they have. 
 
Again the suggestion that we would make is that the people in 
question contact the regional director, and we will sit down with 
the family to develop a specific plan to make use of the 
resources that we have to help that individual, that family, deal 
with this particular problem. That’s how we’ve done it in the 
past. 
 

We hope through pilot projects such as this to enhance our 
understanding and to enhance our ability to help people with 
these particular problems. But we have had responses in the 
past. We are prepared to work with this individual and his 
family to develop a case-specific plan for that individual. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I guess, Mr. Chair, I would have to comment to 
the minister that certainly we realize that those type of services 
cannot be offered in every small community in rural 
Saskatchewan, so therefore to say that the services are provided 
on a residency basis and so on, as in the larger centres such as 
Regina where this pilot project is taking place now, that means 
. . . (inaudible) . . . citizens of Regina and those people who 
require those services know very well. 
 
So what do the people in small-town Saskatchewan do where 
they don’t have those services? I would urge the minister to 
look at providing those type of services and if we can’t do them 
within the province and if there are . . . I mean in this case, this 
individual won’t be able to receive those type of services in the 
town and the village of Kelliher, so he’s going to have to leave 
his home. If there is a service available to him in Manitoba, in 
Winnipeg, I would urge the minister to look very strongly at 
providing those services to the individual. 
 
Would the minister care to comment on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we have other 
instances in Saskatchewan where we’ve been able to work with 
the mental health people in the health districts and with the 
Department of Justice to develop specific therapeutic case plans 
for individuals to help them with treatment in their own home 
communities, small communities in Saskatchewan. 
 
Again, the Winnipeg program that the member talks about is 
not a residential treatment facility. They don’t have bedrooms 
for their participants to stay in. These are people that live 
ordinarily in the city of Winnipeg. 
 
But we do and can sit down with families, develop case-specific 
plan to make use of strengths that we have in Saskatchewan — 
in the areas of mental health, in the areas of justice, my own 
department — to focus those on the needs of individuals and to 
help them with their treatment of their particular offending 
behaviours. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I would say to the minister then that I 
will continue to work with the concerned parent and have her 
. . . As I stated, she already has contacted the minister’s 
department. 
 
I would ask the minister to seriously consider looking at the 
Winnipeg alternative if those services can not be provided for 
this individual in his home community. 
 
With that, Mr. Chair, I would turn the questioning over to my 
colleague from Arm River. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Chair, I just want to 
make it clear that the Winnipeg so-called program that the 
member talks about is not a program that would receive 
individuals from outside of Winnipeg. This is not some facility 
that can put people up for an extended period of time and deal 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 921 

 

with them in-house. This is an outreach program in the city of 
Winnipeg that attempts to help people in the community of 
Winnipeg and to work with their families and the individuals 
involved. 
 
So the alternative here is not to take people out of their 
communities, to send them away and then magically get treated 
somewhere, and then come back kind of all fixed up. It doesn’t 
really work that way. 
 
What we need to do is to work with individuals and their 
families in their own communities. And there are resources in 
Saskatchewan that can be focused on the needs of individuals to 
do just that, as an alternative to having these individuals go 
through the justice system. Which I think we all agree that they 
ought not to be involved in that system. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, and 
officials. Good afternoon. Kind of a follow-up question that my 
fellow member brought up. I’ll follow that a little bit. 
 
A lot of the people you deal with unfortunately are afflicted 
with many problems, you know — drug, alcohol, gambling, sex 
abuse, mental stress. Can you handle all of this in Saskatchewan 
or do you send people out of province to other programs 
throughout Canada, if there’s a particular program out there that 
Saskatchewan maybe hasn’t or isn’t set up for? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Chair, as with the 
previous questions, our direction is to support individuals who 
are experiencing social problems to come to grips with those 
problems in the context of their family and in their own 
community as opposed to removing people from the everyday 
life in which they find themselves; to remove them to some 
other place where they might be treated and cured, if you like, 
and then to reintroduce them into their family and into their 
community. 
 
Some of the problems that the member speaks about are 
problems that are better solved with the support of loving, 
caring family. Problems that are better dealt with while the 
individual tries to maintain some normal routine. Because at the 
end of the day that person will have to go back to that routine 
and has to come to grips with those issues in the course of their 
normal lives. So generally speaking, that’s our direction. 
 
And when we do that, we then work with health districts, school 
boards, community-based organizations, whoever may be in a 
position to help individuals with the specific issues that they 
have. We have, I think, 22 offices across Saskatchewan and we 
think we’re in a position to work with people to help people in 
their home communities. That’s why we’re as widely dispersed 
as we are. And that’s the approach that we take. 
 
There may be instances of where our understanding of the 
behaviour of a person defies our ability or the ability of people 
at the regional level to fully comprehend/understand what 
problems the person may be experiencing or the child may be 
experiencing. 
 
So we have in Regina and also in Saskatoon what we call 

stabilization and assessment centres. Here it’s Dales House; in 
Saskatoon, it’s the Saskatoon Children’s Shelter — where we 
take children whose behaviour cannot be readily comprehended 
by people at the regional level in their home communities, by 
the professionals there; where we do have these facilities, where 
over a period of time we have professionals work with the 
children to try to understand what the behaviours really mean in 
terms of underlying problems, and then get some advice from 
those professionals as to how we might be better able to deal or 
to help that child in their home communities and in the context 
of their families. 
 
So generally speaking, that’s the approach we take. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I 
wholeheartedly agree with that. That’s the way it should be 
done. But I asked, in your last fiscal year, have you sent any 
other people outside of Saskatchewan for treatment . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, I did. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I think, Mr. Chair, that my 
officials are only aware of, that in the last fiscal year there may 
have been two or three young people who are assisted by my 
department to attend specific treatment facilities outside of 
Saskatchewan on account of the gravity of their behaviour 
defying our immediate ability to deal with that and to find, in 
the case of the Poundmaker’s Lodge in Edmonton, some 
culturally appropriate way of helping those young people come 
to understand the destructiveness of their behaviour so that they 
can begin a healing process back home in their communities. 
 
But we can undertake to provide the members with the numbers 
involved — although not the names, of course, of the 
individuals — but we’ll certainly undertake to provide him that 
but it’s a very small number. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Mr. Minister, yes, if 
you could provide me with as much details of cost of how many 
people for the last year. 
 
And I guess the first question, I guess maybe I rambled on a 
little too much, but I wholeheartedly agree that they should be 
treated here in Saskatchewan at their homes as much as 
possible. That’s what I was getting at. 
 
I have a Cedar Lodge in my constituency who does, I believe 
they call it, the mission for the wounded and the weary, they 
call it. Do you look at expanding, sending people to . . . 
They’ve already I guess, people referred to them from Social 
Services, from caseworkers. 
 
They’re also interested in . . . The costs have been going up. 
They’ve been privately funded, but with natural gas costs, I 
think they said their last winter’s bill was — not this winter but 
the winter before — was 12,000. I believe this one is getting 
close to 50,000 just on natural gas. 
 
They are looking at trying to get some money from the 
government for the services they provide there. I was just 
wondering, have you been approached by them or do you look 
at private lodges like that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, we’re not aware of 



922 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

having been approached by this particular organization. But 
typically I would think that they would contact the Department 
of Health who has more of a departmental responsibility for 
treatment facilities in the province, and addiction issues and so 
on. And to the extent to which this happens, these are delegated 
to health districts for treatment programming for individuals in 
their districts. 
 
We do make referrals for highly specialized treatment issues, 
but I think these are almost all to Ranch Ehrlo in Saskatchewan 
and would be no more than about 60 young people, I think, at 
any time. But again it would be highly specialized treatment 
where behaviours defy our ability to deal with those young 
people in their communities. 
 
But we would not, I think, normally make referrals to the 
organization that the member talks about, although the 
Department of Health might do that. I don’t know. You would 
have to ask them that. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I guess, yes, that’s 
the next question I was going to ask. What steps if they wanted 
to be involved, I guess, in one of your programs, do they 
approach you or the Department of Health? And then, I guess, 
are they investigated, looked at? 
 
If you could even provide me with some of them details, 
because I think they’re kind of looking for the steps of how to 
get involved into helping more people. I think they’ve been 
operating for four years. I’ve heard good things about them. 
 
With that, if you can provide that with me not maybe at this 
time, or . . . at your convenience. With that, Mr. Chairman, I 
will turn it over to my colleague from Moosomin. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
there’s a number of areas I want to talk about, but first of all I 
want to go to a situation that we’ve got headlined in the Regina 
Leader-Post on Tuesday, May 1, “Child’s apprehension 
criticized.” I want to deal a little bit with it in a general sense to 
how Social Services deals with situations of this nature. 
 
And just a couple of quotes from the article that basically says: 
 

A two-year-old boy, a ward of Social Services who had 
been in the care of Busy Bee owner (day care program) . . . 
for the last nine months, was awakened and removed from 
the home. 
 
“He was yelling ‘Mommy, Mommy’ and reaching his arms 
to come to me,” said . . . (the manager) who took the boy 
into her and her husband’s home last July upon the request 
of the boy’s aunt — his permanent caregiver at the time. 

 
She says:  
 

“He grabbed my neck, wanting to come to me and they 
(two Social Service workers) grabbed him right out of my 
arms, ran out of the door and took off. (Didn’t even take) 
. . . his shoes, his jacket, or his blanket.” 

 
And other parents mentioned, who had their children in the 
facility at the time, they . . . basically comments were, I think 

the Social Services could have, the workers could have picked a 
different way of working, dealing with the situation. And the 
comment was: 
 

“. . . Aren’t they supposed to be protecting the well-being 
of all children?” 

 
And then the parents went on to say 
 

. . . their children were distraught by both the presence of 
the police officers and by the fact the two-year-old boy was 
whisked off without any warning or goodbyes. 

 
Mr. Minister, this is not the only time I’ve heard of situations 
and actions such as of this nature. And while I’m not totally 
aware of . . . I’ve done a bit of follow-up, Mr. Minister. And 
whether or not the department had a legitimate right or feeling 
that they needed to act in this matter, it seems to me, Mr. 
Minister, that we could find a better way of dealing with 
situations of this nature in regards to how the child was 
removed from the situation. 
 
And the facts as you look at this, and as you hear the other 
parents, all of a sudden we have police officers. And they’re 
involved only because they’re required to, by law, to go with 
workers, social workers if an order has been given, to appear. 
And it just leaves the wrong impression, certainly for the 
children that were in the daycare at the time, the way the child 
was removed from the facility and from the care of the person 
that was entrusted with the individual. 
 
And Mr. Minister, I’d like to know exactly what the policy is, 
and if indeed we can’t find a better means of dealing with these 
types of situations. And while the comment I believe, later on in 
the article, says this situation maybe happens once in a while, 
not all that often. But it’s still a very traumatic circumstance for 
everyone involved. 
 
And I’d like to have you comment, Mr. Minister, as to policy, 
and what requirements are there of social workers in dealing 
with these types of situations so you don’t create a, if you will, 
a bad situation . . . a bad situation, just making it that much 
worse. 
 
And certainly from what I’ve been able to gather, even for this 
young child, for the last nine months, I believe, was in the care 
of a family, and then to be all of a sudden pulled away and left 
with the impression that . . . Well that was a home environment 
that that child was certainly becoming very accustomed to and 
used to, and I gather that the mother decided that maybe they 
wanted the child back. 
 
(15:45) 
 
I think, Mr. Minister, we’ve talked about this before, the 
suggestions that maybe if there’s a situation where a young . . . 
And I don’t understand, don’t know the situation here. But, for 
example, if a young woman has a child and doesn’t feel that 
they are qualified or quite capable of looking after that child 
and rather than just the department putting that child in a foster 
home, maybe working with family members to provide care for 
that child until they can determine whether or not that mother 
really wants to become the mother and provide the actual care 



May 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 923 

 

for the child. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if you could respond and let me know exactly 
how department officials are supposed to deal with certain 
circumstances, and why would this type of action actually have 
happened in this particular circumstance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, one, I’m not in a 
position to comment on the circumstances of the individual case 
that the member raises. 
 
And as I understand it, there is in fact a publication ban in this 
matter, and publication bans are typically ordered by the courts 
to protect the identity of children, recognizing that these are 
children in very difficult circumstances. And to subject those 
children in whatever situations it might be, in schools or in 
daycares, to have others know their identity going through 
situations which are widely reported in the media, can put 
further stresses on children involved. So that’s why we seek 
these bans. 
 
Also there may be innocent parties involved here, that it’s not 
acceptable that we would have people, who through no fault of 
their own, would then also be subjected to community scrutiny 
for situations which are not of their making. 
 
Having said that, I was very interested to hear the other day, the 
member’s colleague — I think it was the member for Humboldt 
— make a statement to the House. And in that statement the 
member said: 
 

I cannot think of a more worthwhile cause than to reunite 
children with their families. 

 
We agree in the department and I think all of society agrees 
with that statement, that it is worthwhile, it’s desirable to have 
children grow up in their own families as opposed to grow up in 
other homes; and to try and make that happen wherever we can 
make that happen, as opposed to raising children in an 
environment removed from their own immediate family. 
 
So as a matter of principle that’s what motivates us. That’s what 
motivates our workers. Indeed it’s more than motivation. That’s 
what the laws provide for. 
 
With respect to the involvement of police or RCMP (Royal 
Canadian Mounted Police), might I say that that is a very rare, 
unusual occurrence. We do not seek the involvement of the 
RCMP or police very often. 
 
And I might say that matters will not be reported on by the 
media if it was just normal circumstances but these are unusual 
circumstances, and we do so primarily for two reasons. One is 
to protect the individual or the children involved. And secondly, 
to protect the safety of the worker involved. As you can 
appreciate, child care workers, child welfare workers enter into 
situations which are . . . can be at times extremely volatile — 
extremely volatile. And there are sometimes concerns for the 
safety of the workers given the volatility of the families. 
 
Where we think there may be just an absolute lack of 
co-operation as well, by people, where it’s made clear that there 
will be no co-operation in carrying forward a plan that might 

have been ordered by the courts, or that the department deems 
to be in the best interest of the child, then it may be necessary to 
engage the services of the police. 
 
Wherever possible in communities, we look to involve police 
officers from the community and who may be known to the 
parties involved as . . . in order to not interject brand new 
people into the situation. 
 
Having said that, to ensure accountability the department 
reviews all cases with police involvement so that we can be 
assured and we can learn from each case as to whether the 
police was used appropriately, and how we might better able 
provide child welfare services in these extremely difficult 
circumstances. 
 
But to reiterate, we are motivated by an interest in reuniting 
children with their families. I think, as the member himself is 
expressing, these can be extremely emotional circumstances. 
And where we get a sense that there will not be co-operation 
and where there’s concern for safety, then we seek to involve 
the police. But again, the circumstances are extremely rare 
where we would do that. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. The . . . well I 
understand you’ve indicated there’s a publication ban and I’m 
not sure if that’s from your department or if that’s come from a 
court system. I’m not exactly sure and I’m not really all that 
interested. 
 
But I do understand that there actually was a meeting just a 
couple of days prior. The real concern that’s been raised, and I 
think you can just see from the article as well, there’s no . . . the 
criticism all centres around how the action was taken, why it 
was taken in a daycare. 
 
And whether it’s a daycare or whether it’s another circumstance 
in a public facility, outside of this article, Mr. Minister, I firmly 
agree, and I’ve always said this, that we need to work with 
family members. And we need to really deal and assist family 
members. 
 
And the committee, the all-party committee that’s trying to deal 
with and come up with some suggestions in regards to the 
children on the streets, have heard from many people talking 
about the fact that they were ripped from their homes by Social 
Services. They were deprived from the ability . . . even though 
the home may not have been what the department or what 
maybe you and I might consider to be a worthy home, and yet 
that was still home. That was still their parents. And I think . . . 
I’ve always felt we need to start working with families rather 
than against. 
 
However when we have placed . . . if for some reason a child is 
placed with a family for a while, and I’m not sure about the . . . 
We won’t deal specifically with this circumstance, but where 
they’ve been placed in the care of some other caregivers with 
the understanding that if the situation does improve where the 
family, whether the mother or the other family members, feel 
that they can then provide the care, it would seem to me anyone 
providing that type of care isn’t going to be refusing the ability 
then to release that child back into the hands of a family 
member. 



924 Saskatchewan Hansard May 3, 2001 

 

And I think the actions that we see portrayed here . . . and as 
I’ve indicated, this is not the first time something similar has 
been brought to my attention over the number of years that I’ve 
been involved as a Member of the Legislative Assembly. I think 
we need to look as well at how we respond to these 
circumstances. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, not knowing it totally, I’m not saying 
that action may not have been needed in responding. But I 
believe that if indeed there was communication and a process 
was being worked out to put the child back into the home 
atmosphere, then that should have been, that should have been 
continued to be worked on over the period of time that might 
have been there. 
 
But to walk into a daycare centre with a number of other 
children that were involved, it seems to me, Mr. Minister, it 
almost looks . . . basically that looks heavy-handed. It looks like 
overkill. And we get the wrong impression. 
 
And I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that your department . . . 
and certainly dealing with the workers involved . . . I’m not 
going to pick on the workers involved. But it would seem to me 
that many times I would like to know at the end of the day 
exactly what comes out of this, how the review took place. 
 
Last night for example we happened to see on the news about a 
situation in Ottawa with a police officer. And the comment was 
made about the fact that the police basically said, we have our 
review process. And the comment on the news, talking to a 
couple individuals a little later, was yes, but I’d like to have 
something independent removed from the police to see if indeed 
the proper review of the matter took place. 
 
Because if it’s just the police reviewing their own processes, 
sometimes you begin to ask yourself indeed how well they 
reviewed it, or are they more just covering up some of the 
actions that may have taken place even though they were not 
happy with how their officers reacted. 
 
And the same case in Social Services. A review by the 
department, Mr. Minister, I think indicating down the road 
when everything is complete and sort of indicating this is what 
happened and the matter is resolved and we’ve got the child, 
whatever comes about, Mr. Minister, I think it’s going to be 
important for people . . . certainly in the community that we’re 
talking about here, many people were very aware of the 
situation. They’re going to want to know exactly what 
happened at the end of the day and if indeed the child was 
treated fairly and the family involved were treated fairly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again, Mr. Chair, I can assure the 
member that to ensure accountability, the department reviews 
all cases with police involvement. I would also point out to the 
member that if anyone has concerns about how the Department 
of Social Services deals with specific cases, people can take 
those situations and report them to the Children’s Advocate, or 
the Ombudsman for that matter. And we will co-operate with 
them fully. 
 
We try to conduct our affairs in an open, transparent manner. 
And that can be reviewed by external authorities such as the 
Children’s Advocate. Again in summing up though, I just want 

to point out that it is an extremely rare situation in which we 
would involve the RCMP. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, just before I 
adjourn, I want to, on behalf of all of the members of the 
Assembly, express a thank you to those that are working in 
Hansard, diligently recording every word very accurately, 
every word that every member in here says. 
 
This House stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:02. 
 
 


