















































Hansard: June 07, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1629 
 June 7, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today presented from people who are concerned about the Fyke 
report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Wadena health centre be 
maintained at its current level at minimum, with 24-hour 
acute care, emergency and doctoral services available, as 
well as laboratory, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services for users from our district and beyond. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Kuroki. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a 
petition, the prayer of relief of which reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call upon the 
Saskatchewan government to repair Highway 43 from 
Vanguard to Highway 4 in order that area residents may 
have access to necessary services without endangering lives 
and property. 

 
Your petitioners come from the village of Vanguard. 
 
I also, while I’m on my feet, have a petition from the city . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Members of the 
Assembly, yesterday I inadvertently allowed the member for 
North Battleford to present two petitions. That is not the custom 
of this House and not the ruling of the House. I would ask the 
member to present one petition per day. Could he wait till 
tomorrow? 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
condition of Highway 339, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest, Moose Jaw, Drinkwater, and Spring Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
concerned citizens of southwest Saskatchewan regarding the 
state of the hospital in Swift Current. And the prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 

Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to present a petition with signatures 
this afternoon from the communities of Success, Cabri, 
Vanguard, Main Centre, Tompkins, Gull Lake, Dalmeny, 
Morse, Central Butte, Shaunavon, Ponteix, Val Marie, Admiral, 
and the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today on health care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our district, 
southeast Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and 
beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the area . . . 
communities of Redvers, Carievale, Maryfield, Fairlight, 
Moosomin, Bellegarde, Storthoaks, and Fertile, and Manor. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from citizens calling for immediate 
implementation of province-wide 911 emergency service. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to fulfil its 
promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
service province-wide. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Leask and Marcelin, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
opposed to the possible reduction of health services in 
Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctoral services available. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of 
Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
expressing support for the Government of Saskatchewan’s 
decision to increase the foundation operating grants to school 
divisions. And the prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and its vision 
of increasing the foundation operating grant to school 
divisions by $40.8 million for the fiscal year 2001-2002, 
the largest increase in 15 years. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good folks from Saskatoon. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today on behalf of constituents concerned with the 
centralization of ambulance services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Dafoe, Wynyard, Wishart, Regina, and Punnichy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the Assembly also 
today to bring forth a petition for improved cellular telephone 
coverage in the Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Spiritwood and the Witchekan Lake Reserve. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition with 
concerned citizens about energy costs. And the prayer reads: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenue to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from North 
Battleford and Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
The first petition is: 
 

Of citizens requesting that the restoration of Territorial 
House in the Battlefords be designated a centenary project. 

 
And there are 12 other petitions that are tabled as addendums to 
previously tabled petitions. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 57 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister of the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: what was the dollar amount of Larson 
Consulting’s successful bid on the request for proposal 
issued by SLGA in 1996 for the leadership development 
program? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day 57 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: (1) why did Saskatchewan 
not formally sign the Canada Farm Income Program until 
June 5, 2001; (2) what was the reason Saskatchewan did 
not sign the CFIP agreement in January when Alberta did, 
or in March when British Columbia and Manitoba did; and 
(3) how much has the late signing delayed payouts to 
Saskatchewan producers? 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my privilege 
today is to introduce to you and through you to the other 
members of this legislature, 55 grade 6 students in your east 
gallery, from PrairieView Elementary School in Dalmeny. And 
I believe these students have spent the past number of weeks in 
some discussion of what happens in government. 
 
They’re accompanied today by their teachers, Darlene Thiessen 
and Roxanne Bitner, and also a parent, Karen Baerg. 
 
And I’d like you to join me in welcoming them to the 
legislature this afternoon. I hope they enjoy their time here and 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

 

that they learn something about the process that takes place on 
their behalf. Would you join me? 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join 
with the member from Rosthern in welcoming the grade 6 
students from PrairieView School in Dalmeny this afternoon. 
 
I had an opportunity to meet and chat with them earlier this 
afternoon and I was very impressed with the questions that they 
asked me with regard to the education system and how positive 
they feel about their school. 
 
And so I’d ask all members to welcome this group to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly today, 36 grade 5 and 6 students from Waldeck 
School near the west end of Thunder Creek. The students are 
accompanied by teachers Sandi Reimer and Marv Parschauer, 
and chaperone Ms. Teresa Ruf. 
 
It’s my hope that the students will have an educational and 
interesting afternoon in the legislature and I’ll be looking 
forward to meeting with them later. 
 
And I hope that all members will welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I also 
want to join with the colleague from Rosthern, as well as the 
Minister of Education, in welcoming these grade 6 students 
from PrairieView Elementary. 
 
I was able to visit their class in the last couple of months and 
they’ve probably the best grade 6 class with the best grade 6 
teachers, as well the best resource room teachers, in all of 
Dalmeny. 
 
So I would just like to join with colleagues and welcome you to 
the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my honour to 
introduce to you and to ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming to the legislature this afternoon Mr. Ed Keyes of 
Toronto. 
 
Mr. Keyes was raised in Saskatchewan so this is a homecoming 
for him. He is joined with his daughter, Heidi, also of Toronto, 
and they are guests in Regina with his brother, Walter Keyes, 
who is a former deputy minister with the provincial 
government, in the east gallery. 
 
I’d ask you to all welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and to 
the rest of the gallery, I’d like to introduce a constituent of 
mine, Maynard Slater, sitting in the east gallery. And I’d like to 
welcome him here. And he’s a councillor in Unity, so welcome 
here Maynard. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, up on your gallery we 
have three special visitors. They were in my office earlier on 
getting an overview in regards to my experience in the 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have there, Laura Ballantyne, originally from 
Deschambault Lake and we also have Jade Sutherland from 
One Arrow and Beardy’s, and also teacher, Linda LaFontaine, 
who is the sister of one of my hard-working staff, Brenda Husli. 
And, Mr. Speaker, they are Miller High students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these two students also speak Cree. With that I 
would like to say to pass on due respect to everyone. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
But also, Mr. Speaker, to say to work at the highest level of 
capacity. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Welcome. Ta wow. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Again, I want to also join my colleague from the Battleford area 
to welcome Mr. Walter Keyes. Mr. Keyes, as you know, 
worked in the North for a number of years and he’s certainly 
served the North in time of his capacity in his past work. 
 
So I wanted to take the opportunity to welcome him here on 
behalf of the constituents of Athabasca. Thank you. 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Induction into the Saskatchewan Oilmen’s Hall of Fame 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
presentation of awards was held last night in Weyburn of the 
Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Show. This event, which included a 
delicious dinner, was attended by close to 800 people. 
 
I had the privilege of witnessing the following individuals being 
inducted into the Saskatchewan Oilmen’s Hall of Fame: Ron 
Kuchenka, Lorne Larsen, John Lindvoy, Bob Pierce, Helen 
Turgeon, and Doug Baldwin. The evening concluded, Mr. 
Speaker, with Mr. Norm (Pierre) Mondor, being named 
South-East Oilman of the Year. 
 
Congratulations to all recipients, and congratulations to 
Weyburn for again hosting this great event, and also the oil 
industry, particularly in the southeast part of the province, for 
making this event such a great success once again. 
 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Saskatchewan Takes Better Care of its Poor 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. An article on page A6 
of today’s Leader-Post states Saskatchewan “takes better care 
of its poor.” The article quotes comments from Mr. Andrew 
Jackson, an economist with the Canadian Council on Social 
Development, who spoke to a group of MPs (Member of 
Parliament) in Ottawa yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the article speaks in detail about how 
Saskatchewan has done a much better job at reducing both the 
incidence and the depth of poverty among lone-parent and 
lone-income families than the two richer provinces of Alberta 
and Ontario have done. 
 
The CCSD (Canadian Council on Social Development) paper 
reports that the portion of lone-parent families living below 
StatsCanada’s poverty line plunged more than 31 per cent from 
1993 to 1998. 
 
Saskatchewan’s building independence programs, launched 
when our Premier was the minister of Social Services and fully 
implemented under our current Minister of Social Services, help 
families leave and stay off social assistance. 
 
Since July of 1998, 3,800 fewer families including 8,100 
children no longer rely on social assistance as a direct result of 
the building independence programs. And our social assistance 
caseloads have dropped 19 per cent in the last six years. They 
are now at their lowest point since 1992. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are proud that Saskatchewan is again receiving 
national recognition for its positive role in social welfare 
reform. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rethinking the Way We Look at Politics and Politicians 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read 
the most recent editorial from the Biggar Independent entitled 
“Re-thinking the way we look at politics and politicians.” And I 
quote: 
 

Two headlines in the news this week have provided an 
opportunity to re-think the way we view our politicians . . . 
 
One is the wage increase for federal MPs. The other is the 
Sonntag-Bacardi merger. 
 
There are two schools of thought on whether our MPs 
deserve a salary increase. Some think that if we are to 
attract the “best” to serve as our elected officials we must 
be willing to pay them accordingly . . . On the other end of 
the scale there are those that feel the MPs don’t earn the 
salary they presently receive . . . 
 
As for Sonntag and his fishing trip — it is common practice 
for companies to “smooze” clients. In the private sector, 

that is. If Sonntag had been the CEO of a private company, 
nothing would have been said about the trip. However, the 
mere fact that he is an elected government official there is 
the perception that there is something sordid about the 
whole affair. It just proves that government cannot operate 
in the world of private business, not effectively. 
 
These two issues simply point to the fact that Canadians 
and Saskatchewanites are re-thinking politics. We are 
re-defining what we feel are political issues and what is 
best left to the private sector . . . 
 
More and more the public mood seems to be: governments 
should look after health, education and our infrastructure, 
leave business to the private sector. We want our elected 
officials to do their jobs with honesty and integrity. 
 
The voters know what qualities they want in their 
representatives. Now we only have to convince the 
politicians we know what we want. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hudson Bay Composite High School 
Sturgeon Environmental Project 

 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this is Environment 
Week. And here’s an encouraging story, Mr. Speaker, showing 
that our kids are working to preserve the environment for 
themselves. 
 
The Grade 7 class of Hudson Bay Composite High School has 
just been given a certificate of recognition by the fish and 
wildlife branch of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) for a very interesting, educational, and 
very worthwhile project. 
 
Did you know that lake sturgeon were once as numerous in our 
lakes and streams as buffalo was on our prairies? Did you know 
that sturgeon are now on the watch list, which is one step before 
being put on the endangered species list? Did you know that the 
same thing that happened to the buffalo almost happened to the 
sturgeon? 
 
I didn’t, Mr. Speaker, and I gather that neither did the students 
in Hudson Bay. But thanks to the efforts of their teacher, Mr. 
Bill Lozinski, and to officials of the wildlife branch of Prince 
Albert they learned. They then proceeded to communicate what 
they learned throughout the community — an educational 
project in which the students became the teachers. 
 
Most interestingly the students were given two sturgeon 
fingerlings, food, and equipment by wildlife branch. They 
successfully raised the fish. And anyone who’s helped kids 
raise goldfish know that’s not always easy. Then, Mr. Speaker, 
they released them into the Red Deer River near Hudson Bay. 
With luck, in 20 years their sturgeon will lay their first eggs. 
That’s how long it takes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Lozinski says he hopes to make this an annual project for 
Grade 7s. The environment is being conserved bit by bit, step 
by step. This is one such step and I congratulate the students at 
Hudson Bay. 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Survey on New Rural Economy 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I recently learned of a project 
within my constituency which should be of significant interest 
to the minister of Rural Revitalization. 
 
The village of Spalding has been chosen to participate in a 
national survey as part of the new rural economy. It’s being 
conducted in 20 rural communities across Canada to determine 
trends in those communities. Wood River is the other 
Saskatchewan community involved. The purpose of the project 
is to get a better understanding of rural Canada. 
 
Criteria for choosing communities consisted of distance from 
cities with populations of 300,000 or more, high or low 
capabilities, impact of industry on the environment, and 
whether the economy of the community is stable or fluctuating. 
 
Outcomes of the surveys are expected to determine where the 
rural economy is going, what Canadian rural communities have 
in common, what can be learned from similar communities, and 
what type of government services will best serve rural Canada. 
 
As part of the project, a national conference will be held in 
Muenster in late October with the project surveyors from across 
Canada. It includes a field trip to Spalding. 
 
The project is an initiative of the Canadian Rural Restructuring 
Foundation. If the minister of Rural Revitalization is not aware 
of this group, I would urge her to contact them. They’ve been 
studying the issue of rural economy and revitalization since 
1997. And they could likely save her department time and 
money if they attempt some of adoption for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gas Pricing 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to read 
from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix an article, Mr. Speaker. It says, 
“Energy critic’s arguments leaky.” 

 
Consumers facing steep hikes in SaskEnergy bills should 
expect better from their politicians than (opposing) MLA 
Brad Wall’s deplorable use of misleading numbers to attack 
the utility and the asinine posturing that has been the 
response by cabinet . . . 
 
Especially disheartening was the performance of Wall and 
the Saskatchewan Party who believe they are poised to take 
the reins. 
 
Nothing in Wall’s theatrics shows that he’s informed on the 
complicated issues of gas pricing, that the Opposition has a 
coherent policy on consumer subsidies or that it’s actually 
capable of governing without (being) bogged down into 
micromanagement. 
 
The problem is — and as energy critic, Wall should have 

made it his business to know — the Alberta price isn’t what 
applies in Saskatchewan. 
 
Instead the Opposition’s instant gas expert wants 
SaskEnergy to lock in at $5.56/GJ because, he alone, 
magically knows when a market wilder than the stock 
exchange has hit rock bottom (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Thank you. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Skills Competition 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker on 
May 31, Tim Paetkau who was recently named Skills Canada 
Teacher of the Year in his capacity as head of the industrial arts 
department at L.P. Miller Comprehensive High School in 
Nipawin, together with instructor Sherri Stevens, escorted eight 
students to the Edmonton Agricom for the national skills 
competition. 
 
Earlier this year, at the provincial skills competition in Moose 
Jaw, students from L.P. Miller took home 12 gold, 11 silver, 
and 5 bronze medals. 
 
About 500 youth came out to compete in an Olympic-style 
playoff to determine who would be the best florist, welder, or 
speechmaker in the country. 
 
L.P. Miller was hoping to set a new record for the school and 
take home a national medal. Sunday at the awards ceremony 
they were very excited when their school was called forward 
four times. 
 
Konrad Jurgens won gold in the job skills demonstration; 
Michel Chabot, gold in workplace safety; Andrew Hamilton, 
bronze in electronics; Carl Dahl, bronze in small powered 
equipment. Reyna Paisley, Ryan Scheuer, Derek Cosh, and 
Steven Paetkau, also drew high praise for their entries. 
 
Skills Canada promotes youth employment within our province 
and our country. Next year will be an international qualifying 
year for Team Saskatchewan, with the nationals being held in 
Vancouver. The gold winners there will be invited to the 
international event in 2003. 
 
Currently the instructors from L.P. Miller are working hard to 
develop work experience programs that will be beneficial to all 
students. 
 
Congratulations to the instructors and the students from L.P. 
Miller High School in Nipawin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Environment Week Activities 
 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, this is Environment Week 
and it is never too soon to become involved in protecting and 
preserving our environment. The theme of Environment Week 
is, quote, “Acting Today for Tomorrow.” And I want to 
congratulate some school children in my constituency who are 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

doing just that. 
 
Today the Minister of Environment presented a certificate of 
achievement to the students of Lakeridge School in the 
wonderful constituency of Saskatoon Southeast. Lakeridge 
School has achieved Earth School status. In order to be 
recognized as an Earth School, Lakeridge students had to 
complete 1,000 environmental projects. 
 
The students took action to enhance the environment. They 
talked to others about the environment. And they practised wise 
and sustainable use of environmental resources — just as we all 
should, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Lakeridge is the fourth school in Saskatoon to reach Earth 
status. I know they are proud of this accomplishment, just as I 
am proud of them. We all hope that all other schools will follow 
this example and that the Lakeridge students will now begin 
work on their next 1,000 environmental projects. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskEnergy Rate Increase 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for SaskEnergy. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
the minister for SaskEnergy told us about the millions of dollars 
he was saving by not locking in the price — and at that time he 
said what with the price being now below $5 a gigajoule. But 
then about an hour later, he and the Premier announced that 
SaskEnergy bills would be going up by 24 per cent to $6.30 a 
gigajoule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if SaskEnergy hasn’t locked in a price that means 
they’re buying on the spot market. And you know what the spot 
market price was today, Mr. Speaker? It was $4 a gigajoule — 
$4 a gigajoule. The NDP (New Democratic Party) is buying 
natural gas for $4 a gigajoule, if they’re in the market today, 
and today they’re charging Saskatchewan people $6.30 a 
gigajoule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is: why? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I do admit I’m a 
little surprised at this question. Just yesterday I pointed out that 
if that member had been investing in gas and if SaskEnergy had 
listened to him, we would have lost $20 million. Well now that 
member is pointing out for the public of Saskatchewan, had we 
listened to him for investing for the day before, we would lost a 
lot more than that, Mr. Speaker, a lot more than that. 
 
I say again to the member, I give him credit for acknowledging 
that the people in SaskEnergy are the experts in investing in 
gas, and he should let them invest in gas, Mr. Speaker, not that 
member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is that the minister 

stood up yesterday in the House and talked about the fact that 
SaskEnergy, by buying on the spot market, was doing us all a 
favour. And we agreed, because the price currently is falling. 
 
But the price today, Mr. Speaker, is $4 a gigajoule. Using 
SaskEnergy’s number, when you add all the attendant cost to 
that, you get 50 cents a gigajoule, according to SaskEnergy, so 
you’re up to $4.50 a gigajoule landed in Saskatchewan to 
Saskatchewan homes today. 
 
So the question to the minister is this, Mr. Speaker: why are the 
NDP charging $6.30? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Before I answer the question, Mr. 
Speaker, I do want to point out for the public that this entire 
discussion would be entirely unnecessary had those members 
opposite when they were in government not sold all the 
reserves, Mr. Speaker. Had they not sold all the reserves, Mr. 
Speaker, this discussion would be entirely unnecessary, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was also . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as all our experts in 
SaskEnergy have pointed out that in fact they would anticipate 
as well that . . . I should say the reason that they’ve not locked 
in is that they expect that in the next little while that the prices 
might in fact continue to drop, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was pointed out yesterday in our 
announcement, any savings that can be incurred will be passed 
on to SaskEnergy’s customers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this should not be portrayed as a bad thing with 
prices dropping, Mr. Speaker. Again I say, leave it to the 
experts in SaskEnergy to make the investments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, certainly 
experts should be involved in the purchasing and the deciding 
of the timelines for purchasing the price of gas. But you don’t 
need an expert to tell you that. 
 
Why would you go through the bureaucracy, Mr. Speaker, the 
bureaucracy of approving a $6.30 rate effective June 1 as they 
did yesterday, when you know in a couple of weeks you’re 
going to have to give the people’s money back, if that indeed is 
what this government would do, Mr. Speaker. A lot of people 
have questions about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very quickly, let’s go through it again. Yesterday 
the Premier and the minister announced that the NDP will 
charge Saskatchewan people $6.30 a gigajoule. We know that 
SaskEnergy is buying on a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
(14:00) 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

 

Mr. Wall: — We know that currently SaskEnergy is buying on 
the spot market. The price on the spot market is $4; add in the 
50 cent attendant cost that they say it takes to get the gas here; 
that’s $4.50. 
 
So the question is simple: if their price is $4.50, why are the 
NDP charging Saskatchewan people $6.30? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to again, for those 
who didn’t catch it just yesterday, I want to refer to a quote. 
This came from the interviews that took place out in the rotunda 
the day before yesterday, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Mr. Wall (it says) says the following: I also understand Mr. 
From (who’s the investor for SaskEnergy), and he is an 
expert in this, he knows more than I do clearly, or anybody 
in the opposition would know. 
 

He should listen to his advice, Mr. Speaker. He should listen to 
his advice. 
 
Again I say, Mr. Speaker, the reduction in prices is a good thing 
for consumers of natural gas here in Saskatchewan. That’s a 
good thing, Mr. Speaker. And any savings that can be achieved 
will be passed on to SaskEnergy’s customers, Mr. Speaker. A 
reduction in price is a good thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Province’s Economic Development Strategy 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. This morning the NDP released yet another 
economic strategy. And right now librarians all over 
Saskatchewan are trying to decide: are we going to put this in 
non-fiction or in fiction? Mr. Speaker, I think they’re leaning 
towards fiction. 
 
Once again the NDP is promising to create 30,000 new jobs. 
That’s the same promise they made in the election two years 
ago. And since that time there are actually fewer jobs in 
Saskatchewan than there were then. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP keep setting these job targets 
when they have no plan to actually reach them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I would have assumed that 
the Hon. Leader of the Opposition’s members would have 
reported to him, at the event this morning there were in essence 
several hundreds of people there, many, many of whom are 
leaders in their own communities, leaders in the business 
community across Saskatchewan, all of whom, plus almost 
10,000 other Saskatchewan people, participated in forming this 
partnership for prosperity, the targets, and the plan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now if the Leader of the Opposition says that these 10,000 
Saskatchewan community leaders and business peoples are 
wrong, fine. He can say that. What we have developed here is a 

partnership of Saskatchewan people who have set some 
ambitious targets. There’s no question about that, Mr. Speaker, 
some ambitious targets with some action plan steps to achieve 
those targets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, knowing the people of Saskatchewan, we will 
achieve those targets. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to quote 
from the NDP’s 1999 election platform. It says: 
 

499,300 people were working this July. We have a 
comprehensive plan to create another 30,000 new jobs over 
the next four years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there were 465,000 jobs in Saskatchewan last 
month. That’s over 30,000 fewer jobs that when the NDP made 
the election promise, the same promise they’re repeating today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier is making unbelievable phony 
promises to the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
is killing jobs, not creating jobs. 
 
My question is, why should people believe their latest promise 
when they have never ever delivered in the past? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition wants to 
talk about campaign commitments made in the last campaign. 
Well I happen to have here The Way Up, the election platform 
of the Saskatchewan Party in the last campaign. What does their 
forecast predict right here in the campaign document? 
 

By 2000, we would have employment of (with their 
strategies in place) 483,500. 

 
We’ve exceeded that, Mr. Speaker, already. We’ve exceeded 
their plan already. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we set in place some years ago . . . Mr. Speaker, 
we set in some place year . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we put in place some 
years ago, as the public will well know, a document called the 
Partnership for Growth with targets, with plans. Mr. Speaker, 
almost every one of those targets have been met or exceeded, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now while I’m on my feet, I know we’ve had a recent 
expression from the Leader of the Opposition about their 
economic development strategy, how we’re going to return 
young people to the province and so on and so on. And he said, 
in The Leader-Post, “if,” Mr. Speaker, “if the federal 
government and the weather co-operates.” 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a plan based on weather 
permitting. Again, it’s an all-weather plan. 
 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I would just remind the Premier that we found that 
information out of his Finance minister’s budget document — 
that’s where we got that information. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would also tell the Premier that had we 
followed the Saskatchewan Party plan, we’d have 20,000 more 
jobs than we have today in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s an old 
proverb that says vision without action is a daydream and, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP are still daydreaming. Other provinces are 
taking action. “B.C. Premier,” it says in the National Post, “to 
cut taxes 25%.” Mr. Speaker, the new Premier of BC (British 
Columbia) has been in office for less than a week and he’s 
already taking action, while the NDP are simply still in a 
daydream world of creating jobs, but they have no plan as to 
how it’s going to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP keeps setting job targets and they keep 
bringing in policies that drive people from the province. Mr. 
Speaker, why would anyone believe this latest job target, given 
the fact that Saskatchewan is currently losing jobs and they 
have never kept their commitments to create jobs in the past? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad that the Leader of 
the Opposition today raised the announcement made by now 
Premier Campbell in British Columbia to cut their personal 
income tax rate by 25 per cent. I’m glad that Premier Campbell 
is following the leadership of Saskatchewan in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — For as you well know, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ve made the same cut announced a year ago in the budget; 
well underway to achieving that goal in this province making 
Saskatchewan, if I may say — taking in light BC medicare 
premiums — more competitive than British Columbia, that’s 
for sure. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I invite the Leader of the Opposition to 
carefully read the Partnership for Prosperity, to carefully read, 
carefully read the assessment of 10,000 Saskatchewan people. 
And, Mr. Speaker, one of the conclusions in the Partnership for 
Prosperity, one of the key ingredients in reaching the prosperity 
that we know that Saskatchewan can reach is in attitude, Mr. 
Speaker. Attitude that says enough of the doom and gloom that 
we’ve heard from across the way throughout this session. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

First Nations Fund 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, just in 
reference to the Premier’s last comment, Campbell didn’t raise 
taxes like this government did. 
 

Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Aboriginal 
Affairs. Mr. Speaker, today the Acting Provincial Auditor 
released his Spring Report, and once again, the First Nations 
Fund received considerable attention. At last, the auditor has 
been allowed access to the fund’s accounts and is able to report 
on the management of these public resources. What he did find 
is proof that the First Nations Fund should have been audited by 
the Provincial Auditor from the beginning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the auditor has learned that contrary to The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act, the trustees of the First 
Nations Fund are operating two trust funds, of which the 
gaming proceeds they receive are paid into. 
 
The auditor states, and I quote: 
 

The trustees’ position is not consistent with the law and 
how they administer the money. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what actions will the minister be taking to ensure 
the trustees of the First Nations Fund operate according to the 
Act they are governed by? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to say that 
I have read the auditor’s report dealing with the First Nations 
Fund very carefully and the auditor has identified certain 
expenditures that in his opinion fall outside the range of 
authorized uses for the First Nations Fund. 
 
I want to also say that we have made considerable progress in 
strengthening the accountability of the First Nations Fund. As 
the member opposite knows, the First Nations Fund has always 
been audited by a private firm. 
 
Due to the hard work of our government, the First Nations . . . 
the Provincial Auditor now has access to those . . . to the fund 
and I am confident that by working together co-operatively with 
the Provincial Auditor, with the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations), and with the trustees of the First 
Nations Fund that the people of Saskatchewan, and the First 
Nations people in particular, will be well served. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the auditor 
says the trustees of the First Nations Fund maintain that the 
agreements between the FSIN and the NDP government allow 
the establishment for two funds. However the Legislative 
Assembly only provided for one fund. 
 
He says that the Department of Aboriginal Affairs is 
responsible to supervise the trustees and ensure the trustees 
spend money with due care and operate in accordance with the 
laws. 
 
The auditor states that a letter received from the trustees dated 
as recently as May 3 indicates that they believe they can act 
outside of the legislation by operating a second trust fund. 
 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

 

Mr. Speaker, the auditor points out that supervisory 
responsibilities for the trustees of the First Nations Fund belong 
to the Department of Aboriginal Affairs. Why, why did the 
minister allow the trustees of the First Nations Fund to operate 
outside the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to say very clearly — and I believe the member opposite knows 
this, but I will state it for the record — that yes, there is a 
second fund, the FNF II (First Nations Fund II). They have 
established a second fund. But, Mr. Speaker, they are not using 
that second fund. So that is an important fact to keep in mind 
when we’re having this discussion. 
 
Now I want to tell the members opposite that we have made 
progress in strengthening the accountability of the First Nations 
Fund. We do accept the findings of the report of the auditor that 
the rules and procedures to safeguard and control the assets of 
the funds are not adequate. 
 
However, there is no suggestion that there is wrongful spending 
of the First Nations Fund. The auditor has identified a couple of 
expenditures that in his opinion fall outside the range of 
authorized uses for these funds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act authorizes the First 
Nations Fund to spend gaming proceeds on economic, cultural 
and social development, education, health, and recreation 
initiatives for Aboriginal people. 
 
However the Acting Provincial Auditor raises serious concerns 
that the money from the First Nations Fund is not going to these 
areas. He says the trustees do not have any procedures in place 
to ensure that the money paid to First Nations are going to these 
programs. He states, and I quote: 
 

As a result we are unable to determine if the money the 
trustees paid to the First Nations was used for the purposes 
set out in the law. 

 
The trustees have paid out over $34 million in the last four 
years to First Nations. Where has the money gone? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit to act immediately on the 
auditor’s recommendations and ensure that the money from the 
First Nations Fund is spent on the purposes described in the 
Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, what the Provincial Auditor 
and the First Nations Fund private auditor have identified is that 
the First Nations Fund trustees need rules in place so that they 
themselves can be assured that the funds of the First Nations 
Fund are properly used. So that they themselves can be assured 
that there is wise use of the money. 

I endorse that and I want to tell the member opposite that I have 
taken several actions as a result of reading the Provincial 
Auditor’s report. 
 
I have phoned the FSIN and advised them of the auditor’s 
findings. I have instructed my officials to meet as soon as 
possible with the FSIN and with the First Nations Fund Board 
of Trustees to work out expeditious processes to strengthen the 
rules and procedures that safeguard and control the assets of the 
First Nations Fund. I have asked my officials to report to me on 
the results of those discussions on a regular basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — The auditor clearly stated this morning that there 
was no detailed accounting from the bands to the trustees of 
how money has been spent. So the minister cannot dismiss the 
fact that not all of the First Nations money is being spent 
properly. 
 
In fact the auditor has discovered over $280,000 that was spent 
on travel and FSIN senate contributions. Payments not 
authorized under the Act. And what is more disturbing is that 
the Acting Provincial Auditor said this morning that there is 
absolutely no evidence of how any of this money paid out from 
the fund is being spent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hear from many grassroots Aboriginal people 
who do not believe money from the First Nations Fund is 
getting to their communities and to their children. They believe 
they would be seeing greater results if even half of the $34 
million was spent on programming for their people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what action will the minister be taking on behalf 
of Aboriginal people to recover the money that has been 
improperly spent by the trustees? And will her department be 
imposing penalties on them for breaking the law? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I want to reiterate, with 
respect to specific expenditures, there is no suggestion of 
wrongful spending of the First Nations Fund. The auditor 
identified a couple of expenditures that in his opinion fall 
outside the range of authorized uses for these funds. And the 
members opposite will know the authorized uses are: economic 
development; social development; justice initiatives; education 
development; recreational facilities, operation and development; 
senior and youth programs; cultural development; community 
infrastructure development and maintenance; health initiatives; 
and various charitable purposes that are mutually agreed upon. 
 
I think that all members in this House recognize that these are 
important goals and important things upon which the First 
Nations Fund should be . . . to which it should be devoted. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 

Investments by Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Crown spending spree of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money outside of the province 
continues uncontrolled. The latest example is an 8.2 million 
investment in a Toronto insurance company. The deal keeps 30 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

jobs in Ontario and creates 10 in Saskatchewan — 8.2 million 
for 10 jobs. That’s a staggering $820,000 per job created. 
 
Today the government said it wants to create 30,000 jobs in 
Saskatchewan. Well at that rate that would cost the government 
$25 billion and result in three times as many jobs outside the 
province. Surely there are more cost-effective ways to create 
jobs in Saskatchewan. Surely there are better ways to reverse 
the 11,000-job loss we suffered last year. 
 
My question for the Premier: will he reverse the policy of 
external investments by the corporations and say that the 
priority of our government and of its Crowns is to create wealth 
here, not to compete with existing private business or to create 
jobs in Ontario? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the member 
is of the view that the creation of jobs is important, he is correct 
in that Crowns in their external investments of course try to 
create jobs. 
 
But that is not their only objective, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance has amongst the lowest auto rates in all 
of Canada. And part of the investment, Mr. Speaker, as SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) has done in the past, is 
to try to spread and diversify risk, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this investment, Mr. Speaker, they have made a very good 
investment by anybody’s yardstick, Mr. Speaker. And clearly 
this will spread risk for SGI, Mr. Speaker, and it will be 
profitable and it will bring revenues to Saskatchewan that can 
be spread amongst the taxpayers of Saskatchewan and people 
who buy insurance from SGI. This is a very good investment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

New Provincial Economic Development Strategy 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m pleased to today bring attention to the House some 
news about a new provincial economic development strategy 
that was released today, that will continue economic growth in 
this province over the next five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to begin by thanking the former minister, 
the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld, for beginning the 
Partnership for Prosperity consultation last fall. A consultation 
in which 10,000 Saskatchewan people attended meetings, 
visited the Web sites, sent in surveys, or called the toll-free 
number that was available to them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the message was very clear. People care about this 
province and, Mr. Speaker, they realize that we have 
opportunities here today. However we must take action in a 
number of areas to ensure that we can continue to have those 
opportunities and more of them in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Partnership for Prosperity is a plan that is based 
on 16 targets, concentrating on three main areas. 
 
Our youth. Keep them in the province; give them the tools 

through education and job and business opportunities so that 
they may stay here and raise their families here and create 
businesses here. 
 
Innovation. Let’s make sure that we’re up for the challenges of 
the new economy so that we can compete with more research 
and development, more access to the Internet and technology. 
 
And rural revitalization, Mr. Speaker. Working with businesses, 
rural leaders, farmers to revitalize and prosper in rural 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this strategy presents a solid, forward-looking 
framework to keep us in the right direction. More jobs, thriving 
businesses, strong communities, and more opportunities. 
 
Partnership for Prosperity is a positive step in continuing the 
growth from the 1990s. It will continue the tradition of being 
the best that we can be, meeting our challenges, and finding 
innovative solutions to succeed today and into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the many business men and 
women from across Saskatchewan. I want to thank the people 
from organized labour, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations, Métis Society, all of the people who were involved in 
putting forward the thoughtful comments that built this 
document and that helped to put this document together. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, I think the people of the 
Department of Economic and Co-operative Development can be 
very proud of the work that they’ve done. It is a very 
easy-to-read document. It’s easy to understand. The goals are 
clear. The targets are clear. But what’s more important, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not based on the weather and the national 
economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
thank the minister for sending over a copy of his statement 
earlier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps it’s a good thing that this new partnership 
is not based on items out of the Minister of Finance’s budget, 
like the idea of relying on the weather, Mr. Speaker, because 
that’s what that document stated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it seems that this is the third or fourth statement 
like this that this government has presented. It seems we get 
them virtually every year — a new five-year plan every year. 
 
The government in 1999, Mr. Speaker, in dealing with the 
economy recovery, promised 30,000 new jobs in their election 
campaign. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, the record is almost 
30,000 jobs lost. We can’t afford, Mr. Speaker, any more of 
their economic development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talked about rural revitalization. Rural 
Revitalization, under the present minister, is simply a 
bureaucracy in Regina while the doors are being closed across 
Saskatchewan because of the Fyke Commission, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we agree with the government that a plan needs to 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

 

be put in place to create a prosperous Saskatchewan. 
Unfortunately though, the model and plan used by the 
NDP-CCF (New Democratic Party-Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) for the last 60 years has resulted in 
miserable failure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The NDP government’s continuation of that plan — no matter 
what the platitudes they mouth — is simply more of the same 
bad medicine of failure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The province needs and deserves a vision, not one that simply 
relies on the failures of the past. One which is this 
government’s solution, Mr. Speaker, a solution of Crown 
corporations as the only economic engine in this province. One 
where Crowns enter into non-essential areas and continuously 
lose money, Mr. Speaker, such as SPUDCO (Saskatchewan 
Potato Utility Development Company), Channel Lake, IQ&A. 
Or try to grow the Crowns by buying successful businesses out 
of the province to compete against private enterprise here, such 
as against ironworks at Outlook or familyfarm.com at 
Archerwill, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. I would ask all 
members to allow the opposition Economic Development critic 
the privilege — and the House Leader — to make his remarks 
on the ministerial statement. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the best solution to create prosperity in this province would be 
for the NDP to simply step aside. This would allow someone 
else with vision and innovation to create an economic 
environment, which will indeed create a reason for businesses 
and people to stay in Saskatchewan rather than be driven out. 
 
In British Columbia, Mr. Speaker, after only a few days in 
power and having thrown the NDP out, taxes are dropping by 
25 per cent. The new government in British Columbia knows 
how to create an environment to create prosperity. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, is ready; it has the vision 
and the innovation to allow the people of Saskatchewan to 
make this province a prosperous place that we know it can be. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I wish to put on 
record that at 1:30 p.m. today I tabled the 2001 Spring Report 
of the Provincial Auditor, silently. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 4 — The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure to stand today and make a few comments regarding 
Bill No. 4, The Registered Nurses Amendment Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I understand, this Bill further expands the scope 
of practice for registered nurses allowing them to diagnose 
basic medical conditions, prescribe medication and other 
diagnostic tests. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe this piece of legislation has been 
discussed at length over a period of years. And in fact a few 
years back, if I’m not mistaken, there was some discussion 
about coming forward with a piece of legislation of this type 
that would expand the role for registered nurses in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And one may ask, well what exactly are we expanding or why 
are we expanding the role of nurses? What we have before us 
today, Mr. Speaker, is the fact that there are many communities 
and certainly in rural areas, where communities are facing 
physician shortages and doctors are leaving the rural areas. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we still have health care facilities, 
community services, and a lot of RNs (registered nurse) 
working in those facilities. And what has been brought to our 
attention is the fact that many of these individuals with some 
additional training would certainly be able to meet some of the 
basic needs of the clientele in those communities. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in that regard this Bill certainly is an 
appropriate piece of legislation in dealing with a concern of that 
nature, and indeed addressing one of the issues that the 
Saskatchewan registered nurses have had for a number of years 
in the fact that with the level of training they receive and with a 
bit of additional training that could certainly expand their scope 
of practice and meet some of the needs on the floor of our 
community facilities and the hospitals and emergency wards, 
especially at times when there may be a shortage of doctors on 
those floors. 
 
So it’s encouraging to see that the government has been able to 
come up with a piece of legislation. And as my colleague, the 
member from Melfort, our Health critic has done some 
intensive research, certainly he finds that there’s a lot of support 
for this piece of legislation in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might add though, we are not . . . we don’t want 
to see this piece of legislation as well, however, just begin to 
replace doctors. I think the people of this province still want to 
see physicians available. We want to see opportunity for some 
physicians to open up practices across this province and in the 
rural communities. We do not want to see this expanded to the 
point that in cases where doctors would like to come and 
practice, but rural health districts may choose to hire a licensed 
practical nurse, licensed nurses, clinical nurses versus doctors. 
 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

So I think it is important that the legislation we have before us 
indeed be very clear in its definition of what an advanced 
clinical nurse is, what that definition means, so that there isn’t 
the conflict between nurses and physicians. 
 
What the legislation as well does for advanced clinical nurses is 
gives them the opportunity to provide the practice and 
prescribing medication and providing some diagnostic tests, as 
I’ve indicated earlier. And indeed, Mr. Speaker, what this may 
do once this piece of legislation is fully enforced, it may 
streamline some of the medical services that we have in the 
province, areas where we find that there are bottlenecks 
currently in the system. And, Mr. Speaker, we hope that with 
this piece of legislation, Bill No. 4, that it indeed will alleviate 
some of the concerns that we have in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to health care, people in this 
province are certainly concerned about the health care. And for 
years we have prided ourselves as a province in the role we 
have taken in expanding medicare and certainly ensuring that 
the public — not only of Saskatchewan, but as we have seen 
through the past number of decades, the people of Canada — 
have become accustomed to a health care system that has been 
provided to them by the tax base, that it guarantees access to the 
services, to the health needs and services that a person would 
experience at any particular time. 
 
And over the past number of years, Mr. Speaker, we have seen 
in the province of Saskatchewan that many people have found 
that they’ve ended up on longer and longer waiting lists. And 
certainly, in loom of the current situation we have in the 
province, I know there are many people scheduled for surgeries 
that are very concerned about the fact that those surgeries may 
be delayed as a result of possibly a conflict within the health 
field between employer and employee. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about . . . we talk about waiting 
lists and we talk about ways in which we can address those 
waiting lists. We talk about procedures or professionals who 
can provide the services to address those types of concerns. 
 
This piece of legislation I do believe does go a fair distance in 
ensuring that we are listening very carefully and we are looking 
at alternatives that can be utilized to meet the health needs of 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that we’ll find many, many 
professionals across the province and certainly many 
associations and health care districts have expressed a very 
positive view in regards to Bill No. 4, The Registered Nurses 
Amendment Act, 2001. And, Mr. Speaker, I think it certainly is 
moving in the positive direction. 
 
While we’re encouraged by this move in the positive direction, 
there needs to be . . . some more issues need to be looked at a 
little more carefully before we actually move further in debate 
of the legislation. And in fact, Mr. Speaker, I believe some of 
my colleagues want to address a few other concerns before we 
actually move into addressing the Bill, line by line in 
committee. And therefore, at this time, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 5 — The 
Dietitians Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
pleasure that I rise to speak to Bill No. 5, The Dietitians Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in reviewing this legislation I recognize that it is 
certainly time that this legislation be updated, as it is destined to 
replace legislation that was on the books dating back to 1958, I 
believe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly in the world of health care, and specific in the 
field of dietitians much has changed since that time. I think it’s 
important to recognize that this Act will have the potential of 
strengthening the Act under which dietitians operate in this 
province, and it ensures a number of very important things from 
a regulatory and an accountability standpoint. 
 
It makes for sure for example that only qualified practitioners 
that are authorized under this Act and under the association that 
will administer the Act, will be allowed to use the name in their 
title of dietitian or registered dietitian. And I think that’s 
important for public confidence so that people understand when 
somebody uses those titles they have the appropriate training 
and professional background so that their advice and 
recommendation in regard to the nutritional issues that many 
people face, are indeed going to be held to a very high standard. 
 
And I think that those kinds of things are good moves in 
legislation to make sure that we aspire to the highest possible 
standards, for particularly those people practicing in the health 
care field, but in other areas of independent regulation as well. 
 
In addition to that, in terms of the public accountability, there 
are a number of amendments in this legislation that I think will 
go a fair distance in the right way to enhance and improve 
public accountability by the dietitians of this province. And it’s 
very important and very helpful, I believe. 
 
For example, it expands the number of public representatives on 
the council that governs the activities of dietitians. It requires 
more open disciplinary hearings and the filing of an annual 
report with the Minister of Health, which were actions that were 
not previously required in legislation. And I think all of those 
moves are very important and very worthwhile. 
 
Mr. Speaker, very often dietitians and the people that practice 
dietitian work operate in the . . . out of the limelight of public 
perception and they work in many different fields in the health 
care area. 
 
They work in food services in major health care institutions to 
make sure that the diets that people are receiving in either acute 
care or long-term care are appropriate to their needs. And make 
sure that they are going to be . . . not have allergic reactions or 
things of that nature that may be detrimental to their health. 
 
They work in public health. And I know in that field that there’s 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

 

much good work that goes on in terms of advice for new 
mothers and people that perhaps have some health challenges 
because of their diets. They work as community dietitian and 
nutritional supplement programs and even in special clinical 
areas like pediatrics. 
 
All of these areas deal with the requirements that people have to 
have healthy lifestyles and healthy diets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many times in the whole field of health care we 
get very much occupied by the immediacy of issues in acute 
care and accessibility to surgeries and waiting times and waiting 
lists. But we also have to understand that as an investment in 
the future we have to very much keep our eye on the 
determinants of health. And one of the very clear determinants 
of health into the future and diminishing the long-term 
requirements of health care going forward, is that people be 
encouraged in every way possible and assisted to have healthy 
lifestyles. And healthy diets are a very important component of 
that. 
 
And very often that we hear stories of people that get very 
much off on the wrong track by investing far too much of their 
food dollars in junk food and fast food things that are only very 
short-term expedient and they don’t look at the longer-term 
implications of that kind of course of action. And people like 
dietitians are very important in communities as part of a district 
health board in order to have the advice that’s necessary. 
 
Too often we hear of children that come to school in the 
morning and they haven’t had a proper, nutritional breakfast. 
And it’s very much of a determinant that they cannot learn as 
well as other children because they haven’t had proper dietary 
breakfasts in the morning. And I think all of those issues 
indicate that there is much more to the role of dietitians in this 
province than what most people may think. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that when we update 
legislation of this significance that we make sure that we have a 
sufficient amount of time for not only people practicing in the 
field, because we’ve heard from the official association who are 
very supportive of this proposed legislation. 
 
But we also have an opportunity for individuals and citizens 
who are practising or experiencing services by dietitians to have 
their opportunity to consult. And we’ve had indication that we 
still have some people that would like to advise us on this 
matter. And, Mr. Speaker, I know everyone in the Assembly 
will want to make sure that we do our due diligence and make 
sure that this legislation not only meets the needs of people for 
today, but going forward into the future. And we certainly want 
to make sure that we do that job responsibly. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, with that in mind, I move to adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 26 — The 
Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act be now read a second 

time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure this afternoon to further debate on The Hearing Aid 
Sales and Services Act. 
 
When we listen to the Minister of Health who brought forth this 
Act, Mr. Speaker, we were, of course, on this side somewhat 
pleased that finally something was being done in this area. Of 
course I’m musing also too, Mr. Speaker, that probably some of 
the cabinet ministers on the other side will probably be able to 
make use of this in very short order. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we notice that we’ve certainly heard from 
the government over the last period of years that there has been 
serious complaints brought forth to the government in this area 
of hearing aid sales and service; that there seems to be a small 
segment of the sales and services community that have unfairly 
taken advantages of those people who are unable to be able to 
protect themselves. 
 
And certainly it’s important that as government and those of us 
in opposition, that we stand up for those people who are less 
fortunate than us and be able to protect them from those people 
who are . . . quite willingly take advantage of people. So it’s 
important that this Bill finally be brought forth. 
 
Although we’ve noticed that through some of the conversations 
we’ve had out there in the industry — and I do say some 
because there is certainly a lot more conversation that has to 
take place yet, Mr. Speaker — is that consumer action groups 
out there have actually been pressing this government for the 
last 10 years, and it’s actually taken them 10 years to get to this 
point. We are certainly disappointed it has taken them so long 
but I guess it’s quite an indication of how slow they actually get 
business done over there. 
 
(14:45) 
 
But there are some important aspects in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, 
that are important that we see that for consumers from now on 
that this government is proposing that there be a period of time 
take place, three working days, in which consumers are going to 
be able to stop and spend some time, Mr. Speaker, making a 
decision, and maybe working out with a neighbour or with a 
loved one, whether the deal that they just got into over a hearing 
aid has actually been a good one for them, or else they have 
been scammed to some degree. 
 
But what we need . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask that only one debate 
occur in this Assembly at a time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, as we listen to the minister and 
his comments, we are very pleased that finally something is 
starting in the right direction. Of course we also see that the 
government may be going a little too far. We need to spend a 
considerable amount of time, Mr. Speaker, making sure that this 
Bill is the right one. 
 
We know that the industry out there, for the most part, a very, 
very large percentage of them, providing a very valuable service 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

to our communities, and to our . . . especially the senior citizens 
out there that require this service. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important that we make sure we 
take the time, that this government is doing the right thing; that 
what they’re bringing forth is what the citizens of Saskatchewan 
need, and not just some more red tape that will be administered 
by the Department of Health. As well though, we have a lot of 
concerns about how the Department of Health is operating that 
maybe there are some advantages here. 
 
But until we receive all the information that we need, Mr. 
Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Trew that Bill No. 39 — The 
Occupational Health and Safety Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand today and speak on the Act to amend The Occupational 
Health and Safety Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these changes being put forward seem to make a 
lot of sense and appear to be supported by the industry, and that 
is absolutely vital in Saskatchewan to have industry on side 
with any changes. 
 
As we’ve seen in many other areas, as a number of regulations 
come forward without consultation with the business sector, 
they’re put through without any legislative scrutiny, and it’s 
very important to have the industry on side in these matters. 
 
Anyone filling the role of the chief mines inspector must have a 
great expertise in a wide variety of areas, given the range of the 
mining activity that Saskatchewan is so lucky to have. 
Saskatchewan is blessed with potash, uranium, coal, precious 
metals, and possibly even diamond mines in the future. 
 
The mining industry employs upwards of 20,000 people in 
Saskatchewan. It has annual sales of about $6 billion. And it’s a 
very important industry to Saskatchewan and to citizens of the 
province. 
 
We understand from the industry that the government is 
currently working on a major rewriting of the mining 
regulations in Saskatchewan, and these changes are necessary to 
comply with those changes. 
 
And again, I’d like to emphasize that the government needs to 
consult widely with industry and make sure the proper 
regulations are in place and bring back to the House, to the 
legislature for scrutiny. 
 
I would hope that when this Bill winds up in the Committee of 
the Whole, the minister would be kind enough to give us an 
overview of the regulatory changes that government is 
contemplating at present. 
 

With regards to the chief mines inspector, it is our 
understanding that both the Saskatchewan Mining Association 
and the labour movement are supportive of changes being 
proposed here. And it’s again very important that labour and 
business have input into changes in the regulations. 
 
One of the chief mines inspector’s major roles is to ensure a 
safe working environment for the 20,000 men and women who 
work in our mining industry, which is very important to the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mining traditionally has been a fairly dangerous occupation, 
compared to others, with the potential for more to go wrong. So 
we need to ensure safety of the workers and at the same time 
make it possible for the mining industry to continue to flourish. 
Mr. Speaker, that is why it is so significant that we have heard 
supportive words from both the mining association and the 
labour movement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know there are a number of other members on 
the official opposition side who do want to have an opportunity 
to speak to this legislation. So at this time, I’d like to move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 30 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Trew that Bill No. 30 — The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a great 
deal of pleasure to stand in the House today and speak to Bill 
No. 30, The Labour Standards Amendment Act. The 
amendment to The Labour Standards Act stem from changes 
made to the federal legislation and Bill C-32 and the need for 
Saskatchewan to harmonize the provincial legislation with the 
federal legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendment to the provincial legislature 
matches that of the changes to the federal EI (Employment 
Insurance) which now provides for 52 weeks of maternity and 
parental leave. The provincial government, the provincial 
changes would increase the job security aspect of The Labour 
Standards Act to match EI in maternity and parental-leave 
benefits. Also, Mr. Speaker, fathers entitled to 37 weeks of 
job-protected leave combined would be a total of 89 weeks of 
job-protected leave for a family of a new baby. 
 
People can begin their parental leave up to 12 weeks prior to the 
estimated time of birth. Protection also includes the parents of 
newly adopted children. 
 
The notice an employee on parental leave must give their 
employer when they are returning to work has been increased 
from two weeks to four weeks, Mr. Speaker. And some 
employees do not take their full leave and come back to work 
early. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I agree that the first years of life are very 
important and parents should have an opportunity to spend time 
with their newborn or adopted children. Our children, our 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

 

families are the most important, precious part of our lives and 
the family health and welfare is fundamental to not only 
ourselves personally, but also to the stability of our 
communities, province, and country. We rely on our family for 
strength to overcome the bumps and difficulties of life, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, parents often speak of the need to create 
good-paying jobs, which will employ the children here at home 
in Saskatchewan. They want meaningful employment 
opportunities that offer the children safety and security. Now 
the desire and the creation of a strong, vibrant, diversified, and 
growing economy that offers the hope of employment stability 
which will keep those dear to them near to them. 
 
And while I’m on the subject of jobs, Mr. Speaker, the 
government side has been quoting numbers during question 
period and I’d just like to make clarifications. I’d like to quote 
from the NDP election campaign in 1999. And they say under 
the jobs . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I believe the member is in 
second reading of a particular Bill and should try to make his 
comments pertinent to the Bill. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was outlining the 
concerns of people having, wanting, and needing good jobs in 
this province. As we have seen, Mr. Speaker, not only parents 
speak of the need to create good-paying jobs, but the business 
owners also desire many of the same things. 
 
There’s no doubt that family issues are an important element of 
many small businesses. In fact it should be remembered that a 
significant number of small firms are owned and operated by 
families that strive to build a family environment within their 
company that values the contribution of employees. 
 
They will also tell you that they want the ability to conduct their 
business affairs with a minimum of regulation in a competitive 
environment that provides them with access to markets in which 
to sell their goods and services in a manner which generates a 
fair return on capital they have invested. They tell you that they 
want to exploit opportunity and markets, not people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they want to grow the business enterprise, thereby 
creating employment and of course wealth. Most will express a 
desire to be good corporate citizens and contributors to the 
economic well-being of their community and this province. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, it is possible to radically alter the 
economic landscape of Saskatchewan and still maintain a 
worker-friendly regulatory environment. There is no 
contradiction between efficient, highly productive, leading-edge 
workplaces and worker safety, financial integrity, respect, and 
dignity. They are not mutually exclusive or at odds with each 
other in any respect. 
 
Indeed the hallmarks of world-class business enterprises are 
respect for worker rights and appreciation of the essential 
elements of competition. As examples, safety, productivity, 
quality, and efficiency. 
 
We believe that Saskatchewan can become a prosperous, 

thriving economy which attracts and retains businesses which 
create high-paying jobs, produce value-added products and 
services, and serve customers throughout the world. We believe 
that the diversification and growth, opportunity and abundance 
can be achieved if a stable and reliable economic climate exists 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
We need to convince ourselves and the rest of the world on the 
concept that Saskatchewan is a terrific place to live, work, and 
invest. 
 
The business community feels strongly that sustained economic 
growth can be achieved only if government at all levels gets out 
of the business of regulating the workplace beyond providing 
for a basic level of protection for occupational health and 
safety, workers’ compensation, employment standards, and a 
social safety net, all of which enhance the competitive position 
of Saskatchewan enterprises. 
 
Saskatchewan should be viewed as a place becoming the best 
jurisdiction to live, work, and do business in North America, 
Mr. Speaker. We want sustainable growth, high-paying jobs, 
and excellent working conditions. 
 
We want to achieve a high standard of performance based on 
the superiority of our people, and practices, and our technology. 
 
Some specific concerns of small businesses, Mr. Speaker, 
concerning this Bill. The most important, critical impact for 
many employers is the prospect of losing a key employee for an 
extended period of time and the difficulty this will impose on a 
small firm. If a business of five employees loses just one staff 
person for an extended period of time, it means that 20 per cent 
of the firm’s workforce must be reallocated either to a 
temporary employee who must first be trained or it must be 
spread over the remaining staff and employer. 
 
Considering that about 75 per cent of Saskatchewan firms have 
five or fewer employees, such an impact is very real for many 
firms across Saskatchewan. The impact of losing a key 
employee for an extended period of time can be significant to a 
firm’s production in day-to-day activities. 
 
However firms are also concerned with the added financial 
burden they will have to endure in order to train temporary 
employees and in many cases, also retrain the returning 
employee if they are gone for a year. This is especially difficult 
for firms located in those areas where shortages of qualified 
labour are severe and in those industries where specialized 
training is required. 
 
Considering that Saskatchewan has a growing concern over the 
shortage of qualified labour, the further prospect of having to 
find, train, and then replace a qualified employee is difficult for 
many small businesses. 
 
Also of concern to many small-business owners is the impacts 
such legislation would have on the temporary employee. Many 
businesses have questioned the fairness of hiring and training 
someone who has been able to integrate themselves into a firm 
over the course of a year, only to let them go once the parent 
employee returns from leave. 
 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

However, in light of the economy, it is difficult to find 
employees willing to take on temporary work. It may also be 
difficult to retrain these temporary employees as they will likely 
move on to more permanent positions, once they get one, 
forcing the employer to find yet another temporary employee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the concerns of small business need to be 
balanced with the concerns of new parents. It is now broadly 
understood that small business provide the majority of new 
jobs, provide most young people with their first job experience, 
and are the backbones of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
As such the continued success is integral to maintaining 
Saskatchewan’s economy. Imposing policies that may hinder 
such growth could jeopardize many small firms. Couple such 
legislation with increases in energy prices, increases in CPP 
(Canada Pension Plan) premiums, and rising property taxes, 
small business firms are finding it more and more difficult to 
operate. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the primary focus among small businesses is to 
have government recognize the added financial burden 
extending maternity leave will have on most employers by 
providing some form of compensation to make up some of the 
costs. 
 
Some of their recommendations, Mr. Speaker. They believe that 
the government should promote to employers and employees 
the fact that there is no loss of parental EI benefits should an 
employee decide not to return to work. This may help to 
encourage those parents who have no intention of returning to 
work to inform their employer of their intention early on 
without fear of losing their benefits for the full year. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the provincial government should apply 
political pressure on the federal government to provide 
compensation to small businesses by providing an EI holiday on 
the employer portion of EI for those temporary employees 
brought on to replace permanent employees on parental leave. 
 
Also the government should consider providing additional tax 
relief to small businesses to recognize the financial impact of 
extending leave to parents in small businesses. For example, 
reducing Saskatchewan’s small-business tax further while 
providing relief on the onerous business education portion of 
property taxes may help alleviate this burden. The 
small-business community would welcome such tax relief as 
most citizens of Saskatchewan would, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More specifically to the Bill, many of the concerns raised in the 
business community are legitimate, Mr. Speaker. However, we 
have to keep in mind that the federal government has made 
these changes despite these reservations. Those changes to EI 
are a reality and it makes sense that the laws that are in place 
provincially that coincide with these federal statutes be changed 
as well. 
 
Overall, it is also a positive when parents get to spend more 
time with their children at any time in their life. This change 
will allow up to 89 weeks of parental and maternity leave 
between the two parents — 52 weeks for the mother and 37 

weeks for the father. The importance of a family should never 
be underestimated. Therefore we see it as a positive that parents 
be allowed to spend more time with their children. 
 
One would hope as well that changes be made to tax rules that 
tend to punish families where one parent chooses to stay home 
with their children instead of working. It is a positive that the 
government has seen fit to extend the provision for an employee 
to give notice to an employer for their intention to return to 
work prior to their 52-week period. This is important in order to 
allow employees to make the necessary arrangements in terms 
of informing replacement employees, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The business community has also asked for a notice on the 
other end as well. Prior to leave commencing, because there is a 
window of up to 12 weeks prior to the birth of a child where the 
parent can begin leave, it would seem reasonable that there also 
be an increased notification period prior to leave to minimize 
disruptions on the workplace by allowing employers to get their 
replacement employee in place, as in Alberta there is a 
requirement of six weeks prior to the start of leave. 
 
And there are other issues we believe should possibly be 
examined when it comes to parental leave, such as the 
minimum period an employee is in a job before becoming 
eligible for leave benefits. I note that in other places, Mr. 
Speaker, that employees are required to work one full year 
before becoming eligible. 
 
Lastly, Mr. Speaker, while we are generally supportive of this 
Bill as a sensible and practical Bill, we recognize that it must be 
a proper balance achieved between the very important needs of 
family, and the needs of small businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
And there are some issues that we do want to continue to 
consult with interested parties, and therefore I move 
adjournment at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 14 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 14 — The 
Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a privilege to get into the debate on Bill No. 14. 
 
I want to, first of all, Mr. Speaker, repeat some of the 
information that the minister has indicated as to how we arrived 
at the placement of Bill No. 14 before this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill was introduced to this Assembly back on 
April 9, 2001, but a lot of work, a lot of work occurred long 
before this date to get us to that point. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Public Accounts Committee, which tabled its 
first report of the second session of this Legislative Assembly 
back on May 2, has had a number of meetings dealing with this 
very topic. 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

 

Mr. Speaker, when that Public Accounts Committee met for its 
first time back on February 29, we didn’t realize the amount of 
material that was going to be presented to us to be able to make 
some recommendations to the Minister of Finance through his 
advisory committee. I just want to review some of the things 
that have happened. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first mention of changes to The Provincial 
Auditor Act were made back on December 6, 1999 when, in the 
Speech from the Throne, the government indicated that there 
would be changes to The Provincial Auditor Act. As a result of 
that announcement in the Throne Speech, the auditor — at that 
time actually, the acting auditor, Mr. Wendel — decided that it 
was in the best interests of the auditor’s office to put together a 
special report. And that special report of the Provincial Auditor 
was tabled on April 11, 2001 with the Public Accounts 
Committee. So we had the opportunity to review the concerns 
as outlined through the Provincial Auditor. 
 
At the same time and concurrent with that, the Minister of 
Finance had created an advisory committee to report also on 
recommended changes to the auditor’s Act. And that committee 
presented a report to the Public Accounts Committee that was 
sent to us by the Minister of Finance. 
 
So basically we were dealing with two reports on the same 
issue. What kinds of changes would be best for the province of 
Saskatchewan to ensure that an independent Provincial 
Auditor’s office could function; that the concerns that have 
been expressed over the last number of years would be 
addressed correctly; and that indeed, the auditor would be able 
to do his job or her job efficiently. 
 
So while we were looking at these two reports, we had — and I 
want to thank the Minister of Finance for allowing his advisory 
committee members to come before the Public Accounts 
Committee — and we had the opportunity to question them and 
to determine what would be the best course of action based on 
the concerns raised by the Provincial Auditor and the concerns 
raised by the advisory committee. 
 
In the end, Mr. Speaker, we put together a report that was 
agreed to by all members of the Public Accounts Committee 
and produced recommendations on what we like to see happen 
in the way of changes to The Provincial Auditor Act. That was 
of course an advisory report that was tabled back through the 
Minister of Finance’s committee back to the Minister of 
Finance to come forward with the Bill, as I’ve indicated, which 
came before us on April 9. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I too also want to thank members of the Public 
Accounts Committee for working so diligently. And I know 
since, you know, the short time that the committee has been in 
session, about 15 months; we’ve had numerous changes. We’ve 
had different people. In fact, Mr. Speaker, I think we have 
already had three Vice-Chairs for that committee. And we’re 
achieving, I think, what was asked of us by this Assembly was 
to compare those, those two documents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other documents that occurred 
immediately after the committee put forward its 
recommendations was that the Provincial Auditor made 
comments that we wanted to have dealt with by an independent 

person. And we asked the Legislative Law Clerk to review the 
conditions that were put forward, to review the Bill, to in fact 
determine whether or not the Bill that was introduced on April 9 
actually reflected the points that were put forward by the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
And at one of our nine meetings that we had on this topic, we 
had a chance to compare what the Law Clerk had interpreted, as 
well as what the Provincial Auditor was stating. And we were 
pleased, as a Public Accounts Committee, that indeed the 
changes proposed were adequate. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this morning, the Provincial Auditor has 
tabled the 2001 Spring Report and, in his observations chapter, 
he makes a comment about the changes to The Provincial 
Auditor Act. And one of the paragraphs, Mr. Speaker, is this, it 
says and I quote: 
 

The Government introduced Bill 14, An Act to amend The 
Provincial Auditor Act on April 9, 2001. We supported the 
changes, set out in this Bill, because they enhance the 
Provincial Auditor’s independence and maintain the 
Government’s accountability to the Assembly. Also, the 
Bill results from a reasonable process that provided for 
adequate consultation among key legislators, the Minister 
of Finance, and our Office. 

 
You see, the reason I wanted to mention that quotation from the 
acting Auditor, Mr. Speaker, is that he clearly identifies two 
reasons why the Auditor’s office needs to be improved, needs to 
be enhanced by the Act that’s been put forward, and that is to 
ensure its independence. 
 
And we believe that the Public Accounts Committee is the 
place to review the different people that will be applying for the 
position and to make a unanimous recommendation to this 
Assembly that will be presented through you, Mr. Speaker, at 
some appropriate time. 
 
The other part is to ensure that government’s accountability to 
this Assembly is maintained. That is critical. And the report this 
morning, the Auditor has indicated a number of concerns in 
other areas but, most importantly, he’s had the ability to do his 
job, to ensure that the reporting and the accountability of 
government agencies, government departments is maintained. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bill No. 14, I think, does that. I think it puts 
forward many good recommendations that were worked on 
co-operatively by many people. And I look forward to 
questioning the minister on a couple of issues in Committee of 
the Whole that we need to ensure that the process that seems to 
be identified in the Bill, we’ll need to clarify an interpretation 
of some of those things. 
 
But we have a feel that in light of the fact that the Provincial 
Auditor, the Law Clerk, the Public Accounts Committee — we 
have all had a chance to review the legislature, we’ve had a 
chance to look at the sections and we believe it is an Act that is 
in the best interests of the people of Saskatchewan. So I look 
forward to continued discussion on this Bill in the Committee 
of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 15 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 15 — The 
Credit Union Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s always a 
privilege to rise in this House and debate the legislation that’s 
coming before it. 
 
Bill No. 15, The Credit Union Amendment Act. I think all of us 
that are members of this House recall that it wasn’t that many 
years ago that The Credit Union Act received a major overhaul. 
And it was at that time, I believe, that probably all of us were 
contacted by members of our credit union executives and 
boards across this province trying to impress upon us very 
much some of the changes that were needed in The Credit 
Union Act. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, that those changes were 
probably passed unanimously by this House at that time. 
 
Those changes at that particular time allowed the credit unions 
to modernize, to improve, and to focus on the services that each 
one provided. The Bill before us this session seems to continue 
that work and maybe more or less just to tinker with the major 
Bill that, as I said, was passed previously. 
 
More and more credit unions are becoming an important part of 
Saskatchewan. And probably more so in rural Saskatchewan 
than in urban Saskatchewan for a particular reason that in many 
cases in our rural communities, banks have chosen just to 
remove themselves. 
 
In my constituency, Mr. Speaker, one of the major banks 
basically withdrew from a number of communities and made a 
deal with the credit union. The credit unions bought some of the 
buildings and took over a lot of the services on that particular 
aspect. And then just essentially moved the memberships or the 
accounts over into the credit union unless those people 
consciously wanted them moved elsewhere. 
 
So the fact that they’ve become a large part of Saskatchewan, 
there is no doubt about it. 
 
Unfortunately those areas not served by major national banking 
institutions become more dependent on services provided by 
credit unions, and those people not necessarily inclined in the 
past to do business with a local credit union are now finding 
that credit unions become a valuable service in those places no 
longer adequately served by the banks. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now the reasons why some areas aren’t adequately served by 
banks are many and varied. But I think one of the major ones is 
that we’re seeing a lot of businesses close and people leave. 
And I think that’s an unfortunate thing, Mr. Speaker. And I 
think for that we have to essentially look at this particular 
government and they have to take the blame for those sorts of 
things. 

We discussed today in question period, Mr. Speaker, and you 
will vividly recall, I’m sure, when the question of jobs created 
came into play. We’ve had the members opposite on the 
government side of the House consistently make job 
commitments in tens of thousands of jobs at a time. And then 
they come back some time later and they make another 
commitment in exactly the same area for another . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would like to bring to the member’s 
attention that the subject of debate is second reading of Bill No. 
15, The Credit Union Amendment Act and I would ask him to 
relate his remarks to the Act. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The reasons that 
The Credit Union Act becomes so critical in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, is that they’ve become a more major part of a lot of 
our communities. 
 
And I think that’s one of the things that I would like to spend 
some time on, is that we find that those communities that 
should have actually maintained their size, maybe grown, 
definitely not decreased to the size that they have, basically 
have done so because of the direction this government has 
taken. 
 
Banks need a certain customer base, Mr. Speaker, to justify 
their operations just like any other business. And as we know, 
the credit unions haven’t been spared from that either, because 
we do have certain areas in which our credit unions have also 
moved out of areas because there aren’t enough people left. 
 
And I think that’s very critical to this province. It’s critical to 
almost every piece of legislation that we deal with, is the fact 
that the populations that were there at one time aren’t there 
now. 
 
So The Credit Union Act essentially is dealing with how to 
operate in a different environment than the environment was 10 
years ago, 20 years ago. 
 
For many reasons we see too many of our communities 
shrinking. But we can’t ignore that this is a general worldwide 
view of the members opposite. 
 
The creation of jobs — today, as we discussed — the numbers 
of jobs have actually gone down. We had commitments that 
they would go up, but they haven’t. So obviously, the 
revitalization isn’t taking place in rural or in urban 
Saskatchewan, at least when it comes to building the private 
sector economy in this province. 
 
Recently we heard the minister of Revitalization defend the 
government’s decision to go into direct competition with the 
very successful businesses across this province. And at that 
time the minister of Revitalization said very specifically that the 
only way to keep business and industry and revitalize the 
province was to grow the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It seems a very bizarre thing when in the next breath we’ll have 
this government say that small business is the backbone of this 
province and is a great engine of employment opportunities. 
 
The credit unions, Mr. Speaker, because they are the only 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

 

financial institution available to many people, available in 
Saskatchewan, and because they are also the financial 
institution of choice for many others, Mr. Speaker, we do have 
to ensure that the legislation is in place that our credit unions 
are as nearly perfect — if anything can be that way in our world 
today — as possible so that they can meet the needs of the 
customers in the best way possible. 
 
As the minister stated in his opening comments whenever you 
have a major change to an Act, as we saw at the credit unions a 
couple of years ago, at some time later we need some revisions. 
And that’s what this particular piece of legislation is doing. It’s 
taking that major piece of legislation and bringing it up to date 
with what’s happening now. And as it appears, that’s what’s 
happening here — some basic revisions to make the Act that’s 
in place a little more conducive to the needs of the credit union, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And while we still have some consultation to do on Bill 15, it 
does appear to me that the changes being made here are overall 
positive and making sense. All of us I believe as legislators in 
this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, have had contact with credit union 
members that have told us what they need and where that 
particular organization’s going. 
 
In my community, Mr. Speaker, the credit union recently built a 
brand new building. They invested some three-quarter of a 
million dollars in a new facility. And basically it’s the head 
office of about three or four other branches, and so it’s a key 
part of my community. And so when the members of the 
executive come to see me on the various issues, it’s obviously 
something that I pay close attention to. 
 
This Bill, Mr. Speaker, puts forward a clarification that states 
that the president and vice-president of the credit union can 
indeed sit on the Audit Committee. Now that’s new. That didn’t 
used to be the case. Presidents and vice-presidents at one time 
could not sit on the Audit Committee. And that’s an important 
distinction. 
 
The president and vice-president are the team leaders and 
should basically be included in all aspects of the organization as 
it relates to good operations of the credit union. And while I 
believe it was never the intent of the Act that’s in existence at 
the present time — the major Bill that we passed some years 
ago, as I said — to exclude presidents and vice-presidents from 
the Audit Committee, the amendment put forward here, Mr. 
Speaker, clears up any confusion that may have been due to the 
deficiencies in that Bill that we passed, I believe it was back in 
1998. 
 
Furthermore, this amendment puts forward some changes to the 
conduct review committee. In the case of this amendment and 
this committee, it does appear that the role and the scope of the 
conduct review committee is being greatly expanded. And 
many of the functions, Mr. Speaker, that are currently 
conducted by the board of directors and by the credit union 
appear to be shifted over to the conduct review committee. And 
so I guess this aspect of this piece of legislation is something 
we have some questions about. 
 
The conduct review committee will take . . . form a board of 
directors and function to ensure that proper practices are being 

followed in the transactions of related parties. And I think that’s 
critical. Because as the credit unions become larger in most of 
our communities, they start playing roles in different people’s 
lives and in different businesses that they may not have had a 
role in before. 
 
We need to make sure that proper practices are followed in all 
cases. This includes sound business practice considerations and 
overall goals and vision of the credit union. While this sounds 
good, there’s some practical questions that we do have. For 
example, we’re not told who’s going to sit on this committee. 
 
Now just a minute or two ago, Mr. Speaker, I mentioned the 
fact that the president and vice-president were now allowed to 
sit on some committees they hadn’t been on. So are we going to 
come back in a year or two and say, now we need to define the 
makeup of this committee and who can or cannot sit on that 
committee? 
 
We need to know how will this committee operate. What will 
be the board of directors’ role in the important decisions that are 
now being made by the conduct review committee? 
 
In the explanatory notes that come along with this piece of 
legislation, Mr. Speaker, the responsibility for this work is 
being removed from the board of directors. And no one knows 
better than the members opposite — and we’ve seen that 
happen within the last month or two — what happens when you 
remove too much responsibility from the people who are 
supposed to be ultimately in charge, or from the fact they don’t 
have any idea what’s going on. 
 
If we take the provincial government and what we’ve seen 
recently, we’ve had members elected to this Assembly, and a 
certain number of those and dealing with operations of 
government, not knowing what’s going on. 
 
Of course in the last decade, Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen 
governments move further away from this in an effort to escape 
responsibility. And the term that’s used by this particular 
government is I wouldn’t micromanage, which is doublespeak 
for I don’t know anything and I don’t want to know anything, 
take me on a fishing trip and that’s all I’m to do. 
 
On a daily basis in this Legislative Building we see this. When 
the opposition turns up the heat on a particular point where the 
media want to ask a question of the minister more closely, what 
happens? Either we can’t get a hold of the minister, and when 
he’s supposed to deal with it, he finds someone from his 
bureaucracy to come out and answer the questions. 
 
Back to the credit unions, Mr. Speaker. This is one of the key 
things. And we want to ensure that it doesn’t happen in the 
credit union system as it’s happening in this government. One is 
probably a microcosm of the other one, Mr. Speaker, and the 
last thing we need. 
 
And I think knowing how my credit unions in my community 
operate, I ask them a question, they never say, I don’t want to 
micromanage. They never go ahead and say, well, call up 
somebody we’re paying a salary for, he’ll ask it, I don’t know 
anything about it. They haven’t even asked me to take him on a 
fishing trip, Mr. Speaker. So the credit unions in my 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

constituency operate a whole lot better than the government 
over there. 
 
The other thing is when I speak with members of my credit 
union back home, I get much better attention than I do from the 
members opposite than I’m getting today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again on the surface I believe that most of 
the things that we’re dealing with in this piece of legislation are 
positive and worthwhile. But we do have to take some more 
time for some more calls and consultation. And so at this time, 
Mr. Speaker, I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Hagel that Bill No. 29 — The Student 
Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s certainly a 
pleasure to enter into the debate on Bill No. 29, An Act to 
amend the Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Act, 1985. 
 
It’s somewhat ironic that we are discussing student aid and 
student loans and those sorts of things in view of the recent 
announcements by both the . . . our two provincial universities 
of some pretty significant increases in tuition fees. The U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) announced that they’ll have an 
increase in tuition fees in the upcoming academic year of some 
15 per cent, and the U of R (University of Regina) has, in more 
recent days, has announced an increase of an average of 9 per 
cent for the upcoming academic year. 
 
So what does this mean to students who will be attending 
university this fall? And what it will mean is significantly 
higher student debt. 
 
And the minister said in his introduction of the Bill . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to my 
colleague from Last Mountain-Touchwood for allowing me to 
interrupt him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seated in the east gallery are 20 students from 
Hillside School in Estevan. They are grade 4 students and they 
are accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Barlow; their 
chaperones, Mrs. Doan, Mrs. Karas, Mrs. Stepp, and Mrs. 
Vlielander. And I hope I pronounced those names correctly. 
 
I will be meeting with them shortly, Mr. Speaker, for 
refreshments and to have a little visit. They can ask a few 
questions, and hopefully, I can have some answers for them. 

But I would like all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 29 — The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Hart: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, what 
the effect of these higher tuition fees will mean — significantly 
higher student debt for students upon graduation. 
 
We’re told by the University of Saskatchewan — and I’m sure 
the U of R will be forced to make similar adjustments in the 
next academic year — in the year 2002-2003, the U of S has 
said that they will be . . . unless there’s significant increases in 
operating grants from this government, they’ll be forced to 
increase their tuition fees significantly again. And I’m sure the 
U of R will be faced with that same situation. 
 
What are some of the reasons for this significant increase in 
tuition fees this year as opposed to some of the other years? It’s 
the chronic underfunding by this government in the last 10 
years to our universities. 
 
The president of the U of S recently provided some figures, I 
believe it was to the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce, that in 
constant dollars, ’98 dollars, that the funding level was in 1990 
to the two universities was the equivalent of $205 million and it 
fell to a low of, in 1998, of $163 million. A significant decrease 
at a time when costs of operation are increasing on the yearly 
basis, and particularly in the last two years, the energy costs that 
people of Saskatchewan are faced with, the universities are not 
immune to those kinds of increases. In fact I’ve been told that in 
the last two years their energy budgets have doubled. And yet 
we’re seeing only a small increase this year of 3.5 per cent, 
which is certainly not enough to offset the increases in 
operating costs and also make any allowance for recouping 
some of the work . . . to address some of the work that’s been 
neglected in past years. 
 
(15:30) 
 
We have, particularly at the U of S, we have older buildings 
that require renovation and repair and upkeep. And the U of R 
also points out, they have told me, they said they’re not immune 
to having repair and maintenance done on their buildings, 
although they are somewhat newer. They still have buildings 
that are 25 and 30 years old. 
 
And this 3.5 per cent increase in provincial operating grants 
certainly doesn’t come near to meeting the mark, in their cases. 
 
It might be interesting to look at some of the actual increases in 
tuition fees. I’ve been provided by this information by the 
University of Saskatchewan. Granted their increases averaged 
out to 15 per cent, but if you look at some specific colleges, 
they have significantly — some of those colleges have 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

 

significantly higher increases in tuition fees. 
 
You take the College of Pharmacy for instance, they’re going 
from a tuition fee is the last academic year of $3,978, to this 
upcoming academic year the tuition fee will be $5,110, an 
increase of $1,132. I believe that works out to 25 to 28 per cent 
increase. 
 
You look at some of the other colleges. The College of 
Medicine is looking at an increase in tuition fees of $994, the 
College of Nursing, $512. And that’s just for this year. And as 
I’ve mentioned, the U of S is looking at having to increase their 
tuition fees next year by most likely a similar amount so that 
they can address some of those problems that haven’t been 
addressed in the past. 
 
So this all translates into a significantly higher student debt that 
our students will be having to address once they graduate. And I 
have a number of students have talked to me in the past few 
months about the problems with their existing student loans. 
 
It seems that on a weekly basis I get calls from graduates who 
are having great difficulty meeting their commitments under the 
student loans that they incurred while attending, whether it be 
universities or SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) or some of our private colleges. And 
now if you add on these significant increases in tuition fees, 
that’s going to make the situation so much worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It might be interesting to look at some figures as to how the 
increases in tuition fees compare to the increases in operating 
grants to the universities. I’m told that the increase in tuition fee 
at the U of S is expected to generate some 7.3 million additional 
dollars in student tuition. And the increase in operating grant is 
only $4.7 million. 
 
The U of R, their increase in tuition fees should generate an 
additional approximately 1.9 million where the operating grant 
is somewhat less than that. I believe it’s approximately 8 
million. 
 
So if you just take the two universities and look at the total 
number of dollars that they will have to extract from their 
students in the increase to tuition fees, it comes to a total of $9.2 
million. And if you add the combined increase in operating 
grants to the two universities that only amounts to some $6.5 
million. 
 
So what this tells me, Mr. Speaker, is that the universities will 
be forced to extract some $2.7 million more from their students 
in increase in tuition fees than they get in operating grants from 
the provincial government. 
 
I’m also told that the tuition fees will be increasing at SIAST. 
And so this is adding an overall burden to our students and 
increasing the debt loads to our students. And so when the 
minister says that with this new arrangement that he’s 
negotiating with the federal government to have a one-stop 
student loan program, it’s going to be a much better student 
loan program — well it better be. Because the students will 
certainly have a greater need. They’ll be incurring a greater 
debt. 
 

So as I said, they certainly should be looking for a better 
program with perhaps some greater bursaries and so on to 
reduce the overall student debt. 
 
I’d like to look at this time, Mr. Speaker, at some of the things 
that students have lost that were there for them or at least they 
thought would be there for them, and in fact, when reality set in, 
they weren’t there. 
 
The millennium scholarship comes to mind. Many of the 
students when they heard about this federal millennium 
scholarship, which in fact is a bursary, were quite excited and 
felt that their student loans would be written down and they’d 
be the net benefactor. 
 
Well in fact, when they received their statements from the 
millennium scholarship people they found that their student 
loans really didn’t . . . the amount of student loan really didn’t 
change because what happened is this government backed their 
provincial bursaries down by an equal amount of the 
millennium scholarship. And so there was really no net benefit 
to the students. 
 
And then in the last sitting of this legislature, the last session, 
this government introduced a . . . made some changes to the 
six-month interest free provision with the provincial student 
loan and the students lost that so that they are now required to 
pay interest on their student loans once they’ve graduated, 
whether they have a job or not. 
 
And also during the ’99 election, Mr. Speaker, there was 
promises made by both parties on that side of the House about 
free tuition and all those sorts of things. Well we all know what 
happened to those promises, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So as I said, there was some things that students perhaps had a 
moment of hopefulness and then it was ripped away from them. 
 
When you look closely at this Bill, it’s not a very long Bill, it’s 
an amendment but there are some questions that we certainly 
have, Mr. Speaker, with regards to the Bill. It might . . . I 
suppose we’d feel more comfortable in moving this Bill along if 
we had an idea of what this new student loan program looked 
like. I understand the minister will be bringing that forward 
some time later on and we will know exactly what the new 
program will look like. 
 
Of course as I mentioned earlier, with the higher tuition fees the 
students will be incurring a higher debt. There’s also some of 
the effects of this government’s action in the last couple of 
years that are having some negative effects on post-secondary 
education in this province. 
 
And as I mentioned, the higher debt would be one of them; but 
also we’re seeing, whether we like to admit it or not — and I’m 
very sad to have to make this observation — but I think we are 
seeing a slip in the quality of the education that is being offered 
to our students. 
 
You look at the Maclean’s ratings and certainly there are some 
problems with the way they rate things and so on, but I’ve had 
it said to me by more than a few people that there is a basis and 
a reason why those Maclean’s ratings of our two universities 



1650 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

are and why they are slipping in those ratings. And I think a lot 
of it has to do with the commitment this government has to 
post-secondary education. 
 
And what this is meaning, what this means to some of our high 
school graduates that are looking at our two universities — 
particularly our top graduates, they’re looking at having to pay 
now higher tuition fees at our universities and SIAST — they 
look at the Maclean’s rating and it does have an impact. We can 
try and say it doesn’t but it does have an impact. And so when 
they look at these two things, they might be saying to 
themselves, maybe I should look more closely at some of the 
other universities in the country and perhaps even outside our 
country. 
 
And in fact, some of them are attending other universities and 
therefore we are losing those bright, young minds. And that has 
an effect on the number of graduate students that we have down 
the road. And our universities are telling us that that’s one of 
our problems with research and not being able to attract some of 
these research dollars is that we don’t have a sufficient number 
of graduate students in the wide variety of programs to attract 
some of these federal grants and so on. 
 
So all of these things impact, and there’s a chain effect that 
takes place, Mr. Speaker, and I think this government has to 
look at that very seriously and make a commitment to 
post-secondary education. And the post-secondary education 
institutions have told me that 3.5 per cent is not a significant 
commitment to post-secondary education. 
 
Now getting back to the Bill, there are a number of issues as I 
said, we have . . . and concerns we have with the Bill, one being 
we haven’t seen the new program. Also, I’m wondering, is there 
anything in the new student loan program that addresses debt 
relief? 
 
The middle-income family scenario, that’s a problem where 
middle-income families have children that want to attend . . . 
whether it be SIAST or university or one of the private colleges, 
and apply for a student loan. The family income is too high so 
they don’t qualify, yet the families don’t have the resources to 
send their students on to post-secondary education institutions. 
And so some of them are falling by the wayside, or having to go 
to banks and so on, and paying, you know, and paying interest 
from the time they take the loan, and those sorts of things. So 
has that issue been addressed? 
 
Also one of the concerns that has been raised to me by 
graduates is that it seems like the repayment of student loans is 
geared to those graduates who go on and get a job and have a 
monthly income, and thereby they have a . . . can set up a 
repayment schedule based on monthly payments and that sort of 
thing, and that seems to work well for the majority of them. 
 
There are . . . as I mentioned earlier, there are a number of them 
who for one reason or another, perhaps haven’t got a job or 
have a job that isn’t providing them with the type of income 
they had anticipated and are having some real problems 
servicing their student loan. 
 
But there are also . . . there’s a group of graduates who have 
gone on to set up businesses, and the repayment of the student 

loan and the provisions within the program really don’t meet 
very well with those type of people who really . . . When they 
set up a business, quite often there’s a period of six months or a 
year perhaps where income is quite . . . the income generated by 
the business is quite low and they really don’t have the ability 
to service their student loan in the way they were required. And 
so they’re running into some problems. 
 
Yet given a bit of a grace period, I guess is what they are asking 
for, that they could see their businesses taking off and they 
could perhaps repay their student loan more quickly than many 
other students. So I guess that’s a concern that I would have 
with this new program and I would like to see perhaps some of 
the details on that. 
 
And also, in the Bill, it mentions that the minister can pay 
expenses that are associated with the student aid fund. And I 
suppose I would like to know what type of expenses qualify for 
payment with this amendment and what type of an impact it 
would have on the total fund. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, until we have some of these questions 
answered and we are consulting with some third parties, I 
would move that we adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
 (15:45) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. First 
of all to my immediate left is Stuart Kramer, which is our 
deputy minister. And directly behind Mr. Kramer is Joe 
Muldoon, the director of environmental protection. And to the 
right of Mr. Muldoon and to my immediate back is Donna 
Johnson, and Donna is the manager of the financial, 
management, and planning of corporate services. And to my 
immediate right is Hugh Hunt, who is the director of regional 
services. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials here today. 
 
I think what I’ll start off first in regarding questions, is a letter 
that I just received from the Whelan Bay Cottage Owner’s 
Association. 
 
And as you know, they are in some heated contesting regarding 
the forestry up in that area, where Weyerhaeuser wants to cut. 
 
And I just want to read into the record, Mr. Minister, a letter 
that was sent to you — I believe you have a copy of it — and it 
reads as follows. And I quote: 
 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1651 

 

Dear Sir: 
 
The Executive Board Of Directors Whelan Bay Cottage 
Owner’s Association met on May 20th. Your letter of 
January 24, 2001 was discussed along with the twenty-year 
plan for Prince Albert Forest Management. The Board 
expressed concern that there has been no written response 
to our position letter of December 15th, 2000, from SERM 
or (from) Weyerhaeuser. 
 
In your letter you indicated you asked Mr. Al Willcocks, 
Director of Forestry Ecosystems Branch, to meet with the 
Whelan Bay Cottage Owner’s Association. To date we 
have not heard from Mr. Willcocks. 
 
In view of the lack of written details regarding verbal 
presentations, it was the desire of the board to have all 
agreements in writing. We respectfully request a written 
response from the Government of Saskatchewan on this 
issue. 

 
To that, Mr. Minister, have you sent a letter to the cabin 
owner’s association, Whelan Bay cabin owner’s association in 
regards to the 20-year plan of Weyerhaeuser and the plans for 
forest cutting in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Chairman, I want to just point out 
is I would ask the member for a copy of the letter because I 
can’t make reference to the letter today. I don’t have it on me. 
But what I will do is, if you forward me a copy of yours, I’ll 
certainly get a timely response to that. 
 
What I want to say to the Whelan Bay Cottage Owner’s 
Association is that we believe in consultation. And one of the 
things and the challenges, as the member can appreciate; we 
have to make sure that we consult with as many stakeholders as 
possible. 
 
And in the province of Saskatchewan the one company that you 
mentioned, the Weyerhaeuser company, they have been doing a 
tremendous amount of work to try and ensure that not only 
stakeholders’ interests are heard but they also balance the 
environmental and the economic demands that the natural forest 
stands certainly provide for Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 
So one of the things I think we should be proud of as a province 
is not the fact that, you know, that we have forestry, but the fact 
that it’s been done in such a fashion that it’s recognized 
throughout the world as being a sustainable, good use of our 
forest. And I think different groups like the Whelan Bay 
Cottage Owners Association could certainly take part of the 
pride associated with that status that the company has achieved 
for themselves. 
 
So again, consultation is something that we want to do. If you 
forward me a copy of the letter as opposed to me going back to 
my office and tracking it down, we’ll get one of our officials to 
give a major response to the cottage owners association. 
Thanks. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Yes, I 
will forward you a copy of this letter here. 
 

Also myself and the member from Saskatchewan Rivers 
attended a meeting at Whelan Bay. That was some time ago. 
And at that time the members there said that Weyerhaeuser 
would not do nothing until their 20-year plan was submitted. 
Well their 20-year plan, forestry plan has been submitted. And 
that’s why I believe the cabin owners are anxious to find out 
what your stand is and where you’re going to go with this in 
regards to Weyerhaeuser’s 20-year plan and the problems in 
and around the Whelan Bay area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
just want to point out that the Weyerhaeuser’s 20-year plan has 
been submitted and as a minister, I have approved the plan. 
 
There’s no question that there are conditions on the plan. And 
the conditions of the plan very clearly have the discussion of 
insurance, that we have long-term sustainability of our forest 
activity in the province as a whole. There is conditions in terms 
of how they construct roads. There’s conditions there with the 
reforestation. They also have annual cutting plans that they 
have to submit to us. 
 
And once we get the letter from you and get this all straightened 
away, we’d be able to let the cottage owners know as to terms 
of their submission of plans for logging and harvesting, that 
they would have some prior information as to what the 
company plans to do in that specific area. 
 
But without the letter and without consultation with the 
Weyerhaeuser in terms of trying to find what year they’re going 
to cut there and what their plans are — I’m not sure if they’re 
there yet but I imagine that they are planning on doing some 
cutting in the area — that they have to submit that to us. 
 
And certainly as per our discussion with the companies and the 
stakeholders that they’re . . . consultation will be undertaken. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just got the page 
to get a copy of that letter to you. 
 
When I was at that meeting, Mr. Minister, I noticed that a lot of 
the concerns regarding that area was mostly in the way of how 
the logging was taking place. And a lot of them objected to the 
fact . . . that they felt that clear cutting that whole area was not 
appropriate and if they would look at maybe ways of select 
cutting rather than clear cutting, I think that group of people 
could be worked with in regarding to obtaining the forestry in 
that area. 
 
But I’ll let you read that letter and deal with it with the cabin 
owners association, but I would stress that you get back to them 
as soon as possible with a letter so that they can address the 
people in and around there. 
 
Now I’d like to move on, Mr. Minister, to around the 
questioning — it’s an area that I hear quite frequently in my 
area — and it’s to do with forest fringe land. Now you know, 
Mr. Minister, I’ve asked some questions regarding forest fringe 
land, questions of late and I would like to take it a little bit 
further. To the members here and around, what is the definition 
of forest fringe land and where is it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

Just to point out as well, the letter we got from the Whelan Bay 
Cottage Owners Association was dated May 22, and that’s 
probably one of the reasons why we haven’t got it — it’s only 
been a couple of weeks. 
 
So what we want to do is certainly make sure that when we 
respond to a letter that we respond as quickly as we can. And I 
know that the owners association, or the cottage owners 
association can appreciate we do have quite a number of letters 
that come our way. So we’ll certainly try and do that in a timely 
fashion. But two weeks is something that we will try and do our 
very best to respond to some of these questions or this 
correspondence quickly as we can. But more time is certainly 
needed. 
 
In relation to your question about what is the definition of forest 
fringe land. We have a line across the province of 
Saskatchewan that is deemed the provincial forest line, 
provincial forest lands. And of course, there’s is a line that goes 
across the province. 
 
In reference to the forest fringe land, it’s any forested land south 
of the provincial forest line. And for further clarification, we 
can certainly forward you a map that indicates where the 
provincial forest lines are. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regards to forest fringe land, who governs that land and who 
administrates forest fringe land? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I guess the question of who governs the land certainly has a lot 
of bearing as to who owns the land. We know that there’s a lot 
of private lands that are in the area that we would consider 
forest fringe. 
 
We know that Agriculture and Food also have some of the lands 
that are available in that area, and certainly some of the lands 
are also under our SERM mandate. And as well there’s also 
wildlife habitat protection areas as well. So there is a wide 
variety of owners, and certainly those four I would deem as the 
primary ones. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Now 
would it be fair to say though that SERM, which is your 
department, governs the biggest portion of that land? In other 
words, forest fringe land is basically governed by your 
department. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
Just to point out that I would . . . Again this is taking a guess. 
It’s a very hazardous guess. But I would put the guess that 
SERM certainly is involved with the harvesting of the wood in 
the sense that they would permit some of the people that wished 
to harvest the trees. That would come through SERM. 
 
I would point out that about two-thirds of the 
government-owned land in that area is under ag lands and 
one-third is SERM. And I guess that’s a guess. 
 
And there’s no question that in terms of harvesting as a whole 

in the province, that SERM would certainly have a very strong 
role to play in permitting the harvest to proceed. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chair. 
Can you identify to me who are the users of forest fringe land? 
In other words, all the users of that land that occupy and use it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The two areas that we have in terms of 
some of the uses of the forest fringe land, if that’s the question, 
are ranchers like the ag leases that are out there, which include 
grazers, of course. There’s also some of the timber companies 
that use some of the lands in and around the forest fringe area. 
And there’s also some of the recreation users of the province as 
well. So those are the basically four primary areas of use for the 
forest fringe lands. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I just 
want to read into the record, Mr. Chair, a letter that was sent to 
me by the cattle grazers of Shellbrook, Holbein, Nisbet forest 
fringe area. 
 
And it states: 
 

Not all RMs in the Nisbet forest areas are taxed cattle 
grazers. There’s only a few of them. The land is owned by 
the government (the provincial government, which is 
SERM, your department) and it controls when the cattle 
can pastured in this area. 
 
When the cattle grazers purchase a permit from your 
department, they are allowed to graze cattle in that section 
of area. But the only allowable time that they can pasture 
that cattle is a maximum of 145 days, depending on 
weather. We have no control over the personal usage of the 
forest fringe area. Gates cannot be locked. Roads and trails 
cannot be blocked. 
 

Just to point out to you, Mr. Minister, that there are other users 
of this forest fringe land. Those users are woodcutters, gravel 
haulers, skiers, snowmobilers, ATVers (all-terrain vehicle); in 
fact, Mr. Minister, even your department uses that land for 
hunting seasons. 
 
My question to you is that these areas . . . or not this area . . . 
this cattle grazing permit holders as of 1996 are being taxed on 
this land. 
 
Now I’ll just give you a history of this tax. In 1996, SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities ) came to 
SERM — which you were not minister at that time — and 
wanted the SERM department to allow RMs (rural 
municipality) to tax forest fringe land. 
 
Now in recollection to that, Mr. Minister, they are paying tax on 
a year-round basis on every quarter that’s on their permit. And 
the permits are instituted by your department, which is SERM. 
They are only — the cattle grazers — are only allowed to use 
that land for a max of 145 days, depending on weather; but they 
are taxed for one full year on that area. 
 
And like I just mentioned before, there are other users of that 
said area regarding skiers, snowmobilers, woodcutters, loggers 
— in fact, Mr. Minister, even your department. Now why 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

 

should one group of people, in other words the cattle grazers, be 
taxed on a year-round basis when they only use the land for a 
maximum of 145 days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just want to point out that there is the cattle grazers that are 
being taxed . . . in terms of some of your questions, I can report 
to you that this is not a provincial tax. This is not a 
SERM-imposed tax. The RMs are the one that placed the tax on 
these permits. 
 
So what I would encourage you to do is that, while SERM has 
very little involvement with this, I would encourage you during 
the Municipal Affairs estimates that perhaps you could direct 
your question to the minister at that time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I 
understand that the RMs are not under your jurisdiction, that 
they’re under the Municipal Affairs jurisdiction. And I have 
talked to the minister regarding this. 
 
The fact remains though, Mr. Minister, that the land that is 
being used by the cattle grazers is your land. And the people in 
your area that control that land control the users of that land by 
handing out permits, which is a fair and proper way of doing it. 
 
But somewhere along the line, the RMs now have the autonomy 
to tax that land which they don’t own, which you own. Is it your 
idea as SERM minister and officials to drive the cattle grazers 
out of that land which you own? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Just remind hon. members that in 
committee we are a little more flexible as to putting the 
comments to the Chair and through the Chair. But that’s 
generally agreed that we are not personalizing the debate. So I 
would just encourage hon. members to put their question to the 
Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question, 
Mr. Chair. I just want to point out that the member is correct, 
this is SERM land. But any land within a RM is taxed; and 
upon disposition of any permits in the area by SERM, 
automatically the RM is going to be taxed in that particular 
area. 
 
And again these are questions beyond SERM’s mandate. As I 
mentioned before, the province and the Municipal Affairs 
branch are probably . . . And SARM agreed to this process and 
that’s probably the best place to direct the question. 
 
But no question, when SERM has a disposition on land, that 
land is taxed by the RM. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I will 
try and direct all the questions through you, sir. 
 
In regard to your latest response, Mr. Minister, I know the said 
land is your land. You know that. Also that the RM . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. The hon. member could please put all 
directions to the Chair. 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will rephrase the 
question. 
 
Mr. Minister, we know that SERM is the governor of the said 
land. I know that the RMs are under the jurisdiction of 
Municipal Affairs. There are questions I will be asking 
Municipal Affairs in regard to this. 
 
But I just want to point out to you, Mr. Minister, that the said 
land which is where the cattle grazers operate, the taxes that 
they are being charged on there to date is not only municipal tax 
but it is also education tax. So if you couple the education, the 
municipal which is Municipal Affairs, plus the permit which is 
SERM responsibility, that adds up to a lot more than what they 
would pay if they went to community pastures. 
 
And so, it brings me into questions which I asked you . . . 
pardon me, asked the minister some time ago, in regards to the 
Minister of Environment and Resource Management, how 
many land grazing permits were issued to users of forest fringe 
land by SERM in the year 1999, year 2000. And the answer was 
146. Now also, Mr. Minister, previous to that year, there was 
approximately 165 permits issued to cattle grazers of the same 
said land. 
 
Now interesting, Mr. Minister . . . to the Minister of 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management, how 
many land grazing permits have been issued to users of forest 
fringe land by your department in the year 2001-2002? And, 
Mr. Chair, the answer to that question was 10. 
 
So you can see, Mr. Minister, that the number of permits has 
diminished substantially and the reason is that there is 
municipal and education tax charged to this land, which the 
land in question is governed and operated by SERM 
department. 
 
So I guess I’m wondering, what is the department’s decision in 
regarding the cattle grazing operations in the said land and what 
will be their, I guess, longevity in regards to this said land? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just want to point out that there is no question that the 
educational tax and the municipal tax — as I mentioned time 
and time again, Mr. Chair, to the member — that that’s 
certainly an issue that the Municipal Affairs portfolio would be 
in the best position to answer. 
 
In terms of land grazing permits and do we support that? Of 
course we do. We support multi-use of all the SERM lands that 
are out there, and try and balance as many interests as we can as 
a province. 
 
But what I will point out is the normal year, being 
approximately 165 grazing permits being given or being issued. 
That’s pretty well a normal year. And the member points out 
that as a result of some of his questions that he submitted in the 
Assembly for this year, for 2001-2002, the number is 10. 
 
And the reason for that is that it’s been about two weeks since 
the grazing period has begun and so the question that you posed 
to me in the Assembly — if I can take a wild guess here, is 
probably no more than a couple of weeks ago — that’s when I 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

would assume again that the grazing permits were not applied 
for. 
 
So the contrast of last year versus this year, being only 10 this 
year and being 165 last year, is I would say that that was due to 
the fact that the grazing season only began two weeks ago and 
we anticipate that there’ll be more applications coming forward. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regards to the questions I asked, that was roughly about two 
weeks ago when I asked them. And I know that the cattle going 
into the cattle . . . or grazing operations may just start of late. 
 
I also want to point out to the minister that, because of the dry 
season, basely in the northwest, but along the forest fringe area, 
that a lot of the cattle grazing owners are not allowed to put 
their cattle in yet because virtually there is no grass. 
 
This comes back to my statement that the permits issued by 
SERM department only allow for cattle operations to own 
permits for a max of 145 days. Well as you can see, Mr. 
Minister, that with the dry season we have, that number of days 
is going to be diminished quite substantially. So therefore they 
may only get a max of a hundred days, or 90 days, or whatever. 
 
The question still that I’m trying to impose is the fact that 
because they’re only limited to a number of days to utilize that 
area, they are taxed on a full year, which then adds up the cost 
that much more in regards to the paying of permits plus 
education tax and also municipal tax. And it still begs the 
question, Mr. Minister, that they are, the cattle grazers, the only 
ones paying that tax. 
 
Have you got any comments regarding that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Just for the record again, I want to point out that the issues of 
taxation certainly is between the permittee and the RM. And I 
understand that there’s an appeal process for the taxes to be 
paid on an annual basis, whereas the person that’s paying the 
tax has an appeal process in which they can go and appeal their 
taxes based on some of the arguments that the member has 
forwarded. 
 
I will point out that there’s no question that in the province that 
there is weather conditions. Some areas are wet and some areas 
are poor in terms of moisture. There’s some very dry areas. And 
again this is something that these arguments have to be 
forwarded to the appropriate places. 
 
And again I would tell the member that the appeal process for 
taxation would certainly be handled between the RM, the 
permittee, and certainly the people that would be involved from 
our perspective would be the department of Municipal 
Government. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I just 
want to go back a few years to a rural municipality convention 
that was held in 1994 in . . . where Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management convention . . . the Environment and 
Resource Management agreed to develop a process to assist 
RMs’ collection of tax arrears originating from assessments on 
or with SERM permits. Has this been followed through? 

Now I know it happened a few years ago and you were not 
minister. But has this been followed through and is it your 
department . . . pardon me, SERM’s department that will follow 
up on this to assist RMs in the collection of taxes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. Just for the 
record, I’m glad that the member certainly pointed out that I 
was not the minister at that time. In 1994 I was pursuing a 
hockey career. Of course I didn’t make out that well. 
 
But just to point out that as a result of the RM convention 1994, 
the process of tax arrears on permits was followed through. We 
followed through for a few years. And a permittee approached 
the Ombudsman and appealed this particular process. And 
certainly the Ombudsman then turned around and said that this 
process was beyond SERM’s mandate and that’s when SERM 
stopped. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I’d just 
like to read a little bit out of the SARM 2000 mid-term report. 
And this resolution actually comes from the RM of Shellbrook. 
And it states, and I quote: 
 

WHEREAS, Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management has withdrawn all assistance for 
municipalities who are experiencing problems with the 
collection of taxes on forest (fringe land and) grazing 
permits and hay permits; and 
 
WHEREAS, this has caused considerable concern for . . . 
municipalities within . . . (those) boundaries SERM has 
been in the practice of issuing permits in the names of (the 
incorporated) . . . bodies, 
 
. . . BE IT RESOLVED, that SERM reinstate its policy of 
refusing to re-issue permits (and) where the permittee has 
not paid taxes in (the) . . . amount equal to the previous 
years levy or that SERM guarantee the taxes on these 
permits in . . . (such a) manner (that) as Saskatchewan 
Agriculture is doing in regards to the lands they lease. 
 

Now, Mr. Minister, can you give a response regarding that? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well thanks for the question. There’s 
no question that in the six or seven years that this issue has been 
before us, I would point out that it’s very important that we 
continue looking at some of the arguments that are coming 
forward. On one hand, a few minutes ago, we talked about the 
grazers getting the permit and having to pay the tax and so on 
and so forth. And now we’re going down the road of, well if the 
permittee doesn’t pay the tax, then SERM should cancel the 
permit. 
 
What clearly this is, is it becomes an issue again where in 1994, 
when the Ombudsman was involved, the Ombudsman said that 
this was beyond SERM’s mandate. In the year 2000, the 
situation is still the same. It is beyond SERM’s mandate. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in 
regards to the resolution I just presented before, there was a 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

 

response by the Minister of SERM, the now Minister of SERM, 
and I’d just like to read that into the record. 
 
Response from, and I quote, Mr. Chair: 
 

Response from the Hon. Buckley Belanger, Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management: 
 
SERM recognizes that rural municipalities have the 
legislative authority to assess taxes on grazing and hay 
permit issues on forest fringe lands. The authority comes 
from The Provincial Lands Act, (SERM) however it has no 
legal authority to collect or enforce the payment of 
municipal taxes or tax arrears. SERM’s legislative mandate 
and activities are directly related to resource management. 

 
Basically what it’s stating here, Mr. Minister, is that it’s your 
mandate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Again I want to point out that SERM’s 
mandate, I concur, that it’s resource management. And when we 
issue permits, there’s certainly dollars that are achieved to help 
us reach for those goals, however, SERM’s mandate is not tax 
collection. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. The 
reason I brought this up is because there is a number of people 
in and around the northwest area who have grazing permits on 
land, and some of them are in a position right now where they 
are being summoned to court. 
 
And I would just like to read a letter from a group of people 
from the Onion Lake area regarding that and some of the 
problems they state regarding the forest fringe land which they 
believe is the jurisdiction of SERM because where they’re 
grazing their cattle, it is on the SERM land. And I’ll just read 
into the record, Mr. Chair, if I can. 
 

From the time we entered into the grazing agreement with 
the Saskatchewan government in 1996, up until 1995 we 
were not taxed on this government-owned land. The first 
year that the Loon Lake RM slapped a tax on, they very 
graciously reduced the amount in order to reduce the shock. 
The next year we had to pay the full tax because the RM 
made an agreement with SERM which disallowed their 
granting us a permit unless the taxes were paid. 
 
This we took to the Ombudsman and that policy was 
revoked. Then after two years of now payment of tax, we 
were threatened with legal action. (So again they had to pay 
all of the taxes including tax arrears.) 
 
To our way of thinking, this tax is totally unjust. First of 
all, we are not the landowner, the Saskatchewan 
government is. 
 
Secondly, we are given nothing in return for these taxes — 
no roads nor bridges, no fences. We do not ask even the 
RM for permission to build fences. We ask SERM. There 
are no schools, yet we are taxed full education tax. No land 
assessment. We pay the same for every quarter, whether it 
be a lake, a slough, a muskeg, a forest or whatever. How 
can a fair tax be levied when a complete and accurate 

assessment was never done before? 
 
Thirdly, we have no control whatsoever over whoever 
might use the same area that we graze. Outfitters, hunters, 
trappers, snowmobilers, quad enthusiasts, berry pickers, 
etc., all of them pay no taxes. 
 
Finally, we pay a full year’s taxes but are only permitted 
use of this land for approximately five months. 

 
Now, Mr. Chair, I know, to the minister, that maybe some of 
my questions should be directed to Municipal Affairs and I will 
direct them to him. But the problem still lies that the land in 
question is governed by SERM — it is SERM land. That’s 
where the cattle-grazers are utilizing it. How can another 
jurisdiction like the RMs have the autonomy to tax another 
jurisdiction of land? 
 
Also, Mr. Minister, when you pay tax, you expect something in 
return for that tax you’ve paid. In SERM land there could be 
nothing done with that land — there could be no bridges built, 
there could be no roads. The government-owned land, which is 
SERM land, wants the land to be just as it is because it is public 
property open to everybody. 
 
So therefore, Mr. Minister, the cattle-grazing permit issuers are 
utilizing that land, they are paying tax on that land, but are 
absolutely getting no services whatsoever for it. That’s where 
the unfair system comes in. 
 
There are many, many users of the said land who are not being 
taxed. Why is it that the cattle-grazing permit holders are the 
only ones paying tax on a full year of taxation for only usage of 
the land for a maximum of 145 days? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
I just want to point out that it is common in Saskatchewan for 
occupied Crown lands to be taxed by the RMs. I think it’s very 
important, and I’m glad the member concurs that these 
questions need to be directed to the minister of municipal 
services. 
 
And what I will point out though is that 1996 or 1997, 
somewhere in that time frame, the RMs found out that they 
could tax the lessees on this particular land. So the RMs did tax 
the lessees. So as a result of that, this is clearly an issue between 
the lessees and SARM, and the RMs and the lessees need to 
work these things out. And again that jurisdiction is beyond 
SERM’s mandate, as I’ve indicated time and time again. 
 
But I’ll point out that there’s no question that SERM is always 
very supportive of multi-uses of our land. As you know, land 
doesn’t grow overnight. We have to make sure we’re able to 
balance as many interests on all lands throughout the province 
and we’re certainly trying to do that. 
 
But what I will point out is — and I’m glad the member concurs 
— that the majority of the taxation issues will certainly be dealt 
with through the RMs and through the Municipal Affairs 
portfolio within this government and not by SERM. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, in 
regard to that then, maybe what I’ll do then is direct more of the 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard June 7, 2001 

 

questions that I have regarding forest fringe land at another time 
when I meet with the minister from Municipal Affairs. 
 
I still believe that the department of renewable and natural 
resources still has a part to play in regards to the questions I’m 
asking. But therefore, I will ask those questions to them and 
then we’ll go from there. 
 
I would like to go on now, Mr. Minister, to the chronic wasting 
disease in regards to animals in and around the area of 
Saskatchewan. And I know the SERM department came to our 
caucus to point out what’s happening in the way of chronic 
wasting disease in mule deer, whitetail, and elk. And the SERM 
minister at that time pointed out that they were going to be 
taking some animals around the Marsden area; I believe in the 
neighbourhood of 200 to 220 animals. Has this happened and 
can you concur on what’s been taking place to now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
There’s no question that in terms of the challenge of the chronic 
wasting throughout the province — as a result of some of the 
heads submitted by the various stakeholders, various users in 
the province — that we had a tremendous amount of heads over 
the past three years that have been tested. 
 
And what we wanted to do is to make sure that we are able to 
determine whether chronic wasting is in the wild, and if we are 
able to determine that as to whether . . . what the extent is. So 
that work continues. And as you can know, several months ago 
we announced that there was one positive test out of the heads 
submitted by the hunters. 
 
And so to point out that one of our strategies was to look at the 
other issue of where the deer was found and to have a 
concentrated area of harvest. And I can report to you that 213 of 
the animals were taken — 71 by Lloydminster and the 
remaining from the Manitou hills area. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Of the 
213 which you just mentioned regarding animals that were 
taken, has there been any test results of these said animals to 
date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well certainly there’s no question that 
one of the first things that we wanted to do as a result of chronic 
wasting — and SERM certainly has led that file on a regular 
basis — is we increased the testing, as I mentioned, for the past 
number of years. And I can report that we anticipate further 
tests in the field to really begin to study the prevalence of 
chronic wasting in the wild. 
 
Certainly on the positive news, all the testing has been done. Of 
the 213 heads that were tested, 212 proved negative. There’s 
one suspicious case that we have sent further down to Ontario 
for further testing and to confirm if there’s a problem. So 
certainly in anticipation of this, I can say that 212 heads proved 
negative. There’s one suspicious case that we have to try and 
get confirmed by next week and of course that test is being 
done in Ontario. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 

regards to SERM’s department taking animals on the 
Saskatchewan side to be sent away for testing, has the Alberta 
government instituted regulations to take animals on their side 
that would also be taken and sent down for testing? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the Minister of Finance on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask leave of the 
House to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. I see up in the 
Speaker’s gallery this afternoon, Hugh Harradence, Q.C. 
(Queen’s Counsel) who’s a well-known lawyer in the city of 
Prince Albert and visiting Regina today for a case but staying 
over for the meeting coming up of the Bar Association. And 
Hugh is the past president of the Canadian Bar Association, 
Saskatchewan branch and well known in legal circles and some 
other circles. 
 
And I’d like all members to join with me in welcoming Hugh 
Harradence to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Humboldt on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — With leave also to . . . 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Party official opposition, we too would like to 
welcome Mr. Hugh Harradence to the Assembly today. And 
we’re pleased to see that you’re watching proceedings, listening 
carefully, and hope certainly that you do enjoy and benefit from 
the afternoon. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Subvote (ER01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I just 
wanted to point out that the collaboration with our neighbouring 
provinces is very important. Chronic wasting, of course as you 
know, doesn’t know any borders so the collaboration with 
Manitoba and Alberta is very, very important to the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And again on the situation, from the information that we’ve got, 
there were 241 heads taken adjacent to the Manitou hills in 
Saskatchewan on the Alberta side. And to date, 60 per cent of 
those heads have been tested and the good news of course is 
that all 60 per cent have proven negative. Now we still have 40 
per cent to go. We understand that those tests will be completed 
by the end of June. 



June 7, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

 

So certainly we’re well on our way to doing increased testing in 
that particular area. We want to see what the prevalence is so 
there’s good collaboration and co-operation from our 
neighbouring provinces, and we’ll continue working together to 
try and solve this problem as best we can. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regards to the one animal that you said is in question right now 
that could test positive for CWD (chronic wasting disease), was 
it taken in the same area as the one that tested positive before 
was taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And what we want to point out is that animal was taken within 
5 kilometres of the other animal. And the reason why we’re 
deeming it a suspicious case right now is it’s very important. As 
soon as we find out the results of those tests, we let the public 
know. 
 
What we want to do is we don’t want to speculate again on this 
particular challenge, because as I mentioned, there’s a lot of 
work being done. What we want to do is absolutely make sure 
what we’re dealing with before we make any announcements. 
 
So we’re deeming it suspicious. The animal was harvested 
within 5 kilometres of the other animal, and of course those 
tests will be confirmed by next week, and the Alberta tests will 
be done of course by the end of June. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
regards to the 213 animals that were taken, were they taken at 
random from spots in and around, or was a lump of deer that 
was seen all taken at one time? 
 
Basically the reason for my questioning is in regards to the one 
suspicious one now and the one that was tested positive. If that 
area, all consume this . . . Where the two diseased animals were 
taken, if all the animals were taken totally from that area, is that 
part of the 213, or were they taken at random in and around the 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Just to point out that of course we’re 
seeking adult animals, but these adult animals were harvested 
on a random basis. And to point out that 71 of the animals were 
harvested in zone 45, which is the Lloydminster area, and the 
remainder were harvested out of zone 46, which is the sandhills 
area. 
 
So the concentration of the harvesting took place in zones 45 
and 46. The animals were harvested at random, and of course 
we’re looking for adult animals. And again, all we have right 
now is one suspicious case but it needs to be confirmed. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:57. 
 
 
 
 

 
 


