















































Hansard: July 06, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2389 
 July 6, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a final number of petitions to present on behalf 
of a number of people on the east side of the province 
concerned about access for seniors to health care. And the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures to these pages of petitions are from 
Kamsack, Veregin, Norquay, and Canora. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the conversion of 
paved highways to gravel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Regina, Spring Valley, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, 
Avonlea, Pense, and Wilcox, as well as Calgary, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of residents of the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the closure of more hospitals. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
levels at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre and Pangman 
Health Centre in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and 
Stoughton. 
 
I so present. 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of citizens of the 
province a petition regarding EMS (emergency medical service) 
service. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intentions to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed from . . . many people, 
from many different communities such as Maryfield, 
Storthoaks, Redvers, and many, many more. I’ll present them 
all. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I also have petitions 
dealing with health care in Saskatchewan. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the communities of 
Antler, Alida, Storthoaks, Redvers, Manor, Carievale; Reston, 
Manitoba; Sinclair, Manitoba; Kenosee village, Mr. Speaker; 
Wauchope, Maryfield, Bellegarde, Carlyle, White Bear 
Reserve, Bear Lake, Mr. Speaker; from Wauchope, Fertile, and 
Gainsborough, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise again to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the high price 
of power and energy. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide more 
substantial power and energy relief to Saskatchewan 
customers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Battleford, North Battleford, and 
Cochin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 



2390 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

to address the lack of funding to non-profit, personal care 
homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Churchbridge, Atwater, Bangor, Kamsack, Wroxton, Veregin, 
and the city of Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by the citizens concerned about the significant rate 
increases by SaskPower and SaskEnergy. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Elbow and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. And Davidson. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order a petition on July 5 regarding 
repair to Highway 22 between Cupar and Dysart has been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be irregular and 
therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) are hereby read and received. These 
are petitions on the following matters regarding the 
centralization of ambulance services, energy rebate to 
consumers, maintenance of the Redvers Health Centre, repairs 
to Highway 339, provision of reliable cellular service in 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood, subsidies to non-profit personal care 
homes, and maintaining the Kelvington health centre. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy 
today to be able to introduce to you and through you to this 
Assembly, my constituency assistant, Donna From, who is in 
your gallery, and her daughter, Kathy. 
 
And I’d just like to give a bit of an introduction for both. Donna 
has been a tremendously hard-working, conscientious 
constituency assistant, very compassionate with the constituents 
and thoughtful, and very effective in helping them deal with 
their needs. And I’m very fortunate to have her for a 
constituency assistant. 
 
Her daughter, Kathy, has just recently returned from Australia, 
and she, I understand, is planning to set down roots here in 
Saskatchewan again. Following high school, she took courses in 

cosmetology and then moved out to Vancouver to study 
especially special effects and make-up for film and TV. And I 
expect that in the next year as she looks into and hooks into the 
prosperous future of Saskatchewan, she’ll probably work 
somewhere in the film industry which is burgeoning in this 
province, or in the . . . possibly in the new sound stage area 
which we’re hoping will be ready in the near future. 
 
So welcome to you folks and hope you have a good day here 
observing the session. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly 
seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Shelley Hengen. Shelley is 
a small-business woman working in the Idylwyld area as a 
consulting psychologist. 
 
Shelley was nominated on June 20 as the Sask Party candidate 
in the Idylwyld constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Shelley and the Sask Party are ready just in case 
there’s a by-election there, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
ask that the Assembly welcome Shelley to the galleries. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly seated in the east side of your gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please, order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
all members for coming to order so quickly. 
 
I would like to join with my colleague in welcoming Donna 
From and her daughter Katherine to the gallery today. I first 
met Donna when she was providing support services to Suzanne 
Murray, and we all miss Suzanne’s whistling and smiling face, 
and particularly as she was a seatmate of mine for quite a while, 
I do miss her as well. 
 
And would like to say thank you to Donna for all the services 
she provides, and for Katherine, who’s come back and I’m 
certain would find that Saskatchewan is a place that she’d like 
to stay from here in with so many opportunities available to her. 
 
I would also like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and through 
you to all members of the Assembly, 10 students from the 
English as a Second Language Program at the University of 
Regina. They’re seated on the east side of your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’ve come to observe the proceedings today. 
They will know it’s the near the completion of our duties 
together and so it may be a spirited observation today as they 
view the proceedings. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher Loretta Paoli and they 
will be also having a tour. And I would ask all members to join 
me in giving them a very warm welcome to the Assembly 
today. 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2391 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join with 
the member from Regina Wascana Plains in welcoming the 
students in your gallery on behalf of the official opposition. I 
would welcome them to Saskatchewan, and I’m sure they will 
enjoy the session that they will be witnessing here this morning, 
and I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them 
here. 
 
The Speaker: — Colleagues, it’s my pleasure to introduce a 
visitor who is sitting in the front row of the Speaker’s gallery 
this morning. Some of you may have had an opportunity to 
meet him in the past years. I would like to welcome Binx 
Remnant to the Assembly today. 
 
Binx served in the Manitoba Legislative Assembly as Clerk of 
the House for 17 years, and prior to that was Clerk of the 
Northwest Territories Legislative Assembly for 17 years. So 
when he retired in the year 2000, he was the longest serving 
Clerk of the House in the Commonwealth. 
 
Since retirement, Binx has continued his parliamentary service 
by working with the parliaments of South Africa and Kenya. 
Binx’s parliamentary expertise and great love for his work has 
benefited his colleagues and elected members across the 
Commonwealth. 
 
Please join me in welcoming Binx Remnant to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to join with you in personally saying welcome to a 
personal friend and a friend of parliamentary democracy, Mr. 
Remnant. 
 
In addition to his outstanding contributions to parliamentary 
democracy, it may be of interest for members to note that Binx 
Remnant joined with our very own Clerk, Gwenn Ronyk, and 
former Clerk of the House, Gordon Barnhart, as part of the 
training for parliamentary democracy practice in Russia as a 
result of a program that was sponsored by our nation some 
years ago. And so there was not only a close working 
relationship between our neighbouring provinces, but also 
together with that in the interest of democracy in the world. 
 
I would also like to join with you, Mr. Speaker, in wishing Mr. 
Remnant a very happy retirement. He’s made a major 
contribution to parliamentary democracy, and it should also be 
noted, although this is not part of his resumé, that he is of a 
significant melodious at voice as well when called on on special 
occasions. 
 
And I would once again like to ask all members to show their 
appreciation to Mr. Remnant for his contribution to parliament 
democracy in our nation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:15) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Social Assistance Caseload Lowered 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. The social assistance caseload is now 20 per 
cent lower than it was seven years ago. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — And the number of people receiving assistance is 
dramatically lower than it was in 1992. Mr. Speaker, 
province-wide, the number of social assistance cases dropped 
from 40,793 in June 1994 to 32,574 in June of 2001, a decrease 
of 20.1 per cent. 
 
Even more to cheer about, the decrease in the number of people 
dependent on assistance is even greater, Mr. Speaker. The 
number of beneficiaries dependent on social assistance has 
declined by 27.7 per cent from June of 1992 to June of 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this phenomenon is also not localized to any one 
region of the province. This decrease has been seen all over the 
province. From Lloydminster . . . have caseload decreases of 60 
per cent to Regina and Saskatoon experiencing an 18 and 26 per 
cent decrease respectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while this historic decrease in the number of 
people on social assistance is impressive, there is still much 
more that we can do and we will do, Mr. Speaker. This 
government will continue with phase 2 of “building 
independence . . .” and make the jobs the real solution for 
poverty in this province, not welfare, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Carrot River to Host 5th Annual Can-Am Bowl 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the town of Carrot River was successful in its bid to host the 5th 
Annual Can-Am Bowl. The Can-Am game will be held 
Saturday, July 7 in Carrot River. 
 
The Can-Am Bowl has become an annual football game in 
which the American stars of a six-man team travel to Canada to 
play the Canadian all-stars. Graduating players of six-man 
teams are eligible to play. 
 
The Can-Am Bowl began after a connection was made between 
American teams and Bjorkdale, Saskatchewan through Rocky 
Chysyk, coach of the Bjorkdale Bandits. Bjorkdale sent two of 
its players to participate in the All-American Six-Man All-Star 
game. This later resulted in the Bjorkdale team travelling to 
play Texas. 
 
In July 1997 an American all-star team made a return trip to 
Canada playing a Saskatchewan all-star team in Porcupine 
Plain. This spawned the creation of the Can-Am Bowl. 
 
The Canadian team for Can-Am V was chosen through a 
selection camp held in May at the Hilltop training facility in 



2392 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

Saskatoon. Players throughout Saskatchewan tried out for 1 of 
the 20 positions on the roster. 
 
The Canadian team includes players from Kenaston, Rose 
Valley, Bjorkdale, Loreburn, Carrot River, Raymore, Hague, 
Eatonia, Hanley, Meath Park, Saskatoon, Codette, Plenty, 
Porcupine Plain, and Wishart. 
 
The United States team includes players from the following 
states: Nebraska, Colorado, Montana, and Texas. 
 
Hundreds of volunteers have come together with sponsors to 
make this year’s Can-Am Bowl the most successful one yet. 
 
I would like to wish all the players and coaches the best of luck 
in a challenging and rewarding Can-Am game. 
 
And also would all members join with me in congratulating the 
town of Carrot River for being such a gracious host for this 
prestigious international event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Tax Cuts 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to draw the 
attention of this place to Saskatchewan tax cuts — the real facts 
and not the phony fiction that some would put about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, six of the last seven Saskatchewan budgets have 
included significant tax cuts. We’ve reduced our sales tax 9 per 
cent to 6 per cent. In 1992, an average Saskatchewan family had 
the second highest tax bill in Canada. This year, Mr. Speaker, 
that same family will have the fourth lowest tax bill in the 
country. Those who would claim we have the highest taxes in 
the country are simply wrong because of either ignorance or 
malevolence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a backup document to Alberta’s 2001 budget 
shows that an average Saskatchewan family pays either the 
third lowest . . . third or fourth lowest taxes in Canada. The 
National Post, which I believe some of the members opposite 
are familiar with, says: 
 

Our top marginal rate on personal income tax will be the 
third lowest in Canada in 2002. 

 
And now, Mr. Speaker, the Fraser Institute says that 
Saskatchewan’s tax freedom day advanced six days in 2001. 
When resource revenues are excluded, our tax freedom day is 
earlier than the national average. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government of Alberta, the National Post, and 
even the Fraser Institute all agree — taxes are coming down in 
Saskatchewan and those are the facts. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Position on No-Fault Insurance 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the reviews for the 
Saskatchewan Party position on no fault are coming in, Mr. 
Speaker. The Coalition Against No Fault says the Saskatchewan 

Party seems to realize that politicians have a responsibility to 
speak for the people and to control the bureaucrats. 
 
Another group says in a press release: 
 

We’re delighted that the Saskatchewan Party has decided, 
after careful consideration, to put its muscle behind this 
document. We see it as a major breakthrough. 

 
And the headline of their press release, Mr. Speaker, says: 
 

Saskatchewan’s Party promise to scrap no-fault insurance 
and restore justice viewed as a victory for the people of the 
province. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, there’s a much more important victory on 
the way that we want to tell them about. It will be a victory of 
vision for growth over the menu for mediocrity, Mr. Speaker. It 
will be a victory for innovation over the failed notions of the 
past. It’ll be a victory of democracy in the workplace over 
forced unionization. It’ll be a . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it will be a victory of diligence over 
complacency. It’ll be a victory of competence over 
incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is the most important victory yet to come, Mr. Speaker, on 
the soon and coming day when the people of this province rise 
up and get rid of the NDP (New Democratic Party), Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — So, Mr. Speaker, while we are grateful to those 
who call our position on no-fault a great victory for the people 
of the province, we’ve got a message for them: thank you very 
much but, Mr. Speaker, wait; you ain’t seen nothin’ yet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Groundbreaking Ceremony for Prince Albert 
Visual and Performing Arts Centre 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Moving from 
fiction to fact, I’m very happy today to rise as a former citizen 
of Prince Albert, Saskatchewan. And I’m particularly pleased 
this morning to recognize an important event that’s happening 
back home in my hometown. 
 
This morning the member for Prince Albert Northcote is 
speaking at a groundbreaking ceremony for the new P.A. 
(Prince Albert) Visual and Performing Arts Centre. This new 
$9.5 million facility is the culmination of hard work and 
planning by the citizens of P.A., who will now have a focal 
point for community entertainment, for visiting performers, for 
participation in the performing and visual arts by young and 
mature artists, and of course, Mr. Speaker, it will provide yet 
another, another excellent reason to visit the beautiful city of 
Prince Albert as it’ll be a fine tourist attraction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many individuals and groups helped bring this 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2393 

 

project to fruition. Many people have been involved in this 
project, and as such, congratulations go to Mitch Holash, Chair 
of the P.A. Arts Board, members of the board, and the many 
people who have contributed to this project. 
 
The operating costs for the centre will come from money from 
the Diefenbaker Trust and from the Prince Albert Kinsmen 
Club, as well from a generous grant from Rawlco 
Communications, which the member for P.A. Northcote paid 
tribute to a few days ago in this Assembly. 
 
I am particularly pleased that the Assembly could show its 
support for this project by contributing $2.3 million from the 
Community Initiatives Fund. And I am proud but not surprised 
that my hometown raised nearly $4 million locally to help fund 
the construction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of myself, I am sure on behalf of you, 
the member for P.A. Northcote, and all members in this 
Assembly, I want to offer our congratulations to the good 
people of P.A. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Annual Playoffs in Birch Hills 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
although it appears that this may be the last day of the sitting for 
this spring session, today actually marks a beginning for the 
town of Birch Hills. Today, July 6, the provincial Squirt D girls 
and the northern Pee Wee C girls begin their annual playoffs to 
be hosted royally by the town of Birch Hills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the Pee Wee division, teams from as far away 
as Kindersley will attend, and in the Squirt division, teams from 
as far away as Edam will converge upon Birch Hills. The two 
host teams, Mr. Speaker, will be trying to use this hot July 
weekend to cap off what has been a very successful spring 
campaign. 
 
The Squirt girls, coached by Ralph and Merle Pratt, finished 
second in league playoffs, losing only to Osborne in the finals. 
The Pee Wee girls, coached by Denis Engele, Marlene Manson, 
and Blair Stephan, finished first in league playoffs. This is the 
second year in a row the team accomplished this feat. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, visiting teams to Birch Hills this 
weekend will be facing two formidable opponents. Let’s all 
hope this weekend shapes up to have the kind of weather 
conducive to good ball. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 
congratulating the Squirt girls and Pee Wee girls softball teams 
from Birch Hills for their successful year, and to wish the best 
of success for all the girls competing in Birch Hills this 
weekend. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Old-timers Baseball Tournament in Regina 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, if you build it, they will come. 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, it is time to talk baseball. The Regina Ghosts 

baseball team has been awarded the national championships for 
the Canadian National Old-timers Federation. The tournament 
running from August 2 through 6 will play host to teams from 
almost every region in this fine country. Only two provinces 
and one territory will not be represented here in Regina, 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be 12 teams competing for the over-35 
division and 14 teams battling for top spot in the over-45 
division. This top-notch action will be witnessed all over 
Regina and the surrounding area, from the field at the Optimist 
Park over to Lumsden and all the way out to Moose Jaw. 
 
This ninth annual tournament is going to bring about some 
major league plays, Mr. Speaker, and I would encourage all 
members and people all over this province to go out and watch 
some world-class baseball. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I would like all the members of the 
Assembly to join with me in wishing all the teams the best of 
luck, especially the Regina Ghosts who I know can go the 
distance. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Job Loss Statistics 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, well, well, 
well, well. On day 71 of the session finally we get an insightful 
comment from the NDP. Have you ever been whitewater 
rafting? We’re to the point where we’ve lost our paddles, lost 
control, and about the only thing we can do is hang on for dear 
life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re just wondering, was it the House Leader 
who said it? Was it the Justice minister who made those 
comments? 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again the captain of the NDP dinghy has 
turned in the worst job numbers in Canada. Saskatchewan lost 
15,800 jobs in the past year, by far the worst record in the 
country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP killing so many jobs? Will the 
Premier admit that he has no plan to create jobs in our 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m reminded of something 
I think we all read in The Leader-Post just days ago, a 
commentary written by Mr. Marty Klyne, president and chief 
operating officer of the Regina Regional Economic 
Development Authority. In that article he said the following. 
Speaking of the job numbers of which we are all deeply 
concerned, Mr. Klyne said: 
 

There are those who will take some inexplicable pleasure in 
playing this up and scaring others into believing the sky is 
falling. While the job losses make for bad news, it seems 
bad news makes for good reading and idle, or 
unproductive, conversation. 



2394 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

Well we’ve had a dose of idle and unproductive conversation in 
here, that’s for sure. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I am concerned, Mr. 
Speaker, and this government is concerned about the job 
circumstances in our province. But did the Leader of the 
Opposition point out in the House today that month over month, 
from May to this month, the jobs in this province have grown 
by a total of 6,500. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier by downplaying the importance of this is showing that 
he’s all wet from his wild dinghy ride. Mr. Speaker, it’s the 
NDP’s own members that are speaking up. The problem is, Mr. 
Speaker, Saskatchewan families are paying the price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these job losses aren’t just a one-time thing. Over 
the first six months of 2001 the NDP is averaging 13,000 fewer 
jobs than last year. Mr. Speaker, the Premier doesn’t realize it 
but that’s an absolute disaster. 
 
What is the Premier doing? Well according to his own 
members, he’s dropped the paddles; he’s hanging on for dear 
life. Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve better. 
Why is the Premier content in killing so many jobs in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The Leader of the Opposition trends into 
some very dangerous territory for he and his friends over there 
when he starts talking about being all wet and whitewater 
rafting, and I hear on the CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) radio this morning he plans to do a little water 
skiing this weekend. 
 
Well we all know about that other leader of the Alliance Party 
that joined the wetsuit and got himself all wet, where he’s gone 
to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this government, this Premier, this 
government is concerned about the circumstances facing job 
opportunities in our province. We know, as the Leader of the 
Opposition will well know, that of the decline we’ve seen over 
the last year over year that fully 75 per cent of that decline is a 
result of the difficult circumstances faced by our farming 
families and the agriculture industry. He above all should know 
that. 
 
But, but, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you what does not assist. What 
does not assist is the constant voices of doom and gloom, 
negativism that comes from those members over there. In fact 
the private sector in this province are having to launch their 
own campaign to compete against the doom and gloom, the 
negativism, that’s coming from the Saskatchewan Alliance 
Party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(10:30) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier’s in trouble and 
he stoops to name calling and deflecting attention from his 
miserable record. The Premier had better tighten the straps on 
his water wings because there’s more rapids ahead. 
 
The TD (Toronto Dominion) Bank is now forecasting 
Saskatchewan will have the worst job losses, the worst retail 
sales growth, and the worst disposable income growth in the 
entire country for the rest of 2001. Mr. Speaker, this Premier is 
leading the province into an economic nose-dive. And he has 
absolutely no plan to turn it around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the government plunging our province into 
an economic nose-dive? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, here in fact are the accurate 
numbers reported today by the labour force statistics. Month 
over month, from May of 2001 to June of 2001 in this province, 
an increase of 6,500 jobs. In this province, Mr. Speaker — these 
are the facts — month over month, this unemployment rate has 
dropped 1.1 per cent; now down to 5.3 — 5.3. Which, Mr. 
Speaker, is well below the national average of 6.7. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition wants to talk about the prediction 
of the Toronto Dominion Bank, another prediction that appears 
in the paper today. Let me talk about a prediction that was 
recently brought to our attention by his Finance critic. Their 
own economic forecaster, which they paid good taxpayers’ 
dollars to get, says this province is going to grow next year by 
2.8 per cent. What about your own prediction of 2.8 per cent? 
 
Again, I make this point, Mr. Speaker: the economy of 
Saskatchewan is not well served by the nattering nabobs of 
negativism from across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
What’s happening — and the Premier should recognize this — 
is as economic forecasts are updated, the situation becomes 
worse and worse because of the mismanagement of his 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people are looking for an economic 
plan from the government but all they ever hear are excuses and 
blame. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Economic Development 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The noise . . . 
background noise level is just a little too high for the Speaker to 
be able to hear the questions in total. I would ask the members 
just to modulate your voices somewhat. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Economic Development, and today the Premier himself says it’s 
the farmers’ fault. No solutions, just blame the farmers. The 
farmers aren’t a problem in Manitoba or Alberta, but in 
Saskatchewan the farmers are the problem. 
 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2395 

 

The NDP promised to create 30,000 new jobs; there are 13,000 
fewer jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the Premier going to take responsibility for this 
economic disaster, or is he going to blame the farmers or 
anyone else he can think of pointing a finger at? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to report to the 
House today, and through the House to the people of 
Saskatchewan that while the Leader of the Opposition and his 
colleagues are strategizing tricks in this House, now hiding in 
the bushes, I’ll tell you where I’ve been. 
 
I’ll tell you where I’ve been in just the last few weeks. I was in 
Weyburn, Mr. Speaker. Weyburn for the opening of the Nexan 
Cable expansion, a significant and major expansion of Nexan 
Cable in the community of Weyburn. 
 
I was up, Mr. Speaker, in Hudson Bay, with the member from 
Carrot River Valley and to his credit he . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I was up in Hudson Bay to 
share in the very happy ribbon-cutting of the new Weyerhaeuser 
OSB (oriented strand board) plant employing hundreds of 
people in the community of Hudson Bay. 
 
I was happy to stand with the ministry of Forestry and the 
Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) to announce the plan for a similar development 
on the west side of the province near Meadow Lake — a huge 
employment in OSB. 
 
And do you know where I’m going to be tonight, Mr. Speaker. 
Do you know where I’m going to be tonight? I’m going to be in 
the community of Assiniboia cutting a ribbon on the Prairie 
Rubber, an innovative, job-creating, environmentally sensitive 
endeavour in Assiniboia, Saskatchewan. And following that, 
I’m going to be meeting with maybe 175, 200 people in 
Assiniboia. These are not people negative about the future of 
the province; they’re doing something about this province in 
their communities, unlike our friends across the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is likely the last day of the spring session so let’s review the 
new Premier’s record. 
 
In his first six months of office, the Premier promised to create 
jobs — he failed. The Premier promised to cut waiting lists — 
he failed. The Premier promised to deliver $500 million in farm 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order. We 
must reduce the amount of braying and yelling in order to be 
able to hear the questions. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I assure you the 
braying came from that side. 

Mr. Speaker, the Premier promised to deliver $500 million in 
farm aid. He failed. And the people of North Battleford are still 
boiling their water. Mr. Speaker, this session of the legislature 
has seen failure after failure from the NDP government, to the 
point where his own members, his very own members, are 
questioning his leadership. 
 
Will the Premier admit, what his own members are saying, that 
he has lost control and is hanging on for dear life. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we’re going to have more 
time today to debate some of the issues that the Leader of the 
Opposition raised, but I want to bring to the attention of the 
House one illustration. This administration made a commitment 
to fix the roads of Saskatchewan and fix the highways. 
 
Now I tell you, Mr. Speaker, I have in my hand a very happy 
letter. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, as do all members of the 
House, about a year ago now, the mayor of Val Marie and the 
community of Val Marie set out to patch the potholes in 
Highway No. 4 around the community of Val Marie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to read a letter to you and to the House that 
I received yesterday, a very happy letter to me as Premier from 
the current mayor of Val Marie, Mr. Robert Ducan. He says to 
me: 
 

This is a letter of congratulations to the government for the 
great improvement in our Highway No. 4. We can now 
meet tourists without embarrassment and safety is much 
improved. It is very uplifting (says the mayor) to see the 
government and its employees performing in such an 
efficient manner. 
 
We usually only criticize and never let anyone know when 
things are working. So with that thought, I say a big thank 
you from the people of Val Marie. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
question for the Premier, but before that I have a comment for 
him. The highways are still a mess in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. The continued loss 
of thousands of jobs in this province is very, very discouraging 
because it means that people have to look elsewhere for work. 
Most of the people in the job market are young people. They are 
mobile, they may or may not have a family yet, and they will 
look elsewhere for a good job with a good income if they can’t 
find it here in their home province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, day after day Saskatchewan families are saying 
goodbye to their young people as they leave for other provinces. 
And even though it breaks their heart, they realize that their 
family members must go to where the best opportunities lie. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier: will you tell Saskatchewan . . . 
 



2396 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. You’ll rephrase your 
question. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Will the Premier tell Saskatchewan families 
today his plan to stop the job losses and create opportunities so 
that our kids can come home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, when it comes to judging 
the state of the roads, I’ll take the word of the mayor of Val 
Marie everyday over the word of the member from Estevan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate the 
member perhaps was not listening to the debate in this House 
yesterday when I shared with this House the results of a survey 
that was completed last year indicating that in all of Canada — 
in all of Canada — Saskatchewan ranks third as an opportunity 
place for young people; third in all of Canada. An 
improvement, if I may say, Mr. Speaker, over 1999 when we 
stood as fourth. 
 
Are we finished the work? We are not finished the work. We 
have outlined in this session what we have described as the 
Partnership for Prosperity, a document, a plan with action 
steps, with targeted goals, unlike an opposition who day after 
day in this House can find it in their hearts to criticize but can’t 
seem to find it in their hearts to come up with one positive or 
progressive suggestion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this budget alone we have created over 2,000 
opportunities for Saskatchewan young people through the 
Centennial Summer Student Program, a program that over the 
course of its life will create 10,000 opportunities for young 
people to work and learn in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I will 
take the Premier on a tour of my constituency but I will assure 
you we will be using his car. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the continued loss of jobs in Saskatchewan has a 
huge effect on every sector. We have a great education system 
in this province yet we are educating our kids just so that we 
can see them leave Saskatchewan because they want jobs 
elsewhere. How are we going to sustain this education system if 
our tax base keeps shrinking? How are we ever going to rebuild 
our health care system and recruit health care professionals we 
so desperately need if Saskatchewan is seen as a place people 
leave, not where they go? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and all of his ministers keep saying 
they are working on these problems but we never hear a 
solution. What is the Premier’s solution to the continued 
economic slide Saskatchewan is experiencing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are providing the best 
educational opportunities for our young people from 

pre-kindergarten to post-secondary, I will say of anywhere in 
the country. In this budget alone, we’ve dedicated, through the 
ministry of Education and my coalition partner, 9.1 per cent 
increase to the Education budgets of the province of 
Saskatchewan to provide that kind of training for our people. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got the doom and gloom artists over 
there. But here are some facts — here are some facts — not 
from government but right here, from the Canada West 
Foundation in their Western Landscapes newsletter this spring. 
Mr. Speaker, here’s what’s going on, here’s what’s going on in 
western Canada. Growth in real GDP (gross domestic product) 
1999 to 2000: growth in British Columbia, 5.7 per cent; growth 
in Manitoba, 17.4 per cent; growth in Alberta, 27.4 per cent; 
growth in Saskatchewan, 27.8 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Canada West 
Foundation aggregate productivity: growth in British Columbia, 
3 per cent; growth in Manitoba, 10 per cent; growth in Alberta, 
17 per cent; growth in Saskatchewan, 20 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
headline in The Leader-Post “More gloom predicted” says it all. 
The TD Bank has downgraded its forecast for the performance 
of our provincial economy. Doug Elliott with Sask Trends 
Monitor says that if these trends continue, he expects the 
provincial population to drop by 10,000 due to the out . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order, once 
again. Once again members, I would ask for your courtesy to 
the member who’s asking the question. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re a little testy 
over there today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Doug Elliott with Sask Trends Monitor says if 
these trends continue, he expects the provincial population to 
drop by 10,000 people due to out-migration by the end of the 
year. Mr. Speaker, that’s virtually equivalent to the population 
of the city of Estevan — 10,000 people. Mostly our young 
people and our young families who feel there are better 
opportunities elsewhere. 
 
If the Premier and this NDP government believe that people 
support their government and their economic development 
policies, he is wrong, because people are voting with their feet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the Premier going to stand by and do nothing 
while 10,000 people leave this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, if in fact it says in The 
Leader-Post today, if there’s a headline that says “More gloom 
predicted”, perhaps it was, perhaps it was a prediction that 
we’re going to hear more from the opposition party, because 
that’s what we hear day after day after day is gloom from the 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2397 

 

opposition party. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated in this House and very publicly, 
we take this matter very seriously. We take this matter very 
seriously. We are working on a daily basis to strengthen and 
build the economy of Saskatchewan, and I can point to example 
after example after example of success, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now has the opposition in the session given us a positive 
suggestion about what to do with the economy? Well they talk 
about cutting taxes. They talk about cutting taxes. They don’t 
tell us how much, where, or when or how this is going to get 
paid for. 
 
But in fact the Leader of the Opposition early on in this session, 
in Friday, April 6 edition of that same Leader-Post, unveiled 
their economic game plan. And I review it again, Mr. Speaker. 
He said on that page of The Leader-Post: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party wins the next election, 
Hermanson said the population outflow would be stemmed 
within a year or two and the province would then grow, if 
the weather and the national economy cooperated. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I’ll tell you, this plan of ours is not 
a weather-permitting; this is an all-weather kind of plan we’ve 
got. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier’s answer is precisely the problem with this government 
today. This NDP government has no idea how to stop the job 
losses and how to stop the people from leaving this province. 
But they say, we’ve cut taxes, when in fact, Mr. Speaker, 
they’ve raised taxes for Saskatchewan families. They have 
become so lost in their own rhetoric that they have no idea how 
Saskatchewan families really feel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are tired of paying more — more for taxes, 
more for energy, more for power, and more for telephone. They 
are tired of waiting for this government to take some action to 
improve health care. They are tired of hearing this government 
say over and over that they are meeting and listening, listening 
and meeting, but never ever making a decision. They are tired 
of hearing this NDP government blame everyone else in the 
province for this province’s poor economic performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier finally stand up and take his 
responsibility? Will he commit to Saskatchewan people that he 
will take some action to at least stop the continued loss of jobs 
in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this budget which they 
oppose on every front, this budget which they oppose on every 
front continues the reduction of the tax load on Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
It continues the personal income taxes being paid by 

Saskatchewan households and families. It knocks two points . . . 
2 per cent off the small-business corporate tax, from 8 to 6, and 
it has raised the theory, a move which I may say — contrary to 
the voices we hear in here — is much appreciated in the 
business community as they generate employment 
opportunities. 
 
What are we doing through the budget that they are voting 
against? We’re rebuilding our transportation infrastructure in 
highways. We’re investing in our young people so they might 
be equipped to seize the economic opportunities of the future. 
We’re linking the communities of Saskatchewan through the 
information technology network so we can seize the 21st 
century opportunities. 
 
And I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, in all of this we’re not forgetting 
people. And perhaps the happiest statistic we have heard today 
came from the member’s statement — from the member from 
Dewdney — when he told us that over the last several years 
we’ve seen a decline of 27 per cent; 27 per cent of people 
dependent on social assistance in this province. That, Mr. 
Speaker, is result of a creative and growing economy and a darn 
good government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP says 
that the Saskatchewan Party doesn’t bring enough good news to 
the House. Well here’s some good news, Mr. Speaker. We’re 
now one session closer to the next election. Mr. Speaker, that 
will give the Saskatchewan Party the opportunity to turn the 
economy around, to create jobs, and bring hope back to 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when will the NDP allow the Saskatchewan Party 
to get on with the job? When will they allow us to turn this 
province around by calling an election? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I guess the final question from the 
Leader of the Opposition is when do I intend to let that group of 
men and women take over the reins of government? The 
answer, Mr. Speaker, is never. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
isn’t this interesting. The NDP’s own members admit that they 
have lost control of their government and all they can do is hold 
on for dear life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know the saddest thing about the NDP record 
is? It doesn’t have to be this way. Saskatchewan will be great 
again. Saskatchewan will grow our economy. Saskatchewan 
will bring our children home. Saskatchewan will deliver a 
health system that provides proper health care for our families 
and our children and our grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will happen. And it starts the day that we get 
rid of this NDP government that is out of control. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2398 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is when is this 
day? It can’t come too soon. When is the Premier going to call 
the election and allow Saskatchewan to move forward? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite are leaving their seats. You know it is an interesting 
question, it is an interesting question. They want me to call an 
election. Well you know what, I called one. It was called the 
Elphinstone by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well we know what happened to them 
there. I called one. It was my own, the Riversdale by-election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now they want me to call another one. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that day will come, that day will come, very 
soon or later, that day will come. And I am very confident that 
when that day comes and when that period is past, I’ll be in this 
seat. I’m not sure who’ll be in that seat, but I’ll be in this seat, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — My officials with me today are Mr. Hal 
Cushon, who is the director of policy and planning. Seated right 
beside me, Mr. Doug Matthies — behind me — is the general 
manager of the crop insurance corporation. And Mr. Jack Zepp 
is directly behind Mr. Cushon, who is the director of 
administration services. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, I have one question I’d like to 
pose to the Minister of Agriculture on your permanent cover 
program. Is that still eligible? And how many . . . Is there still 
money in that program? And how many people have applied for 
it so far? And how many people have been approved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The answer, Mr. Chair, is that there still is 
money in the, in the account. There are now 6,000 applications 
that have gone out or have come in, and we’ve already paid out 
a substantial number on that 6,000 number of applications. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I wanted to 
speak with you this morning about crop insurance and the 
procedures. If you would — you and your officials — outline, 

for farmers who are faced with drought, exactly what the 
process and the procedures are in terms of what their 
responsibility is, first of all, as a farmer when they are in a 
situation where their crop is clearly drought-affected and they 
want to make claim. I’d like you to, in the best fashion possible, 
lay out the complete procedure and what kind of coverage they 
can expect, how it influences future coverage in terms of 
whether it’s summerfallow or stubble coverage, and what effect 
it has on their premium, Mr. Minister. 
 
I think we all recognize, Mr. Chair . . . Mr. Minister, I should 
say, the importance of the ag sector and we are experiencing a 
widespread drought in Saskatchewan right now. We’re all 
hopeful that that will be alleviated if we get some rainfall soon, 
but I think in many areas of the province the feeling is is that 
the crop is gone and we might as well admit that and outline the 
procedures that farmers will follow and that Crop Insurance will 
follow, following that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the member 
raises a very important question. Clearly as we experience in 
the province, some parts of the province, some concern about 
an intensified drought. 
 
The current program, the Crop Insurance program of course, as 
the member will know, the amount of premium that you pay is 
based on your historical year of participation in the program 
and whether or not you in fact have had loss payouts over that 
period of time. And one’s premium is discounted throughout 
the course of the life of their involvement with the Crop 
Insurance program. However, various different times, you may 
need to collect on the program and of course it will impact your 
premium accordingly. 
 
Say to the member opposite that, Mr. Chair, that the farmer 
really will make the decision about whether or not they want to 
write off their crop. And if that decision of course is made, then 
of course inspectors from the Crop Insurance agency would 
then go out and do the inspection of the crop and then make a 
decision. 
 
(11:00) 
 
If the farmer decides that he wants to continue on with the 
current crop that he has and hope that in fact he’ll be able to 
recover something from it, we do an inspection on it. We 
provide some appraisal numbers on it and then come back for a 
re-inspection later in the fall. 
 
If the farmer decides that he wants to put the crop to another 
use, whether he wants to bale it or whether he wants to put in 
into . . . take it off or to graze it, we will pay out the claim and 
there would be then a . . . guaranteed production is already 
provided because he would have a history. It would be 
appraised on that basis and then there would be a coordinate 
payout. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wonder if you could 
explain as well the dates, the important dates, that must be met 
in terms of the establishment benefits — and I think that date 
may be already gone by — what the procedure is in terms of 
making a claim to qualify for a summerfallow coverage for next 
year. 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2399 

 

I think it’s incumbent upon Crop Insurance and I would say, 
Mr. Minister, that perhaps a public awareness campaign to the 
crop insurance contract holders would be in order to make clear 
to them their obligations and what kind of coverage they can 
expect, the important dates that they have to keep in mind to 
qualify for any changes in coverage or any . . . not changes in 
coverage but any changes in opportunity for coverage next year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the 
establishment date is June 20 and then the summerfallow policy 
is as follows. If the general rules are that the land must be 
worked by July 11 and kept in good shape for the following 
year if in fact there’s a decision here to summerfallow. If the 
crop was seeded and the field is to be worked under in the same 
year, the adjuster may recommend granting summerfallow 
coverage for the next year if he assesses growth was minimal or 
the crop was destroyed due to excess moisture conditions. 
That’s the way in which the policy is crafted today. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Am I understanding correct, Mr. Minister, when 
it comes to the establishment benefit . . . I had a farmer call me 
the other day about it and he was quite concerned about what 
Crop Insurance people had been telling him. He had seeded a 
crop of canary seed and the crop had germinated and there was 
evidence of germination, clear evidence of germination, but the 
crop had basically flat-out ran out of moisture and withered and 
died in the field and then Crop Insurance officials came out and 
viewed the crop and said that they were writing the crop off and 
would provide him with a $20 an acre establishment benefit. 
 
Now clearly there was no reason, or no opportunity to reseed 
because there was no moisture available whatsoever in the soil, 
and he said to them he would prefer then to take the crop 
through to yield coverage, through to completion. And then he 
would have considerable higher coverage. 
 
The Crop Insurance officials told him that no, he didn’t have an 
option under that circumstance and that he only qualified for 
$20 worth of establishment benefit; when indeed through his 
what-if forms that every farmer gets to establish what their 
benefits will be at the other end, at the yield conclusion, he 
would have somewhere in the neighbourhood of 80 to $90 
worth of coverage, and considerable higher coverage obviously. 
 
And he would have much preferred to take it through to the 
conclusion rather than accept the establishment benefit. And in 
fact he was told that he had no option in that regard that he . . . 
the Crop Insurance people were indeed writing the crop off and 
he had to take the establishment benefit and could not take it 
through to yield. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member. In each case 
there is a decision made based on the strength of the particular 
crop that has been seeded and whether or not it has any ability 
actually to make the crop season. 
 
And of course the adjuster would be, in consultation with the 
farmer, would be attempting to establish that kind of a 
understanding. 
 
If in fact, there is a decision made that the crop has not 
established itself adequately — has not established itself 
adequately — if that decision has been made by the adjuster, 

then in fact, as the member points out, there would be then the 
kind of payout that the member has indicated. 
 
Sometimes on an individual basis, what the adjuster might say 
is that if the growing season still remains and sufficient time, 
there could be some discussion about whether or not you could 
seed an earlier harvesting crop. But the establishment of the 
viability of the current crop is really very much the issue here. 
 
And much of that discussion is based on a series of questions 
that they would go through in terms of what would be the 
viability of trying to get another crop seeded and whether or not 
the current crop that they’re examining or reviewing in fact has 
established itself in the kind of fashion where you still have 
some other options. And this really is a discussion on a 
case-by-case basis with each of the individual producers. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, will Crop 
Insurance through your department be notifying contract 
holders of their options that are available to them prior to the 
July 11, I believe, and I hear rumours that you may be 
extending it to July 15, the opportunity to burn off or plough 
down a crop to allow for summerfallow coverage next year? 
Will you be outlining in a public awareness campaign to 
contract holders the importance of those dates, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to say to the member opposite 
that we have currently, as the member knows, a fairly 
significant information program that Crop Insurance puts out. 
Today they have of course the existing policy we haven’t 
changed as it relates to the summerfallow piece. 
 
The member also would, if he is a crop insurance holder, will 
also receive a calendar in the mail that comes early in the year 
which describes the kinds of benefits that the crop insurance 
program provides. And on an individual basis of course, 
through our extension offices, our folks are available to provide 
that kind of information for individuals. 
 
I think that, particularly on the forage program that we 
announced about three weeks ago or two weeks ago, we had a 
large public campaign on that piece which is separate and 
independent from, I think, some of the discussion that we’re 
having this morning. And from our perspective I think farmers 
have a pretty good idea of what it is that we’re doing or 
understanding of what we’re doing on the forage hay piece. 
 
And on the crop insurance side, as I say, we already have a fair 
amount of information that we’ve put out there. If there is some 
sense here that the member believes that there’s something else 
we might do to enhance that, we’d be happy to take that under 
advisement. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that . . . I think 
you should very seriously consider that because fortunately, 
very, very fortunately in this province we suffer these kind of 
weather-related activities not all that often. There are always 
parts of the province where there are problems, but this year it 
appears to be particularly large in nature, large in area, and as a 
result of that, I think that we need to strengthen our efforts to 
make people aware of the important deadlines that they are 
faced with. 
 



2400 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

Mr. Minister, as you know, farmers are faced with a number of 
forms from NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) to AIDA 
(Net Income Stabilization Account) to CFIP (Canadian Farm 
Income Program) to CSAP (Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment 
Program) to you name it — it goes on and on and on. And 
frankly, a lot of farmers, I don’t think, have the time necessary 
to go through these things word for word. 
 
A letter from the Crop Insurance department, I think, would be 
a good reminder of them, particularly under the circumstances 
that they are faced with, just so they can clearly look at the 
options that they have available to them and once again, make 
the decision that’s going to be very, very important in terms of 
what kind of coverage levels they have. 
 
Mr. Minister, following through from there, there will be many, 
many, many crops in Saskatchewan, and particularly on the 
west side, that will be taken through to yield. And at that point, 
farmers again will be faced with another decision, whether or 
not they should harvest the crop or not harvest the crop. And 
part of that decision will be based on . . . part of that decision 
will be based on what kind of coverage levels they have and 
also on the minimum yield requirement to harvest a crop that 
Crop Insurance has in place. 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would explain for the farmers of 
this province that are affected with drought what the minimum 
yield requirement to harvest a crop will be that they must keep 
in mind later on this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, we don’t write 
down the crops or write-off the crops. What we would do of 
course is we would sit down or have a discussion with the 
producer, look at what their yield appraisal is. Then the farmer 
would make a decision as to whether or not he wants to retain 
that crop or whether he wants to work it down. 
 
And then of course at the end of the crop year the payout would 
be made based on the historical amount of coverage that the 
farmer would have insured for, and based on his particular yield 
is the way in which that decision would be arrived at. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I may not have 
explained myself properly to you. Now let’s remove the spring 
season here that we’re in, or early summer, and look at the other 
end, at fall, at harvest here. 
 
I am under the understanding, and correct me if I’m wrong, that 
Crop Insurance has a minimum yield that you must harvest a 
crop. So if the crop is less than five bushels to the acre, is there 
a requirement that the farmer still harvests that crop and goes 
through the expense of harvesting that crop, or at what level is 
the crop written off entirely and they aren’t required to harvest 
the crop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, there is a low 
threshold and each crop that the member would speak of, each 
would have a different type of . . . with low threshold. Now the 
expectation is of course that there would be a harvest here, 
unless it’s below the threshold or if in fact the farmer decides 
to, I think, to bale it or to graze it, and so that would then 
provide for a different option. 
 

So the reality is that in fact the farmer would be expected here, 
unless he makes the decision to abandon it, to harvest it and use 
the thresholds that would apply for each of the various different 
crops. And I can provide you with a copy of what those 
thresholds are, particularly if there are particular farmers who 
are asking you what that threshold might be. I’ll send this over 
and make sure that you will have a copy of this. 
 
I also want to say to you, Mr. Chair, to the member, that the 
suggestion that he makes about providing information — and I 
should have answered that in my previous occasion or previous 
question — we will give the undertaking today to provide some 
radio ads to the farmers across the province. We think that 
written correspondence . . . we have a very short timeline now 
and we have I think about 800 appraisals that are already out 
there and we best can address that I think by just doing the radio 
ad as opposed to any kind of a written correspondence. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we would 
certainly support that. I think that’s a good step in the right 
direction. You’re indeed correct that the timelines for any kind 
of written correspondence with farmers would be very, very 
tight. 
 
For the situation in the spring, I think those yield thresholds . . . 
that information would be of value to farmers as well so that 
they can assess for themselves at what point they want to go 
through the additional, extra cost of harvesting a crop that may 
not meet that yield threshold. So if you were to provide radio 
ads to outline their obligations and their options right now, and 
provide either in written or radio ads as well the threshold 
requirements for the end of the year, I think that that would be 
helpful too. 
 
And that undertaking I think could go out with some of the 
publications that regularly are sent out from the Crop Insurance 
Corporation or through the Canadian Wheat Board or other 
channels as well, Mr. Minister. And we would certainly support 
your efforts in that area to make aware of the situation to 
farmers what their obligations and what kind of coverage levels 
they can expect under these types of situations. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to turn my attention . . . or want to 
continue with perhaps a couple or fewer questions on the 
drought situation. I see in today’s newspaper you are saying that 
the programs in place will be — and I want to know this — will 
be the only programs in place. Or are you looking at, for the 
grains and oilseeds sector, and speciality crop sector, any 
further top-up or any further assistance that might be looked at 
for the farmers that are faced with a very serious drought 
situation? 
 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Chair, to the member, in my 
scrum yesterday or the discussions that I had yesterday with the 
media, what I’d indicated in it is that in the province today we 
only have three programs that can assist producers as it relates 
to the grains and oilseeds or even to the livestock side, and that 
being in the NISA, the Crop Insurance, and certainly the 
Canada Farm Income Program. And I know that from time to 
time across the province we have certain areas that will 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2401 

 

experience either drought or we’ll have too much moisture in 
some parts, as was the case a couple of years, and that the 
dependency, of course, is on the safety nets that are in place 
today. 
 
I have, in my recent meetings with my colleagues in the Yukon 
and with the federal government, indicated that there is a real 
need here for us to review those programs and we have a 
commitment now to get a better understanding and appreciation 
of enriching some of those. 
 
I said to the media yesterday, we’re working closely with 
Alberta and Manitoba on a readjusted Crop Insurance program 
and that will be the route that we’re tending to go over the next 
couple of months. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ve forgotten to ask a 
couple further questions on the Crop Insurance program while 
we have the officials for that available. It’s my understanding 
that Crop Insurance is looking at, specifically for chickpeas, I 
am told — I don’t know this — but I am told that they have put 
in place a monitoring program to assess the crop that’s out 
there. 
 
There’s considerable amount of concern with regard to disease, 
ascochyta, in the Shaunavon right through to Weyburn-Estevan 
area. And I’m told that you have implemented an monitoring 
program to ensure that the crop is being handled properly by 
their producers in terms of spraying the crop with products like 
Bravo or Quadris or . . . is that indeed correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Have you put in place a monitoring program, and what is the 
purpose of the monitoring program, and is it to simply assess 
the amount of liability that Crop Insurance is faced with? 
 
Is it to advise farmers on what kind of requirements they have 
to properly maintain that crop? Or is it . . . what is — I guess 
my question is very simple — what is the purpose of it if it is in 
place and what goals do you hope to achieve by that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To the member, as the member can 
appreciate, this is a very new crop to the province and a very 
important crop to the province. And what the adjusters are 
doing and Crop Insurance is doing is working very closely with 
the industry and with the producers. And there is a monitoring 
program, in fact, in place that we’re a part of today. 
 
And what we’re looking at is trying to understand where and 
how the crops are most successful, what makes them most 
successful, making sure that the kinds of . . . we have an 
understanding of the kinds of weather conditions that are 
assistant in making these crops the kinds of value that they 
provide. So as much as this is a learning process for many of 
the producers who are getting into these crops in a more 
extensive fashion, so it is for our Crop Insurance agency and 
corporation. 
 
And so we’re working closely through the monitoring program 
to try to understand that, and to be sure that in the future we can 
provide benefit coverages that will be responsive to what the 
producers are wanting to see in the program. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So we can assure 

farmers when they call us that this is not to try and absolve 
Crop Insurance of any kind of coverage, or any kind of 
obligation. It’s simply to compliment management, and to 
perhaps even advise management practices, and to monitor the 
crop as it progresses through the season. 
 
I think that reassurance from you and your department, and 
from the Crop Insurance people would be of benefit right now. 
It’s a very, very high value crop, but it’s also a very, very high 
input crop. And I think farmers are wanting to protect it to the 
degree that they can. And they also, I think, believe and want an 
assurance from you, Mr. Minister, that this monitoring is not to 
try and sort of trip them up for any management practices that 
they might be undertaking, or to try and absolve Crop Insurance 
of any kind of liability under these very, very stressful 
drought-related situations. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member. It’s 
exactly as he’s highlighted. This is not about providing any kind 
of restrictive measures on the producer or on the industry as it 
relates to the . . . this very important crop. 
 
It’s really about the pulse development working closely with the 
Pulse Development Board. And it’s also to ensure that our 
adjusters are far more efficient in their work in the future 
because, as I’ve said, this is a very important crop to the 
industry and our working relationship with them will be to 
enhance the work of our corporation, and certainly the work of 
the adjuster. And we can assure the producers accordingly. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. In 
Saskatchewan certainly agriculture’s has always been and will 
always be a very, very important component of our economy 
here in Saskatchewan. And as you know, as Agriculture 
Minister, we’re always faced with some very serious challenges 
as to how we implement policies to put our farmers into a 
position, the most advantageous position we can, relative to 
other producers throughout the world. 
 
I want to just finally say to the Minister of Agriculture on 
behalf of the farm people of this province, we sincerely believe 
that you and your department do try and implement policies that 
will benefit them. We have a challenge — and we all face this 
challenge, whether we’re on that side of the House or on this 
side of the House — in terms of putting in place the long-term 
safety net program that is necessary and very much needed. 
And I think you would agree with me on that, Mr. Minister. 
 
So we certainly will support efforts made in that area to put in 
place that program as quickly as possible. We will always and 
we will never not reserve the right to criticize that and to offer 
comment on it. You can also expect, you can also expect 
certainly support when we believe support is warranted, as we 
supported your efforts for livestock producers here most 
recently. 
 
But there are some very, very serious challenges that we are 
going to be faced with not only in agriculture, but indeed all of 
this province if we see the level of drought that we 
unfortunately are looking at right now. The economy of this 
province is going to be very, very dramatically impacted and we 
better brace ourselves for that impact, Mr. Minister. 
 



2402 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

So I would implore you and your department and your cabinet 
and the Premier to very, very seriously look at what kind of 
efforts can be put in place to address that very unfortunate 
situation as it unfolds, and to very, very seriously put all efforts 
forward, all efforts forward to get in place a long-term safety 
net that is desperately needed. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, with those closing comments, I want to thank 
the Minister of Agriculture and his officials for answering our 
questions throughout estimates and throughout this past session. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, I too want to echo some of the 
words of my colleague, the Agriculture critic from Kindersley, 
because as he has identified, I think appropriately, we have a 
number of challenges in this industry without any doubt. But we 
have a tremendous opportunity which, I think, he too has 
indicated in his address just a couple of minutes ago. 
 
Saskatchewan, as we know, has a tremendous potential for 
growing our agricultural industry, and our communities, be they 
rural or urban, are highly dependent on how we make this 
industry grow into the future. So I appreciate his comments as it 
relates to the notion that we need to work together around some 
fronts. 
 
I appreciate the fact that just recently the member was able to 
attend the standing committee in Ottawa with us. And I would 
say made a strong presentation as well about the importance of 
working together and not only trying to fix the safety net issues 
in this province but also looking at a whole host of other 
agricultural requirements that will help improve our economy. 
 
So I appreciate his words and the questions that we’ve had on 
this file, not only through the course of our discussions over the 
last three or four occasions that we’ve been up together but also 
during question period where he’s raised a number of very 
important issues around this industry. 
 
So I too, Mr. Chair, want to thank the officials of my 
department. Consistently this file makes its way near the top of 
the discussion through the course of the budget debates and it 
requires a great deal of hard work and energy on the part of my 
officials. 
 
And I want to thank them too for the way in which they’ve been 
able to present in my view not only a good budget but a future 
direction for our department, Mr. Chair. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (AG01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (AG02), (AG05), (AG04), (AG06), (AG07), (AG12), 
(AG03), (AG08), (AG09), (AG10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture and Food 
Vote 146 

 
Subvotes (AG02), (AG03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 

(11:30) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 147 

 
Subvote (AG01) — Statutory. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 

Subvotes (AG08), (AG10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Vote 26 
 
Subvotes (ER09), (ER10), (ER05), (ER07), (ER03), (ER11), 
(ER14), agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Environment and Resource Management 

Forest Fire Contingency Fund 
Vote 72 

 
Subvote (FF01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 72 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Environment and Resource Management 
Vote 26 

 
Subvotes (ER10), (ER07) agreed to. 
 
Vote 26 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvotes (HE01), (HE02), (HE03), (HE10), (HE04), (HE06), 
(HE08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health — Transition Fund 

Vote 69 
 
The Chair: — The next item is Vote 69, (HT01) and there is no 
amount required. Are there any questions? Seeing none, we’ll 
move on. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2403 

 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvotes (HE03), (HE04), (HE06) agreed to. 
 
Vote 32 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Vote 143 

 
Subvote (SH01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

SaskEnergy Incorporated 
Vote 150 

 
Subvote (SE01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Telecommunications Holding Corporation 
Vote 153 

 
Subvote (ST01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Power Corporation 
Vote 152 

 
Subvote (PW01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 165 

 
Subvote (CI01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Premier to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the same group of officials as 
yesterday: Dan Perrins, my deputy minister; and from 
Executive Council, Bonita Heidt; Jim Nicol; and my chief of 
staff, Kathie Maher-Wolbaum. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
welcome to your officials this morning, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, I would like to revert back to a few of the 
questions I asked you yesterday regarding The Constituency 
Boundaries Act, more for clarification, Mr. Premier. 
 

Mr. Premier, yesterday we talked about a timeline that might be 
in effect for reviewing the census report. And you indicated 
yesterday that you expect that your department . . . the Clerk 
will receive the census report next spring, maybe March, April. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of the various clauses that talk about the 
creation of the commission 30 days after receiving the report, 
an interim report is to be produced by that commission within 
three months after being established and then a process for a 
public consultation. Could you indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan how you would see the review of the census data 
that will be presented through the report and The Constituency 
Boundaries Act and all of the obligations, as you indicated 
yesterday, that the Act of course would be followed. What 
timeline do you see occurring for the final report coming to the 
Legislative Assembly for debate and discussion? Could you 
indicate what that timeline would be. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the legislation itself sets some 
timelines. It does use phraseology for instance in 19(3), “As 
soon as is practicable . . .” And so some of the timelines I think 
will be determined by the commission itself as they do their 
work, and it’s not a circumstance where you’d want to intervene 
with the work they’re doing. 
 
But as I read the Act, the interim report prescribed in section 
19(1) of the Act indicates that: 
 

A commission shall prepare an interim report within three 
months after the date the commission was established. 

 
And so the first timeline on the interim report is a three-month 
deadline by legislation. And I think we’d all hope that it could 
occur sooner than that but at the same time, as the Act points 
out, as soon as practicable. 
 
And then in terms of the final report, the ultimate deadline as 
prescribed by legislation in 22(2): 
 

A commission shall prepare the final report within six 
months after the date it was established. 

 
And so if my assumption is correct that we would have the 
census data in the hands of the Clerk in March or April of next 
year, that within 30 days of that occurring, the commission 
process is put in place under the legislation, then the furthest 
deadline would be a six-month period after that. 
 
Now again, as soon as practicable, as soon as the commission 
could do its work, I think we’d all appreciate that work being 
done as soon as possible. But the deadlines themselves are 
prescribed in the legislation. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, in 
light of the various clauses that you’ve referred to, would it be 
fair to say then that the final report would not be presented to 
this legislative session until probably the spring of 2003? Is that 
a fair assessment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is hard to say. Again, Mr. Chair, it’ll 
be an independent, totally independent commission who would 



2404 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

do their work and I can’t guess. 
 
What we do know from the legislation is that the deadline 
would be six months. If they went to the extent of the deadline, 
it would be highly unlikely, therefore, that we would have it in 
a spring session of the legislature next year. It could fall within 
the purview of a fall session, if there were a fall session in 2002. 
If not, it could then fall into the purview of a spring session in 
2003. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, for clarifying that. 
 
Mr. Premier, yesterday, and I note from Hansard, you indicated 
that and I quote: 
 

I have indicated that we do not have any plans at this time 
to open the Act or change the Act. 

 
And I think you were referring, of course, to The Constituency 
Boundaries Act. 
 
Mr. Minister, there still seems to be discussion or suggestion 
from members on your side of the House that your government 
might be considering changing the number of constituencies in 
the province, as was the case back prior to 1995. 
 
Mr. Premier, there is of course no set election dates in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The normal four-year mandate will 
take your government to the year 2003 and I think you’ve 
indicated that in the House, that your plan is to be here for your 
full term of the normal term of four years. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, in light of what you just said about the 
Boundaries Commission doing its work and being able to 
present its final report to the Legislative Assembly late 2002 or 
early 2003, if indeed you are looking at staying within the Act, 
not changing the Act, as you indicated yesterday in your 
remarks that you have no plans to do that, then of course we 
will be debating the report that will, I guess, do two things. It 
will either maintain the current 58 constituencies with the 
current boundaries if the population shift isn’t too significant 
and doesn’t go beyond what is required by the Act, or there will 
be 58 constituencies redrawn with different boundaries and we 
will still have 58 constituencies. 
 
The other option, Mr. Minister, and I want you to indicate 
whether your government has plans to indeed present to this 
Legislative Assembly for the next session — since we may be 
ending today and there will be plans being put in place by your 
government — is your government planning to make changes to 
the Act that will indeed reduce the number of constituencies so 
that when the census report is received and the Boundaries 
Commission is established that they will be working hand in 
hand? Is that the plan of your government, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, to be quite frank with the 
member, I have not individually. Others may have been giving 
this thought. I have given this as much thought as we all would 
in passing, and there are conversations in the public sphere and 
so on. When we made the decision some years earlier, ’95 or 
whenever it was, to reduce the number of seats in this House to 
58, I think there was a sense of public acceptance of that 
decision. 

I have not, I repeat, made any decisions or determination of 
legislation that would affect The Constituency Boundaries Act. 
I’d appreciate it from the member if he has a recommendation 
. . . perhaps he is recommending that we should lower the 
number, or leave it at 58, or in the alternative I guess increase 
the number of seats in the province. And I suppose one could 
make a cogent argument for each of those positions. If he or the 
opposition have a position on this, fair enough, we’d appreciate 
hearing it. 
 
But I repeat, as I said yesterday, certainly no decisions have 
been made and I have not given it sufficient thought to 
enunciate a position today. 
 
On the question of the timelines, as I indicated, the Act itself 
prescribes the maximum timelines — three months for the 
interim; six months for the final report after the work of the 
commission. These are of course maximum timelines, and 
essentially the timeline for delivery of the report, in my view, 
should ought to be in the hands of the independent commission 
of this legislature following the adherence of the Act. 
 
And if they felt in two months they could have an interim 
report, fair enough. The Act does indicate “as practicable”. If 
they could have the complete work done in three months or four 
months or five, fair enough. The maximums are outlined in 
legislation so it’s very difficult to pinpoint exactly when their 
findings could be brought to a debate in this House. 
 
Now it’s highly unlikely given the three-month, six-month 
timelines set out in the legislation that they would be done their 
work as early as a spring session, but then again, who knows. 
Then again, who knows. 
 
So I’d appreciate if the member has some suggestions that he 
wants to outline today for consideration, I’m happy certainly to 
hear them. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, I’m 
pleased to hear that your response regarding the commission 
being able to do its work and to prepare a report that would 
reflect what is found in the census and it will take, you know, as 
you have indicated, the maximum amount of time that it could 
take would be six months. 
 
Mr. Premier, in reference to the 1999 election, I think it was 
noted in some of the documents that have been circulated in the 
press that the number of eligible voters in what is referred to as 
the 30 rural seats was about 10,856 and that the number of 
eligible voters in the 26 urban seats — the 11 for Regina and 11 
in Saskatoon, 2 in Moose Jaw and 2 in Prince Albert — as 
about 10,809. Not a whole lot of difference in the ’99 election 
and I’m probably speculating that that hasn’t changed a whole 
lot to the May 15 census that has just occurred. 
 
So the comments being made by some of your members, Mr. 
Premier, suggesting that indeed there will be a redrawing of the 
number of constituencies and a lessening of that number, 
you’ve indicated today that you currently have no plans for that 
and as far as you know no legislation is being prepared for 
delivery next spring or possibly even this fall, if indeed you’re 
going to recall the session for this fall, that no such legislation 
amendments are being proposed to lessen the number of 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2405 

 

constituencies in the province of Saskatchewan. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as we speak today that is 
correct. There is not legislation being prepared. Obviously these 
considerations go on in political circles and in public circles 
about the numbers of constituencies across the province. 
 
As I said, there are those who would propose we have fewer 
members in this House; those who propose we should perhaps 
have more members in this House; and those I guess who would 
accept that 58 would be the appropriate number. 
 
Maybe it’s entirely fair to say that, as we speak today, there is 
no legislation being prepared and I have not given serious, 
serious thought to any particular change one way or the other. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And again 
welcome to the Premier and his officials for the conclusion of 
the Executive Council estimates. 
 
I think we both have an anticipation that this session is drawing 
to a close within a matter of not too many minutes or hours 
from now. And I understand that the Premier has some 
priorities here. I don’t want to mix my metaphors; I’m not sure 
whether to talk about the dinghy that’s out of control in the 
whitewater or about the bus that he’s going to go out and either 
buy or lease and polish up immediately following this session. 
 
But there were a couple of areas that I wasn’t able to . . . didn’t 
have time to touch on yesterday and I would like to deal with 
today, Mr. Premier. 
 
Turning to the issue of the province’s finances, there is growing 
concern — and this concern is not just a partisan concern, not 
just a concern that’s being expressed by the opposition — but 
there is concern that the current patterns of funding, revenue 
versus expenses, in the government is unsustainable. As you 
know, Mr. Premier, you’ve drawn heavily in this fiscal year 
from the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
There is speculation — I don’t know whether it’s true or untrue 
— but there is speculation that the deputy minister for Finance 
was displeased with the budget and has since left 
Saskatchewan. There is growing concern in the business 
community that the budget is unsustainable. And there is 
serious concern by families in Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about the ability to fund health care and education and other 
social programs in the future. 
 
Could the Premier indicate how he plans to sustain a balanced 
budget when he has been growing the size of government, 
government revenues have been increasing, the tax base is 
shrinking — people are leaving Saskatchewan and there are 
fewer jobs — and he is borrowing from the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to address 
some of the issues that the Leader of the Opposition raises, and 
they are indeed important and fair questions in this process, 
because at the heart of what government is about is the 
budgetary process. 
 
Let me say this as an opening comment. This represents, as the 

public of Saskatchewan knows, a balanced budget in a 
succession of balanced budgets. One of the greatest challenges 
that this government faced in the ’90s was to restore fiscal 
stability to the province of Saskatchewan after years and years 
of huge deficit financing led by some of the members opposite 
and their political party. 
 
So we had a real challenge in this province, and it wasn’t a 
challenge, Mr. Chair, that was simply a challenge for 
government. It was a challenge, a challenge if I may say, for the 
entire people of Saskatchewan who, as a result of the 
horrendous deficits and debt that were run up over those years 
of the ’90s, really had to, really had to sacrifice to put the 
province right. 
 
It was this government, Mr. Chair, as you well know and the 
public well know, that was the first government in Canada to 
restore balanced budgets. This is a commitment that is very 
deep in this government, Mr. Chair, to maintain that fiscal 
stability that comes with balanced budgets. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in this current year . . . 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. My friends in the opposition, 
Mr. Chair, want me to repeat that answer and I’ll be most happy 
to do so. 
 
In the current budget, we have demonstrated, I think, the results 
of fiscal prudence. Over the last several years, particularly last 
year, we were the beneficiary in this province of some, in a 
sense, one-time money that came to us through the, particularly 
through the significant growth of revenues from the energy 
sector. Which enabled us, as a people, as a province, to set 
some monies aside in terms of fiscal stabilization and to provide 
for the future stability of our province a Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, which as members know is limited where it should be 
kept. 
 
That Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Chair, has in fact been 
utilized this year because it had grown as the result of these 
one-time revenues. And so essentially, Mr. Chair, what we’ve 
done is to take some of those one-time revenues in this budget 
and invest them in important infrastructure for this province in 
the long term. 
 
So you take your one-time money — not your operational 
monies but this kind of one-time windfall revenue — and place 
it, in my view, into infrastructure that will serve this province 
for many years. So here’s what’s happening, Mr. Chair. Here’s 
what happening. 
 
We have undertaken the largest maintenance and rebuilding 
program for Saskatchewan highways and roadways in the 
history of this province; utilizing, utilizing, Mr. Chair, the 
one-time revenue money. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Now the fact of the matter is I spend a great deal of time on the 
highways and roadways of Saskatchewan. The fact of the 
matter is it seems to me wherever I travel these days, I am 
meeting construction crews, I am meeting detours. I need to be 
tonight in Assiniboia and I know I’m going to have to leave a 



2406 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

little early because of the amount of construction that’s 
happening just right adjacent here on the No. 1 Highway. As a 
result of this budget and the careful utilization of the fiscal 
stabilization dollars and these one-time dollars for 
infrastructure, we’re doing to have this No. 1 Highway twinned 
by 2004. We’ve advanced the plan. 
 
Now it is not simply us, Mr. Chair. It is not simply members of 
the government benches who have looked at this recent budget 
and spoken highly of it. There are reports from the business 
community, there’s reports from . . . well let’s just listen, let’s 
just listen: from the Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce, this 
is from the CIBC World Market report, March 30, 2001, quote: 
 

There may be a new Premier at the helm, but 
Saskatchewan’s 2001 budget revealed very familiar fiscal 
results. The province expects to balance its books for an 
eighth consecutive year with a sizeable Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund available. 

 
From the Scotiabank: 
 

Premier Lorne Calvert’s government maintained a large 
portion of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund instead of using it 
(Mr. Speaker, as we’re called upon to do by the Leader of 
the Opposition) to fund deeper tax cuts, a move, quote, 
“Webb agrees with.” 

 
I’m going to reread that, Mr. Chair, I’m just going to reread that 
so the member from Cannington might take note about it. This 
is Mary Webb, chief economist, the Scotiabank, chief 
economist of the Scotiabank said, and I quote again: 

 
Premier Lorne Calvert’s government instead maintained a 
large portion of the provincial Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
instead of using it to fund deeper tax cuts, a move Webb 
agrees with. 

 
Here is my point, Mr. Chair. We have provided balanced and 
stable fiscal government for these past seven, now eight 
budgets, balanced budget, brought to us by this Minister of 
Finance and ministers of Finance in front of him. 
 
We were able this year to make some very important 
investments in the infrastructure of Saskatchewan, whether it be 
in our roadways, in our community infrastructures, in programs 
like the infrastructure program that is assisting with the 
community of North Battleford to ensure that their water is safe. 
We’re taking some of those one-time monies that we were able 
to, through careful stewardship, put aside and invest in the 
future of our province. 
 
Because that’s our task, Mr. Chair. Our task is to turn our 
attention, not to the past, but to that future which can be a very, 
very bright future for this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier really 
did not get the point that I was trying to make. I’ll try and 
explain it as simply and as straightforwardly as I can. 
 
The deputy minister of Finance has quit. The current budget is 

unsustainable in future years because the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund will be drained. The Crown dividends are not as high as 
they were in the past. The Crown debt is increasing. 
Saskatchewan will soon be back into a deficit position. In other 
words, Mr. Premier, you’re heading back into the Devine era — 
the era that we were trying to get out of. 
 
And just for . . . The writing is on the wall, Mr. Premier. It’s as 
clear as clear could be. Now, Mr. Premier, just to set the record 
straight. In 1998, in 1998 I entered politics. And I’ve always 
been in favour of fiscal responsibility. And when the Premier 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. Order. Order. I’m having difficulty hearing the person 
speaking and the person speaking is having difficulty hearing 
the Chair. I would really like to hear the question as I would 
like to hear the answer, so would the committee please come to 
order and keep the level so that I’m able to hear the speaker. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I appreciate your 
intervention. I think the Premier was trying to listen but 
certainly his colleagues were not. They don’t like the truth. 
 
And what I was stating, Mr. Chairman, and you asked me to 
repeat it is, the current funding of the . . . the current budgetary 
trends which depends on increased amount of resources from 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund are not sustainable. That fund will 
run out perhaps next year, perhaps the year after; depends on 
how long the windfall oil and gas revenues continue in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Chair, to the Premier. The writing is on the wall as clear as 
could be that we will be back in a deficit position very soon. It’s 
serious enough, Mr. Premier, that the deputy minister of 
Finance has left and returned to Alberta. It’s serious enough that 
the business community is losing confidence in the 
government’s ability to manage the affairs of the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, your fiscal plan — this is very important — 
your fiscal plan is based on an increase of I think 3,500 jobs, if I 
remember correctly, but definitely an increase of jobs in 
Saskatchewan. Right now the numbers are negative and 
substantially negative. This month it’s 15,800 job losses. That 
means that even under the government’s projections, which 
were unsustainable, now it becomes less sustainable, and in fact 
sooner rather than later, Saskatchewan will be back in a deficit 
position. 
 
Now NDP governments have entertained deficit financing in 
the past. Mr. Blakeney started it out, particularly causing the 
Crowns to be in serious deficit positions. Half of the provincial 
debt that we now hold was accrued by Mr. Blakeney and his 
government. The other half was accrued by Mr. Devine. They 
both amassed too much debt in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We will be back into that trap under your budgetary planning. 
Your budgetary planning is false. 
 
Mr. Premier, you need to be spending these windfall revenues 
on fundamentals that will make our economy stronger. Making 
government bigger, making government bigger, hiring more 
employees will not create a stronger economy. 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2407 

 

We just have the job numbers, we just have the job numbers 
that have come out and every . . . in many instances, the job 
numbers are down in Saskatchewan, but there’s one glaring 
omission and that’s public administration. Jobs are up in public 
administration. 
 
What that means is that government is getting bigger and the 
tax base is getting smaller. Now even under your projections 
your budget will not be . . . your ability to balance the budget 
will not be sustainable many years into the future. And given 
the current reports that we’re getting from Statistics Canada, 
that’s going to happen sooner than your government has 
projected. 
 
What are you going to tell the people of Saskatchewan to 
indicate that you’re going to change your fiscal planning? Are 
you going to bring in a new economic statement in the fall that 
will correct this problem, because it’s a very serious problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it was very interesting that the 
Leader of the Opposition started his line of questioning here by 
suggesting that this government is following the lead of his 
colleague and friend, Mr. Grant Devine, when he was in 
government. 
 
Now this, Mr. Chair, is an interesting observation from across 
the way. Bizarre, someone says, a bizarre observation. 
 
As I said earlier, one of the greatest challenges that this 
government had to face and the people of Saskatchewan had to 
face with government was to mop up after the wrecking crew 
that occupied these benches in the 1980s, that ran us $15 billion 
dollars into debt — $15 billion. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition refers to his friend and colleague, 
Mr. Devine, when he knows full well that in this budget that we 
are now debating . . . How much are we spending on debt this 
year? 
 
An Hon. Member: — $650 million. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — $650 million we are still paying out of 
this budget year to pay for the debt run up by his friend, Mr. 
Devine. And let him not deny it, as he tried to do in a certain 
leadership debate, let him not deny it. I mean he’s got folks 
right in his backbench here who worked for that administration. 
He’s got MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) who sat 
in that administration. 
 
So if he wants to talk about Mr. Devine’s record I’m more than 
happy to talk about Mr. Devine’s record because we’re living 
with it, we’re living with it. In this budget, $650 million of the 
taxpayers’ money going to pay up the interest . . . the interest 
payments on the debt those people rang up. 
 
Now do you know what we could do with $650 million, Mr. 
Chair? Do you know what we could do with $650 million? Well 
I don’t need to begin to document it. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition who follows about the same 
economic platform and principle as his friend Mr. Devine did 
while in office, the theory is, the theory is — and we hear it on 
a daily basis from over there — the theory is somehow you can 

cut all the taxes. They say this every day, cut all the taxes. 
 
But what do they also say every day? Spend more money. They 
say cut the taxes. Everyday they say that. Then every day they 
get up and say we need more money for roads, we need more 
money for health, we need for money for education, we need 
more money for this, more money for that. 
 
So somehow the theory is you can cut the taxes and you can 
spend more money and you can continue, you can continue to 
pay up the interest debt that their friends ran up here. And 
somehow this is all going to come out in the black. 
 
Well I’ll tell you, Mr. Chair, it never added up when Mr. 
Devine was here. It never added up when they proposed this 
theory to the province during the last election. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it doesn’t add up today. It just doesn’t add up. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition will have his view, his view 
of this budget — fair enough, fair enough. But again I just turn 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. There’s a number of personal 
conversations going on that is overarching the actual debate 
that’s going on right now, so if those members would like to 
take that conversation behind the bar I think it would be 
appreciated. I’d like to be able to hear the questions and also 
hear the answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, we can take the view or 
we could take the word of the Leader of the Opposition or we 
can take the word of well let’s take the word of the senior 
economist from the Toronto-Dominion Bank. Now what did the 
senior economist of the Toronto-Dominion Bank say about the 
budget which we’re now debating? 
 
Well I’ll just quote, Derek Burleton, Derek Burleton “definitely 
a good grade on this one,” definitely a good grade on this one, 
referring to the budget. He goes on to say “the government is 
making progress in making both its economy and its fiscal 
position more competitive.” That’s the kind of a review you get 
from the Toronto-Dominion Bank. 
 
In the Leader of the Opposition’s comments he almost slipped, 
Mr. Chair. You might not have missed it or caught it, but I did. 
He almost slipped. He almost said in his comments here today 
you should take that Fiscal Stabilization Fund and spend it on 
tax cuts. That’s about what he said. He didn’t quite go there but 
I think that’s where he meant to go. 
 
He says take your Fiscal Stabilization Fund. Don’t fund 
one-time expenditures like a highway. No, don’t do that — put 
it into ongoing expenditures like tax cuts. That’s what he was 
saying here, Mr. Chair. 
 
Well you know what that will do, you know what that will do. It 
will send us straight back, straight back to the ’80s, straight 
back to the days of deficits. And I’ll take the word, I’ll take the 
word, Mr. Chair, of . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and I’ll 
repeat it, I’ll repeat it. The member opposite wants to hear it 
again. 
 
So here’s the report from the chief economist of the Scotiabank 



2408 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

of Canada, chief economist, Scotiabank of Canada, Mary 
Webb, she says, and I quote again: 
 

Premier Lorne Calvert’s government instead maintained a 
large portion of the provincial fiscal stabilization fund 
instead of using it to fund deeper tax cuts, a move Webb 
agrees with. 

 
The chief economist at the TD says we’re doing the right thing. 
The Leader of the Opposition says we’re doing the wrong thing. 
I’ll take the opinion of the chief economist of Scotiabank every 
day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, the 
Premier quoted an economist with the TD bank. This is what’s 
happening today: “More gloom predicted.” And this is from an 
economist with the TD Bank. Let me quote for the record, Mr. 
Chair, what the TD Bank is saying about Saskatchewan today, 
under the current NDP government. 
 

“We’ve downgraded our growth forecast by half a 
percentage point and slightly downgraded our outlook for 
2002” to three per cent, bank economist Derek Burleton 
said . . . 

 
“Employment growth is very weak,” Burleton said. “That’s 
going to have an impact on consumer spending, housing 
starts, (and) retail sales.” 

 
Mr. Premier, the TD Bank is saying today, July 6, 2001, “More 
gloom predicted.” That’s the current situation. 
 
Now he can quote from the past when the outlook was a little 
brighter. But the fact is, because the job numbers are lower than 
your government predicted it was going to be, because the tax 
base is shrinking, because windfall oil and gas revenues may 
not be sustainable, you are in serious danger of squandering the 
fiscal surplus by making a larger government, a bigger 
government, a government that lets the Crowns run out of 
control, spend money willy-nilly, compete with taxpaying 
firms, then driving them out of Saskatchewan, further shrinking 
the tax base. It’s a recipe for disaster. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Mr. Premier, can’t you see the writing on the wall? People 
leaving Saskatchewan; businesses located in Saskatchewan 
moving out of the province to escape higher taxes and a 
government that doesn’t recognize it shouldn’t be competing 
with them. Mr. Premier, this is serious and you have not 
responded to my question. 
 
Now you’ve talked about Mr. Devine in the ’80s, and you’re 
welcome to do that, but political rhetoric is not going to get you 
out of the mess that you’re in today. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, the job numbers are pathetic — 21,000 jobs 
lost, May to May; 15,800 jobs lost, June to June. The numbers 
for the year 2001 are far below the job numbers for 2000. That 
represents . . . And the unemployment rate is not increasing. So 
what that means, Mr. Premier, is that there are fewer people 

working, but they’re working out of the province. They’ve left 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They haven’t gone onto the unemployment rolls, thankfully, 
because Saskatchewan people want to work. They do want jobs; 
they don’t want to be on welfare. And so if they can’t get a job 
in Saskatchewan because your government and its Crowns are 
competing with the private sector and because taxes are higher 
in Saskatchewan, they will leave and they will get jobs outside 
of Saskatchewan. That’s a recipe for disaster. 
 
Nine thousand people left Saskatchewan in a year’s time. Sask 
Trends Monitor is predicting that 10,000 people are going to 
leave Saskatchewan this year. Pretty soon we’ll be under a 
million people. And the demographics are also working against 
us because more of the people remaining will not be people 
who are contributing significantly to the tax base. 
 
Now, Mr. Premier, you haven’t answered the question. I have a 
feeling you won’t answer the question, and so I’m going to 
move on to another issue that’s probably going to be much 
more easy for you to answer. 
 
Just to set the record straight in regards to Executive Council, 
my information tells me that there are currently 88 employees 
in Executive Council, that this is an increase of four from a year 
ago. 
 
I would like the Premier to confirm those numbers are correct. 
And if they are correct, I want to know if his entire cabinet is in 
agreement with increasing the size of Executive Council. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The numbers that the Leader of the 
Opposition have, Mr. Chair, are correct. A year ago there were 
84 employed in the Department of the Executive Council; there 
are now 88. 
 
One of the positions is a position in the correspondence unit that 
deals with the voluminous amount of correspondence that’s 
received through Executive Council. One is in media services, 
and two are positions related to our coalition agreement and our 
coalition government. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Will the Premier confirm that all of his 
cabinet is in agreement with the larger Executive Council? 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I request leave of the 
committee to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, with thanks to the Premier and 
the Leader of the Opposition, I appreciate the opportunity to 
introduce some guests that have joined us in the Speaker’s 
gallery today. 
 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2409 

 

The one who has travelled the farthest to be here today is a 
young man by the name of Louis Doom who is a Rotary 
exchange student here for the summer in Moose Jaw. And 
Louis comes to us, joins us from Belgium. So we’re very 
pleased to have him here today. 
 
He’s joined in the gallery by his host student with whom I 
believe there will be . . . they’ll have an exchange returning to 
Belgium later on in the summer, Heather McMaster. And 
Heather is joined here today as well by her brother Iain and her 
mother Joan McMaster who is, by the way, one of the school 
board trustees in Moose Jaw. Good to have them here. 
 
They’re also joined by Anne Millar and Lindsay Millar from 
Regina, who I suspect are connected to the world of Rotary 
exchange. Good to see them here as well. 
 
And I’m also pleased to introduce, joining them in the gallery, 
Andre Cowon, who is a summer student working in my office. 
 
Members of the Assembly, and members of the committee, I 
would ask all to extend a warm welcome in particular to Louis 
Doom and to say welcome to Canada. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 

Subvote (EX01) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I was in the 
process of asking the Premier a very short question just to 
clarify from his comments that his cabinet is in total agreement 
with a larger Executive Council. Would he clarify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I have not polled 
individually members of cabinet on each of the positions in 
Executive Council. I’ve not done that. But I tell you what. This 
cabinet is in absolute solidarity in supporting this budget, which 
provides for these employment opportunities. 
 
Mr. Chair, just while I’m on my feet. As a Rotarian I also want 
to extend my greeting to our Rotary exchange student who is 
with us here today. I know this a life-changing and a 
life-enriching experience and I wish him all the best. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the Premier: I’d 
like to know what the rationale was for splitting the position of 
deputy minister to the Premier and cabinet secretary into two 
separate positions, currently held by Dan Perrins and Judy 
Samuelson. That’s a job that used by done by one person, Greg 
Marchildon, the former deputy premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, and I don’t at all fault the 
Leader of the Opposition for this; it’s structures within 
Executive Council, in the current . . . in the former regime when 
Dr. Marchildon served as the deputy to the Premier. 

And you know, Mr. Chair, the member from Rosthern and the 
member from Cannington, I mean they have not asked one 
question during my estimates, except they’ve asked dozens 
from the floor, from their benches. 
 
So I invite them, if they have these very important issues they 
want to raise, they should just jump up . . . just jump up and ask 
. . . see, it gets them going doesn’t it? 
 
Anyway, I’ll say again to the Leader of the Opposition, when 
Dr. Marchildon served as the deputy to the Premier, the chief 
civil servant of the province, he adopted the title of deputy and 
cabinet secretary. But the fact of the matter is another individual 
served that role within the cabinet, at one time, most recently, a 
Mr. Perry Erhardt. 
 
Now my reorganization, as small as it is in terms of these two 
offices, the functions are still held by two people, but I wanted 
to clearly differentiate their titles. I wanted to ensure that my 
deputy could be seeing to and devote his full attention . . . full 
attention to building the strongest public service and 
administering the best public service that we can possibly have 
for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Premier, does the deputy 
minister to the Premier attend cabinet meetings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Yes, appropriately so, Mr. Chair, the 
deputy to the Premier will attend almost all cabinet meetings as 
his schedule permits. It is entirely appropriate in my view that 
the deputy to the Premier, the chief of the province’s civil 
service should be present to hear cabinet discussions, to 
understand the policy directions that are being set by cabinet. 
And therefore to . . . as he so adequately does . . . therefore then 
implement the policy decisions made by government. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, I’d like to again 
change course a little bit. There is a lot of unfinished business 
that is still on the books as a result of actions by this 
government, issues that need to be addressed. 
 
My background federally was one where there was both a fall 
session and a spring session of the House of Commons. Many 
times legislation was introduced in the fall session. There was 
time for public evaluation. Groups interested in the legislation 
could review it. And then a budget would be brought forward in 
the spring session and more meaningful debate would occur. 
 
Right now we still have many urgent issues facing the province 
of Saskatchewan that need government direction and action. 
There is the whole issue of the health care crisis in 
Saskatchewan, with waiting lists extremely long. The fact that 
the Fyke Commission has reported and there’s been no response 
yet from the government because of ongoing study. 
 
There is the issue of the drought in much of the agricultural 
sector here in Saskatchewan and there’s still . . . while it’s 
obviously very severe, the full extent of the severity will be 
known in the fall. 
 
And then there is the disaster of jobs being lost and a population 
that is decreasing in our province and, as I mentioned to you 
earlier, Premier, that’s a recipe for economic disaster in this 



2410 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

province. 
 
So I would like to ask the Premier if he intends to call a fall 
session of the legislature to deal with these very, very important 
issues. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as I reported moments ago to 
our friends in the media, I have not, not decided on the recall of 
the legislature for the fall. I have certainly not written the idea 
off, but we certainly have not made a decision to recall in the 
fall. 
 
One, we will recall this legislature in that circumstance where 
there is sufficient work to be done by the legislature. We will 
today, I am hopeful, pass the budget for this fiscal year, which 
is a very, very, very significant piece of work for this 
legislature. We have in this session dealt with, my count was 
58, I believe — 60? — 60 Bills; some of them of less import, 
but many of them of high significance to the people of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve had a good legislative agenda here and 
it’s been, it’s been complete. 
 
As we look to the fall it will be a circumstance of judging, as 
we approach those months, of the work that could be done in 
this House at that time, if it’s appropriate that it be done at that 
time or if it’s possible to do the work or appropriate to do the 
work in a spring session. 
 
What I want to conclude by saying, Mr. Chair, is this: that 
because this House is not in session does not indicate that this 
government is not at work. In fact, this government will be at 
work over the course of this summer, through every month of 
the fall, developing and delivering good public policy. 
 
We’re going to leave this place; we’re going to spend a little bit 
of time, I assume all of us, taking a bit of a summer break. And 
I can say for members on this side of the House, we are going to 
be using the days and weeks of this summer to be talking to 
Saskatchewan people, not here, but where Saskatchewan people 
are in the summer — in their communities, in the parks, in the 
fair days and the rodeos and the powwows. 
 
This government will be on the road, and I’m very pleased to 
say many of us will be travelling the highways and byways of 
this province in a very nice STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company) bus. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Premier, 
that’s again very disappointing to think that the Premier thinks 
that everything is fine in Saskatchewan. We should all be just 
enjoying the rodeos while people are leaving Saskatchewan. 
You know, we should go to the fairs and, you know, read a 
good book at the cabin at the lake while jobs are being lost. 
 
Mr. Premier, I think that the signals say that it’s imperative that 
we have a fall session of the legislature because a change in 
direction is imperative for the province. The clock is ticking, 
and it’s ticking against this province right now and it’s ticking 
against the viability of a strong economy and a quality of life. 
 
Mr. Premier, we’ve come to the end of this session of the 
legislature and I want to make a few observations. We’ve been 
looking for leadership from the other side of the House and 

we’ve seen none. We have seen leadership come from this side 
of the House. We saw leadership when it came to child sex 
abuse. We saw leadership when it comes to dealing with fiscal 
matters. We’ve seen leadership when it comes to addressing the 
crisis in health care. 
 
We have seen leadership when it comes to insisting on 
government accountability. Certainly we saw no leadership 
from the Premier of the province when it came to ministerial 
accountability. 
 
We have seen a very thorough review of the estimates, a 
professional review of this government’s action — or more 
often inaction. 
 
And we have seen a positive alternative presented by the 
Saskatchewan Party with regard to almost every issue whether 
it be the Crowns, whether it be no-fault insurance, whether it be 
ISC (Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan), 
whether it be the quality of water in Saskatchewan. It was the 
Saskatchewan Party that initiated the motion, the emergency 
debate and motion that we all agreed to here in the legislature. 
 
That was a Saskatchewan Party initiative that showed that the 
leadership in Saskatchewan right now is coming from the 
opposition, and that we’re handicapped in that we don’t have 
enough members to actually — except for one night — make a 
difference here in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now given that vision from this side of the House, given the 
leadership the Saskatchewan Party has shown . . . 
 
(12:30) 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I’m having difficulty hearing the 
speaker. Would the Minister of Labour please come to order. 
Thank you. I would like to hear the question and also hear the 
answer. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. While the 
leadership has been coming from this side of the House and by 
all of my colleagues on this side of the House, the opposite is 
becoming very obvious on that side of the House. 
 
The NDP have given up. They’ve given up on Saskatchewan. 
They expect school enrolments to drop by 30,000. In their 
minds, it’s a fait accompli. We’re going to lose families; people 
are going to leave Saskatchewan. We’re going to close schools; 
we’re going to fire teachers. We’re giving up on education; 
we’re giving on the future of our province. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the NDP have been unaccountable. They have 
allowed their ministers to wander away and deal with every 
crucial issue as though it was an arm’s length issue. 
 
We’ve seen from the minister responsible for the Crowns, he 
has no control — not even any knowledge in many cases — of 
the actions of his own Crown corporations that are supposed to 
be working for the people of Saskatchewan but have been 
working against the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have seen a government that purposely mislead the people 
of Saskatchewan about the quality of their water. That’s a 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2411 

 

terrible, terrible indictment on this government. It not only 
shows lack of leadership but it shows a terrible lack of 
responsibility. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we have seen a government that has shown no 
leadership with regards to health care. Mr. Speaker, health care 
is deteriorating in this province — the waiting lists are getting 
long; doctors, specialists, nurses leaving the province of 
Saskatchewan; people going to emergency and not receiving 
proper attention within a reasonable amount of time; ambulance 
service not addressing the needs of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Everyone recognizes that health care is deteriorating in every 
part of Saskatchewan, including the city of Saskatoon and the 
city of Regina. Health care is a serious issue; it’s an expensive 
issue for Saskatchewan people. It affects families. Families hurt 
if good health care is not provided. Families in Saskatchewan 
are hurting. Parents are concerned about whether their parents, 
grandparents in Saskatchewan, and even their children are 
going to have adequate health care. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Premier seems to have given up on health 
care, he seems to have given up on education, he seems to have 
given up on agriculture, he’s given up on rural Saskatchewan, 
he’s given up on a sustainable budget, he’s given up on the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
People in Saskatchewan are a hopeful people. People in 
Saskatchewan want . . . they think highly of their province and 
they want the best for their province, but their hopes have been 
deferred by the actions of the Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, the people of Saskatchewan, the media in 
Saskatchewan have recognized that the Saskatchewan Party has 
presented a good opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Even members opposite, even the Premier 
this morning on CBC radio acknowledged that the 
Saskatchewan Party has been a good official opposition. 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, most people recognize that if you’re good at 
one thing, you’re probably good at a number of things. And the 
people of Saskatchewan are recognizing that if the 
Saskatchewan Party can be a good opposition, they would also 
be a good government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — They are recognizing that if the NDP 
government is a bad government, likely they’d be a bad 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — So we better not see too many of them 
around after the next election. 
 
The Premier, the Premier over and over and over again in this 
legislature, rather than defending his terrible record, rather than 
sticking up for his ministers, has stood up in his chair, when he 
has, and it hasn’t been often, but he stood up and he’s 

reminisced about the ’80s and about how terrible the 
Saskatchewan Party is, without a shred of evidence, without a 
shred of proof. 
 
I challenge the Premier, I challenge the Premier. If he really 
believes that, if he isn’t just playing political games, why 
doesn’t he just test his theories with the people of 
Saskatchewan? I ask the Premier to be bold, to be strong, to 
either do something or call an election so we can do the job for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank the Leader of 
the Opposition for his presentation in the House today and for 
work that he has done over the course of the session, and his 
colleagues. 
 
He makes a fair point. This opposition in this session has done 
some good work, in one role — in one role — which role is to 
put the government on the test, to make government 
accountable, to ask tough questions, to call for accountability. 
 
In this score, Mr. Chair, this opposition has done not bad work 
in this session. I’ll give them that. 
 
But there are some other areas that this opposition might have 
scored just a little higher in the session in my view, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now let’s just rehearse the circumstance around their 
non-participation, their non-willingness to deal with the Fyke 
Commission in a way that would approach it to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you it took a lot of work on this side, a 
lot of work on this side to find a mechanism by which we could 
have this opposition be part of perhaps the most historic health 
care planning process in the history of the province. If we had 
to drag them kicking and screaming — I’m glad they finally 
came — I don’t think that’s the kind of response that people 
want from an opposition. 
 
And the excuse I heard earlier today was that well it wasn’t a 
. . . it was a special committee, not a standing committee. Once 
it was a standing committee, well we could be there. I do not 
understand the argument. 
 
I know what happened here. I know what happened, Mr. Chair. 
The people of Saskatchewan told them you doggone get on to 
that committee and get to doing the work of the people. 
 
Now fair enough, fair enough. They’re good critics. But I also 
ask, Mr. Chair, at the end of this session how many progressive, 
positive solutions have we heard proposed from the opposition 
in this session? Well someone suggests none. I’m not sure it’s 
none but it’s pretty thin. 
 
It is pretty thin, Mr. Chair, of the kind of positive suggestions, 
progressive solutions that you might expect to hear from a party 
who claims, who claims to be on occasion a 
government-in-waiting. They make that claim. Well you know, 
Mr. Chair, whenever I hear that claim you know what I’d like to 
say? I say well they’re a government-in-waiting all right and 
they’re gong to be waiting an awful long time. 
 



2412 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as I review the course of this 
session, this has been an extremely significant session in the life 
of this legislature and in the life of the province of 
Saskatchewan and I’ll tell you why, Mr. Chair. Because during 
the course of this session what has happened — significant 
change has begun. A significant change has begun. 
 
I evidence again the nature of that change. You’ll remember, 
Mr. Chair, about a year ago now how this legislature was 
dominated, dominated by the issue of the state of the 
Saskatchewan roadways and highways. That was the dominant 
issue a year ago in this legislature. Our friends in the opposition 
were running little stunts. There were bringing in pieces of 
asphalt. They were holding contests about the worse road and 
on. And fair enough, there’s a problem with our highways — a 
problem. 
 
Well this is a government that recognizes problems, find 
solutions, implements them, and solves the problems. Now we 
all have the memory I’m sure, Mr. Chair, of the circumstance 
around Val Marie a year ago, where the mayor of Val Marie 
and the citizens of Val Marie went out, given the circumstance 
of Highway No. 4 near their community, went out themselves 
and patched that road. We had Highways folks participating 
with them, but they were down there; they took the initiative. 
They’re like Saskatchewan people; they took the initiative and 
they patched the road because of the concerns that were raised 
by the mayor and by that community. 
 
And that’s why today, Mr. Chair, I am pleased to put on the 
record the full, the full text of a letter that I received yesterday 
from the mayor of Val Marie, and I hope that members across 
will listen to this letter. He writes to me as Premier, saying: 
 

This is a letter of congratulations to the government for the 
great improvement in our Highway No. 4. The earlier start 
time and extra employees have made a great difference in 
that highway. 

 
And I want to pause there, Mr. Chair. The mayor of Val Marie, 
His Worship Robert Ducan, compliments this government in 
terms of the rebuilding of Highway No. 4. He knows, and he 
says, again: 
 

The earlier start time and the extra employees have made a 
great difference. 
 

He understands. He understands if we’re going to rebuild the 
infrastructure of our Highways, if we’re going to provide good 
public service, it takes people. Through this budget we have 
been able to put new employees into highway construction and 
do the kind of work that the mayor recognizes. 
 
Who opposes that? They oppose that. Day after day they stand 
up and say you shouldn’t be hiring those new people. Well, the 
mayor of Val Marie understands what they do. He says: 
 

Highway 4 is now patched from the US border to Swift 
Current, which is two months ahead of years past. Also the 
patching is of a higher quality, with sections having been 
dug out and a gravel base put in to fix continuous problem 

areas so they will not be a problem in the future. 
 
Mr. Chair, listen to what he says: 
 

We can now meet tourists without embarrassment, and the 
safety is much improved. 

 
I would like to add and this is an important paragraph, Mr. 
Chair, he includes in his letter: 
 

I would like to add that Martin Kuntz, the local area 
manager in Swift Current, told me that the road would be 
patched by June the 1st, and it was. 
 

And I say congratulations to Mr. Kuntz, to the entire crew down 
there in Swift Current, in fact to the entire crew in the 
Department of Highways who are out there today repairing the 
highways of Saskatchewan. 
 

It is very uplifting to see the government and its employees 
performing in such an efficient manner. (Finally he says) 
We usually only criticize and never let anyone know when 
things are working. So with that thought, I say a big thank 
you from the people of Val Marie. Yours truly, Robert 
Ducan, His Worship the Mayor, the Town of Val Marie. 

 
Now, he says, he says as a public official of our . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I’m having difficulty hearing the 
answer to the question. Order. Order. Will the committee please 
come to order. I would like to hear the question and now I’d 
like to hear the answer. So would the committee please come to 
order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, it’ll be an interesting response that 
the mayor of Val Marie will have, I’m sure, when he finds out 
that no one across that House seems to value his opinion or 
wants to hear his letter. And the member from Rosthern wants 
me to read it again. I will read it again if he’s not careful. 
 
Mr. Chair, this has been a very productive session for the 
people of Saskatchewan. A session that has taken our attention 
from the past, turning it squarely to the future. We’re rebuilding 
to the . . . we’re rebuilding the infrastructure of our province. 
We’re connecting to the future through the internet, 
CommunityNet. We are connecting to the future of this 
province through the investment in our people, in our children, 
in our young people in record numbers. We are investing in 
health care in record numbers. We are providing quality public 
services. 
 
We have identified in this session the Partnership for 
Prosperity, a game plan for economic development. In a 
vacuum presented over there, except you know their thought 
that we should just cut the taxes and everything will 
miraculously happen. 
 
Mr. Chair, we’ve had some challenges in this session. Important 
challenges having to do with water quality, having to do with 
energy rates, having to do with the negotiations in our health 
care sector and our public service sector. We’ve had challenges. 
We’ve met those challenges, Mr. Chair. We have succeeded. 
Just as the people of Saskatchewan are doing today and will do 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2413 

 

in the future, we meet our challenges and we succeed. 
 
And the key to that success, Mr. Chair, the key to that success is 
that spirit of Saskatchewan, that attitude of believing in 
ourselves and believing in our future that is prevalent in this 
government. It’s prevalent in the business community. It’s 
prevalent among working people. It’s prevalent among farming 
people. It’s prevalent across this province. Only one group of 
people where it’s not prevalent, and they occupy the benches 
across this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, in the close of his 
comments desires an election. He says we should call an 
election tomorrow. Well I’m not going to do that, Mr. Chair. 
 
But someday, someday I’ll go to Her Honour and we’ll have an 
election in this province. And I repeat, as I said earlier this day, 
when that election is completed, I know where I’ll be sitting — 
right here. I’m not sure who will be sitting in the bench across 
the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, one small but important 
unfinished piece of business that I would like to do as we 
complete the session. Members will know that I had requested, 
of our Conflict of Interest Commissioner, a report on the 
concerns that had been raised about the current Minister of the 
Crown Investments Corporation during his service and time as 
Minister responsible for the Liquor and Gaming Commission. 
 
I would appreciate the opportunity to table the report of the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner on that matter today in the 
House. I have provided a copy to the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Subvote (EX01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (EX02), (EX07), (EX04), (EX03), (EX08), (EX06) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 10 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I would seek leave for an opportunity to 
thank the officials who have served us during these estimates. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, thank you for the opportunity. 
I do want to sincerely extend our thanks as legislators to the 
officials who have served us in these estimates, that being Mr. 
Perrins, Ms. Heidt, Mr. Nicol, and Ms. Maher-Wolbaum. 
 
But because the Department of Executive Council, as these 
estimates have shown, in some ways represents the totality of 
government, I want to say a word of thanks through the deputy 
to all of those public servants across Saskatchewan who serve 
us, who serve the people of Saskatchewan, to thank them for 
their work on a daily basis wherever they may be employed in 
this broad, broad public service. 
 
Our thanks to these officials but our thanks through them to all 

who serve the public of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On behalf of the 
official opposition, we too would like to thank the officials, not 
only the ones who came faithfully day after day to help the 
ministers with estimates but all of the public service in 
Saskatchewan. We do know that the province would not be able 
to function at all if we did not have a public service that was 
very dedicated. 
 
And I think it’s very important that all members know and the 
House know and the public service of Saskatchewan know that 
the official opposition does appreciate the work they do on 
behalf of all Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Motions for Supply 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to 
make the following motion: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2001, the sum of $213,005,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to make the 
following motion: 
 

Resolved that towards making good the supply granted to 
Her Majesty on account of certain charges and expenses of 
the public service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 
2001, the sum of $4,136,815,000 be granted out of the 
General Revenue Fund. 
 

And I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of the 
Assembly, I move: 
 

That Bill No. 59, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 



2414 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Years ending respectively on March 31, 2001 and March 
31, 2002, be now introduced and read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to on division and, by leave of the Assembly, the 
Bill read a first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to on division and, by leave of the Assembly, the 
Bill read a second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 13:00 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 56 -  The Tobacco Control Act 
 
Bill No. 47 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic Relations) 

Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Bill No. 48 - The Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic Relations) 

Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2)/Projet de loi n° 48 
Loi corrective (relations domestiques) de 2001 (no 
2) 

 
Bill No. 58 - The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Bill No. 42 - The Métis Act 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name I asset to these Bills. 
 
Bill No. 59 - An Act for granting to Her majesty certain sums 

of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Years ending respectively on March 31, 2001 and 
on March 31, 2002. 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 13:02. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to make a 
statement of a personal nature. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Tribute to Member for Saskatoon Idylwyld 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as we part today and this 
House rises, I think we all recognize that one of our colleagues 
who has served this legislature for many years, exceptionally 
over the past 10 years, is perhaps not likely to rejoin us in this 
Chamber in her current capacity. So I would very much, Mr. 
Speaker, like to say just a few words about the member for 
Saskatoon Idylwyld and her contribution. 
 

I think it is fair to say, Mr. Speaker, that over the past 10 years 
this member has seen a very significant amount of change. Her 
constituency has changed. It initially was Saskatoon 
Westmount; now Saskatoon Idylwyld. Her portfolios in 
government changed over the years: first Social Services; then 
CIC, the Crown Investments Corporation; and then notably, her 
service as Minister of Finance; and Co-operative Development; 
and then again back to CIC. If I may say, talking about change 
— even the Premier’s changed during her tenure. 
 
But I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, there’s one thing that has not 
changed over these years and that is this member’s commitment 
to the legislature, to this province, and to the people of 
Saskatchewan. This member in her cabinet portfolios has served 
in each with poise and professionalism. She has always done, 
no matter what her undertaking, a very thorough and diligent 
job and gave her duties as a minister of the Crown the most 
diligent of attention. 
 
And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, this member made history, 
Canadian history. This member was the first woman in Canada 
to ever be appointed as a Minister of Finance. She served that 
role, Mr. Speaker, from 1993 to 1997 and as members in this 
Assembly well know these years were not an easy time to serve 
as Minister of Finance in this province. Our province was faced 
with a seemingly unmanageable debt and there were very, very 
many difficult decisions to make, sometimes unpopular 
decisions, but always necessary decisions. 
 
That Finance minister dealt with those challenging decisions 
just as she has dealt with every responsibility she has been 
given — with decisiveness, with a great strength of character, 
and a constant regard for the well-being of Saskatchewan 
people. She did, Mr. Speaker, in my view, and I’m sure that 
history will judge, an incredible job of managing the finances of 
this province. And so for years to come the inheritance of the 
work of this member in her capacities in cabinet will serve the 
people of Saskatchewan — not just ourselves and not just our 
children, but in my view our grandchildren. 
 
Now we understand that the member of Idylwyld at some point 
will take her leave from elected office primarily to teach and to 
write a book on Saskatchewan politics. Her book will most 
certainly play an important role in recording the history of these 
most recent years and in sharing that history and educating 
people within the province and far beyond the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that here in the legislature we’re not by 
rule to refer to members by their proper names, but I’d ask the 
House’s indulgence and further to ask all hon. members to join 
me in thanking Janice MacKinnon for all her work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave also to make a 
few comments. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank all 
members of the House for leave. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I too would like to express 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2415 

 

our appreciation for the efforts of the member from Idylwyld 
over the past decade. She has played an important role in the 
political life of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We don’t always agree on the issues and we’ve had different 
views on different issues over the past number of years — for 
myself personally, over the last two or three years since I 
entered provincial politics — but we do respect her 
commitment to the province of Saskatchewan and we too wish 
her well in life after that of an MLA serving Saskatchewan. I’m 
sure she’ll report back to some of her colleagues that it may not 
be so bad and some of them may follow her. 
 
In politics, of course, we keep very close account of promises 
made and promises kept. And I want the entire House to know 
that the member for Idylwyld did make a promise several 
months ago to provide me with a sample of brown salve that her 
mother says cures everything. And during this session of the 
Assembly I did receive that brown salve, and so the member did 
keep her promise — I thank her for that — and do wish her well 
in the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, by leave to make a few 
comments as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the Liberal 
caucus, I too would like to join with the Premier and the Leader 
of the Opposition in thanking the member from Idylwyld for the 
service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Having had the opportunity to work with this member in 
caucus, in our coalition government and also at cabinet and 
Treasury Board, I know how persevering she can be when it 
comes to an issue she strongly believes in. But that is what the 
people of Saskatchewan need, and I hope that we can have more 
members that can reflect the strength and depth of character that 
we saw from the member of Idylwyld. 
 
And I would join with all members in this Assembly in wishing 
her very well in the future. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. MacKinnon: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
with leave to make a very brief statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. MacKinnon: — I promise, Members, I will not be long. I 
have to drive to Waskesiu and I think my twilight tee time is 
becoming a midnight tee time. And if you knew how I play 
golf, that’s probably an appropriate time to be out there. 
 
Don’t you sometimes wish that after hearing all these nice 
things, the person would stand up and say, oh, by the way, I was 
just kidding; I really don’t plan to quit. 
 

I don’t want to start saying thank you’s because I’m afraid that 
if I do begin to say thank you's, I’ll leave people out. And also 
in the last few months I’ve spent a fair bit of time with civil 
servants who I’ve worked with over the years. And to each and 
every one of them I’d say, well you know when I say my thank 
you’s, I’d like to mention you. And they all say: no, no, no, no, 
please don’t, we never want our names mentioned in the 
legislature. 
 
So I have only two things to say, one a comment and another a 
story. And the story is important because it is the one piece . . . 
it leads to the one piece of advice I leave with members. 
 
The only thank you I want to say is to the people of 
Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you if you want to pick a decade to be in 
politics and to be the Minister of Finance, you couldn’t have 
picked a more exciting, interesting, turning point in the 
province’s, and in Canada’s history. 
 
So I say a great thank you to those people who allowed me to 
do that. And as my son, who is my research assistant is going 
over the record, his first comment is: boy, this is boring. And I 
say: William, it’s not boring, it’s my ten-year career. 
 
But his second comment is: you know people actually were 
quite decent to you considering some of the decisions that you 
had to make; they let you off pretty lightly. So that’s my 
comment. 
 
My story has to do with . . . and it’s kind of a bipartisan story. It 
has to do with the 1997 budget, and the member from 
Kindersley will remember that budget because it was his very 
wise decision to stand in this legislature and to support that 
budget. 
 
Well, now what is on the public record about the 1997 budget is 
what happened from January to March. And in January the 
member from Kindersley started saying: gee, if only this 
government would drop the sales tax from nine to seven, that’s 
what the province needs to get itself going. 
 
I knew that in December we had already decided to do that, so I 
was watching with great interest as he dug himself further along 
this road, to the point where he said: and in fact, if that 
government drops the sales tax from nine to seven, I’ll vote for 
the budget. 
 
And you know, I have to confess, I’ve always had a soft spot 
for the member because he did live up to his commitments and 
he stood in the legislature . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. MacKinnon: — But what I have to confess today is what 
happened between September and December. How in fact did 
we get to make this astute political decision to drop the sales tax 
from 9 to 7? 
 
We started our Treasury Board deliberations, as the Leader of 
the Liberal Party knows, in September, and I knew we had to do 
something with the sales tax. It had to be dramatic and we 
didn’t have much money. So we all started with this wonderful 
idea, six Treasury Board ministers, that we would broaden the 



2416 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

base of the sales tax. And in September it was so exciting. I 
mean we could take that sales tax from nine to six, nine to five 
had a nice ring to it. But another political party had used that 
and not to great effect so that wasn’t working too well. So we 
were all excited about how far we could drop this sales tax 
down. 
 
By December when decision time came, we were in total 
despair because what we had looked at is all the things that we 
were going to have to tax — the new taxes that we’d have to 
put on — to get the sales tax from nine to seven or five or 
whatever. 
 
And the other thing that had happened, was we were in total 
gridlock. There was still a group of the high-minded Treasury 
Board ministers who said it’s the right thing to do, let’s do it. 
But our politicians and our polls and our focus groups said the 
public isn’t going to thank you for this. Then there was another 
group that said look, cutting taxes is too complicated; let’s not 
even bother cutting taxes. And quite literally, we were sitting 
there gridlocked. 
 
My deputy minister said come on outside. And he looked at me 
and he said, boss, lower it to seven, just take it from nine to 
seven, that’s the easiest way. And, a total role reversal — I said, 
but can we afford it? And he said listen, I’ve been listening to 
those ministers, take this, this, and this piece of spending off the 
table — they’ll be so relieved to have a solution that you can 
get away with it. 
 
So the wise political choice did not come from any of the six 
politicians sitting around the table; it came from the deputy 
minister of Finance. 
 
So the only piece of advice I leave everyone with is: in politics 
surround yourself with the very best people that you can find. 
Let them know that you trust their judgment and their ability to 
give you advice and they’ll get you where you need to go. 
 
So thanks very much for the comments and all the best to all of 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I’d ask for leave 
of the Assembly to move a motion of adjournment. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(13:15) 
 

MOTIONS 
 

House Adjournment 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I intend to 
move a motion, seconded by the member from Cannington. But 
I would like to take a few brief moments to thank the people 
who are involved in the operation of this Assembly when we’re 
in session. 
 
First of all I’d like to thank all of my colleagues in the 
legislature for their work during this session. I think it’s safe to 

say that we don’t always agree on issues but we do share a 
common commitment to represent our constituents and all of 
the people of Saskatchewan to the best of our abilities. And I 
think it’s this commitment and dedication that leads to lively 
debate and an interesting session to say the least. 
 
I would like to thank you, Mr. Speaker, for your hard work 
during the session. I think members will agree that you 
performed admirably in your first session as Speaker of this 
Assembly, and I think that all members would also agree that 
your job is not an easy one even though the members were 
always on their best behaviour as was attested to a little earlier 
this morning. 
 
You were asked to make several rulings during the session and I 
believe your rulings were fair and thoughtful. You should also 
be commended for allowing members to express their 
constituent’s views with the emotion and the enthusiasm that 
this place brings to it while maintaining as much decorum as 
possible. 
 
And I also want to thank the Opposition House Leader and the 
member from Cannington for their assistance in putting 
together the business of the Assembly, of this House, each day. 
And I’d like to thank the Clerk of the Assembly, Gwenn Ronyk, 
Greg Putz, and the Clerk Assistant, Meta Woods and Viktor 
Kaczkowski for all their hard work during this session. And I 
guess thanks as well to Monique and Zorka and Sandra in your 
office, Gwenn. 
 
To our pages, Nikki, Pam, Amanda, Loni, Sarah, Jennifer, and 
Lori, I want to thank you for your assistance and we really do 
hope that you’ve enjoyed your experience working in the 
legislature during the session. 
 
And I also want to thank the dedicated staff of all three of our 
caucuses, the ministers’ offices, the Executive Council who 
assist in carrying out our duties in this Assembly. And just a 
little inside joke from the Government House Leaders’ 
Committee, I want to thank Mur the Purr Manz for his 
attendance to his duty. 
 
Also I want to thank our constituency assistants who represent 
us in our constituencies when we’re here working in Regina. 
And you, Patrick, I want to thank you and your staff and the 
commissioners for keeping this building safe, keeping us safe, 
providing security in a very professional manner. 
 
The staff of Hansard. They worked some very long hours to 
make sure that everything we say in this chamber is recorded 
accurately, which may in some cases not be the best thing, but 
that’s their job and that’s what they do. 
 
And I want to thank the Journals staff, the visitor services staff, 
the library staff, for providing their assistance to the members 
and the caucus staff. And also the Law Clerk, Ken Ring, and his 
staff for their assistance to ensure that our legislation is written 
properly. Also to Ian Brown and his staff in legislative drafting 
and in assisting our government to prepare our legislation. 
 
And a special thanks to the friendly and hard-working cafeteria 
staff who help us pack on these extra pounds that we generally 
do gain when we’re here in session. 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2417 

 

And a big thanks to the SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) maintenance staff, ensuring that we 
keep our offices in tip-top shape, and the building itself of 
course. 
 
And we also have to pass on thank you to the visitor services 
who help make our building open and accessible to school 
groups and tourists and to the general public. 
 
And recognizing as well the work of Gary, Ihor and Kerry in 
broadcasting services who provide television coverage of the 
session to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think all members would like to recognize the contributions of 
their staff and officials from the government departments for 
their assistance in Committees of the Whole and of Finance. 
They work very hard in trying to make us look as good as we 
can be in answering some of these difficult and tough questions 
that have been posed by the opposition. 
 
Lastly, but certainly not least, Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
media. They may not always get the stories as we would like 
them. They may interpret the facts somewhat differently than 
some of us do, but they do report the daily activities of the 
House to the people of Saskatchewan and I want to thank them 
for that. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
wish all of my colleagues in the legislature a safe and a relaxing 
summer with their families and constituents. I look forward to 
seeing all of you again in the next session of the legislature. 
 
And I want to as well thank all of the families of members who 
. . . it is quite an imposition, as members will know, to be away 
from your homes and your families as much as we are. And so I 
want to thank all of our families on behalf of the government 
side for their tolerance. 
 
And so with that, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move, seconded by 
the member from Cannington: 
 

That when this Assembly adjourns at the end of this sitting 
day, it shall stand adjourned to the date and time set by Mr. 
Speaker upon the request of the government, and that Mr. 
Speaker shall give each member seven clear days notice, if 
possible, of such date and time. 
 

I so move. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, on this final day of a 71-day session, I too would like 
to take the opportunity to thank various people. 
 
We’ve had a very good session, Mr. Speaker; at least the people 
in the opposition believe so. We’ve had lots of action in the 
House. The fact is we’ve had historical votes, Mr. Speaker. And 
we even passed good legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to say thank you to the Speaker, to yourself, and to the 
Deputy Speaker. I know that at times we challenged you. We 
challenged you in the positive sense, Mr. Speaker, in various 
points of order and privileges and votes that create an 
atmosphere in the House, Mr. Speaker, that is a historical events 

that happen that are recorded here, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 
important that the work that you and the Deputy Speaker did 
was fair, with integrity, and we appreciate the hard work that 
you put into maintaining the decorum of the House under trying 
circumstances at times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d like to thank the Clerks of the Table. They 
are the people who know the rules of this Assembly, that we 
rely on in asking questions to make the exact determinations on 
how things work and how that both sides, Mr. Speaker, can 
utilize those rules to the best advantage of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
To your staff, Mr. Speaker, who have been very co-operative in 
dealing with all sorts of manner of business. 
 
To the Sergeant-at-Arms and to the commissioners and the 
other security staff of the building, they are very pleasant, they 
are very efficient, and they do the job, as the Government 
House Leader said, very well of protecting us. And we thank 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
To the pages, who are almost invisible to the public in the 
House, Mr. Speaker, but are very, very important to us. We 
utilize them in all manner of way to communicate across the 
floor, Mr. Speaker, to our offices, and to keep our water glasses 
full, Mr. Speaker, which allows us to filibuster much longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to also thank the library staff who provide 
us with again all manner of information. They’re here to 
provide service to the members and they do an excellent job of 
it, Mr. Speaker. And when you ask them to get you information 
on virtually any subject, you can count on them supplying you 
with information and knowing that that information is accurate, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d also like to thank the people that make it possible for our 
constituents across this province to actually see what we do in 
here on a daily basis. That’s the broadcast staff. They do an 
excellent job, Mr. Speaker. And I know that in this session they 
have had some difficulties with the equipment but they get it up 
and running again very quickly, and we look forward to 
working with them more in the future. 
 
To the guide staff, Mr. Speaker, that help not only ourselves 
when we come in, Mr. Speaker, but the people of Saskatchewan 
who like to stop in and visit this Assembly. And it’s a very 
beautiful building indeed, and we’re proud to show it off, and 
the guides are those that have the history and communicate with 
the people that come into the building and let them know what 
is happening here and the history behind the building. 
 
To the Hansard staff, Mr. Speaker, who record our every 
utterance whether or not we actually mean to have them record 
it. They do that and they do it excellently. 
 
There is a tradition though, Mr. Speaker, in the House which 
perhaps most members are unaware of and that’s the tradition 
of the cinnamon bun, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Every year, sometime during the session, the people at 
Hansard, Mr. Speaker, supply me — as an individual, Mr. 
Speaker — with a cinnamon bun and I would like to thank the 



2418 Saskatchewan Hansard July 6, 2001 

 

Hansard staff this year for lastly providing me with that 
cinnamon bun. It was an excellent, excellent homemade one, 
Mr. Speaker. So they not only do a good job of recording our 
words — also excellent cooks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Talking about the cooks, Mr. Speaker, as my colleague heckles 
in the background, you’re buttering them up for next year — 
absolutely, Mr. Speaker. The cafeteria staff, Mr. Speaker, that 
keeps us feed and watered do an excellent job. You can tell, Mr. 
Speaker, that a good number of the members utilize the services 
downstairs and that they are appreciated. 
 
To the SPMC staff that keep the building clean, keep our 
offices working, Mr. Speaker, thank you. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most importantly, to our office staff — to the 
office staff, Mr. Speaker, on both sides of the House — we rely 
on those staff people to a huge degree. If, Mr. Speaker, and I 
say this with a big if, if we look good, Mr. Speaker, in doing 
our jobs it’s because of the staff that have supported us, 
provided us with the information. 
 
I’d like to say, in my case, a very special thank you to Paul who 
works with the Government House Leader person, Darwin, in 
organizing the House. So a big thank you to Paul and Darwin, 
and to the Government House Leader, Mr. Speaker, in working 
together. He challenges us, Mr. Speaker, and I enjoy matching 
wits with him to try and gain a slight advantage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to our constituency office staff who deal with all 
the issues that come forward on a daily basis to our offices 
when we’re in here doing our duties in the Assembly, a big 
thank you. 
 
I’d like to also say a very big thank you to the media. As the 
Government House Leader said, they don’t always get the 
stories right, but I think most of the members on this side of the 
House would say that they generally get the stories right, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we have to say a thank you to each and 
every one of ourselves, to the MLAs, who through their 
dedication and hard work make Saskatchewan a better place. 
We represent our constituents in here; we represent their needs 
and desires, their wants; and hopefully we’re building a future 
for them. 
 
I’d like to specifically, Mr. Speaker, point out two members. 
The member from Battleford-Cut Knife who is currently in the 
hospital with leukemia. And he spent his time in the House, Mr. 
Speaker, until the day he had to go in for chemotherapy. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the member for Humboldt, who spent her 
time in the House doing her duty even though her father was 
extremely ill. 
 
I know that many of the other members, Mr. Speaker, have 
faced crises or personal difficulties in their lives during session, 
and they too have spent their time working in the House, doing 
their duties on behalf of their constituents. I think we need to 
thank them also. 
 
Last, but not least, Mr. Speaker, there are people who support 

us but who receive no formal recognition in the House on a 
general basis, who we do not see around the Assembly, but . . . 
those are our families. We need to say thank you to them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — So, Mr. Speaker, all of the members of 
the opposition, along with I’m sure the members of the 
government . . . I know that the Government House Leader 
mentioned this . . . we wish all of the members, all the 
legislative staff, all the people of Saskatchewan, a good and 
safe summer holidays, and I look forward, Mr. Speaker, to be 
being back here sometime early in the fall. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly before I put the 
questions, I think it would be appropriate if I used this occasion 
to put some comments on the record. 
 
I feel that too often we do not thank everybody so it may be a 
. . .some redundancy, but please bear with me. 
 
From the Speaker’s perspective the people of Saskatchewan 
expect three functions of this legislature: first of all that 
members scrutinize and pass laws necessary for a civil, modern 
society; second, that members scrutinize and appropriate 
necessary funds to implement government programs; and third, 
that the many and varied views of constituents be brought to the 
Assembly by the members who represent them. 
 
Although every person in the province cannot have his or her 
way, they should be permitted through their members to have 
their say. And I want to express today that I’ve been privileged 
to preside as Speaker while members have fulfilled these duties. 
 
For members to be able to do their work, the three functions 
that I mentioned, they have the support of their respective 
caucuses and staff and the employees of the Legislative 
Assembly Office and the independent legislative officers. So 
today, in addition to the remarks from the Government House 
Leader and the Opposition House Leader, I too want to thank 
all those who have provided parliamentary service or advice to 
members. And I’m talking about everyone who works for the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And before that I should also mention I would like to thank 
publicly the maintenance and cafeteria staff who look after our 
very, very basic needs. 
 
And I’m talking about the pages who — they are the only 
people that I will mention by name because I expect that most 
of them will be going on to other interests in the following year 
— and that is Pamela Yungwirth, Lori Rosom, and Nicole 
McNaughton, Amanda Lawson, Loni Schick, Jennifer Simair, 
and Sarah Theaker. Thank you very much for the service that 
you have provided and the help with the information and paper 
flow. 
 
I want to thank the Clerk and all of those who work in the 
Clerk’s office. The Clerk serves as sort of the deputy minister to 



July 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2419 

 

this department, and all of the members rely on them for 
procedural advice. 
 
I want to thank the Hansard and Journals management and 
staff. They’re the ones who, it has been mentioned, capture all 
that is said in this legislature for posterity. 
 
The Legislative Law Clerk and staff who provide us with the 
technical expertise in writing the law. 
 
The librarian and library staff who provide access to 
information on any topic, any time. 
 
We’re very conscious of people in financial services. The 
payroll is a very important function in this legislature. 
 
People who work for information services, who keep our 
computers and programs updated. 
 
People who work in administrative services, who coordinate 
behind-the-scenes work to keep the legislature and in some 
cases the constituency offices functioning. 
 
The visitor services, who make visitors to this building 
welcome. 
 
To our Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff who provide security 
service with a smile. 
 
To our broadcast services, who provide TV coverage now 
province-wide and also on the Internet. 
 
And of course my staff from the Speaker’s office, who is sitting 
in the Speaker’s gallery today, who meet everybody that they 
see with enthusiasm and courtesy and competence to support 
the functions of the Speaker’s office. These are the people that I 
want to acknowledge today. 
 
Anybody who works in this building has a sort of an unique 
position. First of all, I believe that they all feel privileged to 
work in this building in support of the work done by the 
members elected by the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The attitude they bring to this building is important. It’s 
important that they exercise their work professionally. Like the 
Speaker, they must serve all members who are elected. They 
must do so in a non-partisan, impartial manner, even though at 
every turn they are bombarded by partisanship. But that’s the 
requirement of our system. We demand competence; we 
demand professionalism. In this case that means being 
even-handed. 
 
So on behalf of all members seated in the Assembly, in addition 
to the remarks we’ve heard, I want to express my gratitude to 
the employees of the Legislative Assembly and the independent 
officers for their manner, decorum, good will, and dedication 
that they give to their work. Thank you for providing all 
members with the legislative infrastructure. 
 
Of course I want to mention also, in addition to those who get 
paid by the legislature, the media who diligently interpret the 
works of the Assembly at all hours of the day. 
 

Members, at the opening of my remarks, I mentioned the public 
expects three functions of this legislature. That laws under 
which we are governed be scrutinized and enacted. During this 
session you’ve passed more than 60 Bills. That funds be 
authorized for the carrying out of government supported 
programs. You have scrutinized and passed the budget. That the 
varied and diverse views held by the people of Saskatchewan be 
given voice in the legislature. To that end people watching the 
proceedings or reading the newspapers or watching the 
electronic news or referring to Hansard can attest that a great 
abundance of opinions have been heard. 
 
I commend all members for the diligence they have put to their 
jobs. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are indeed fortunate to have 
elected such talented, enthusiastic, knowledgeable, and 
hard-working MLAs. I believe that the members elected to the 
House have strived to show that being a politician is an 
honourable calling. And I am honoured to have presided over 
your deliberations. 
 
As you probably noticed during question period, I feel you have 
done your constituents proud. So I want to extend to all — 
politicians and staff — a safe and relaxing holiday and time for 
family and friends. And then be able to reinvigorate yourselves 
for the intensive work that will be challenging you in the year to 
come. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — The House stands adjourned until the call of 
the Chair. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 13:38. 
 
 
 


