















































Hansard: June 20, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1977 
 June 20, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition today is 
regarding the EMS (emergency medical services) report and 
people that are concerned about the impact on rural 
Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Yellow 
Quill, Rose Valley, Saint-Front, Archerwill, and Fosston. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the condition of Highway 339. And 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the community 
of Avonlea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents of Swift Current and area concerned about the state of 
the hospital in my hometown. The prayer of their petition reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today come from the city of Swift 
Current and the community of Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who believe 
we should build an in-patient treatment centre in the city of 
Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre in the city of 
Weyburn and provide funding for the same. 

And this is signed by citizens of Weyburn and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition trying to bring awareness to the lack of funding 
to non-profit personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 
 

The communities of the signators, Mr. Speaker, are Stockholm, 
Esterhazy, Runnymede, and Togo. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, long-term care services available to the users 
from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Hanley. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition signed by folks 
that are concerned about the high energy costs. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Unity and 
Wilkie. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from concerned citizens that are 
really worried about the future of the emergency medical 
services in rural Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 



1978 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Cadillac. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on 12 matters that 
are addendums to previously tabled petitions. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 66 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

From which industry sectors was capital tax revenue 
generated in fiscal year 2000-2001, and what was the total 
capital tax revenue received by the province of 
Saskatchewan from each of those respective industry 
groups in that year? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
my pleasure today to welcome to Regina representatives of the 
Heritage Canada Foundation, who will be attending a two-day 
national gathering of that organization in Moose Jaw later this 
week. 
 
In your gallery, Mr. Speaker, firstly I would like to introduce 
the chairperson of the foundation, Ms. Trudy Cowan from 
Alberta, as well as a Saskatchewan representative, Mr. Don 
Kerr from Saskatoon. And thirdly, Mr. Brian Anthony, the 
foundation’s executive director from Ottawa. 
 
Welcome to you all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Seated with them, Mr. Speaker, is Chair of 
the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, Dr. Bill Brennan; and 
foundation manager, Garth Pugh. 
 
Let me just tell you a little bit about the Heritage Canada 
Foundation, which was formed in 1973 by the federal 
government as a non-profit, non-governmental organization to 
encourage the protection and promotion of the built, natural, 
historic, and scenic heritage of Canada. 
 
Their board is comprised of representatives from all provinces 
and territories. I expect you will note with interest the numerous 
heritage preservation initiatives that have occurred and are 
presently underway in Moose Jaw. And this will form an 
appropriate backdrop for discussions with your colleagues later 

this week. 
 
Again, welcome to Regina and Saskatchewan, and best wishes 
for a productive meeting in Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official 
opposition, I too would like to welcome our special guests 
today, and we recognize the good work they do for our 
province. And again, welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
a great pleasure to introduce a constituent of mine, Ms. Carol 
Skelton. Carol is the Member of Parliament for 
Saskatoon-Rosetown-Biggar and is serving in parliament after 
my opportunity to serve there. 
 
Carol has shown a great interest in the agriculture concerns and 
I believe also in human resources development is an area that 
she’s done a lot of work. So I would ask all members of the 
Legislative Assembly to join with me in welcoming Carol 
Skelton, Member of Parliament for 
Saskatoon-Rosetown-Biggar, to our Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatoon Math Students Win 
National Pythagoras Math Contest 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I 
would like to take this opportunity to bring to your attention and 
all members an example of educational excellence right here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And while examples of excellence within a public education 
system might fail to interest some of the members opposite, we 
here on the government side take great interest in these matters. 
 
Recently, a pair of Saskatoon math students did it again by 
taking the top spot in a national competition of over 24,000 
students. That’s right, Mr. Speaker, the top spots out of 24,000 
other entrants. 
 
A recent OECD (Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development) report in education indicated that the 
achievements of Canadian students in the areas of math and 
science are improving. Well, Mr. Speaker, here in 
Saskatchewan they are excelling. 
 
This year, at the Pythagoras math contest based out of Quebec, 
Bobby Xiao from Greystone School in Saskatoon, and his 
classmate David Wang, won the gold and silver medals 
respectively in this highly competitive nationwide math contest. 
 
This is the second time this year Bobby and his classmate 
helped propel their school to national fame through their talents 
in mathematics. It is through their accomplishments that the 
school of Greystone Heights has been ranked above even the 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1979 

 

Academy for Gifted Children in Richmond Hill, Ontario as the 
top champion school in this over 1,000 school competition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I invite all members of this Legislative Assembly 
to join me in congratulating Greystone Heights School and, in 
particular, the six Greystone students who took part in this math 
contest and their recognition as national champions in 
mathematics, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Progress Show 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
marks the beginning of the Farm Progress Show at the 
exhibition grounds here in Regina. And it is a very, very 
important agribusiness exhibition that will feature producers 
and business people. Implement dealers and exhibitors from all 
around the world will spend the next few days here in Regina to 
show their latest wares and technology that are available to the 
farm community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this event also generates millions of dollars of 
activity for our economy here in this province, including 
everything from simply staying at a hotel here in Regina, eating 
at restaurants, to the sale of very important agribusiness tools 
and equipment to the farm people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while I was attending it this morning we had the 
opportunity, along with the Minister of Agriculture, the member 
for Regina Qu’Appelle, to listen to the vice-president of New 
Holland North America. Very, very interesting presentation he 
had about the latest in technology over the years and what we 
can expect in terms of technology in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I would want to take the opportunity to invite all of the 
members of the legislature down to see the latest of equipment 
and latest of technology that’s available for our farm families. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway No. 11 Designated Louis Riel Trail 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. A 
significant era of Saskatchewan history was recognized today. 
At the Duck Lake Regional Interpretive Centre, our esteemed 
Minister of Highways officially announced that Highway No. 
11 will, from this day forward, carry the designation Louis Riel 
Trail. 
 
This designation will apply to the entire 364 kilometres of 
Highway 11 in Saskatchewan, from Regina to Saskatoon to 
Prince Albert. Putting the name of Louis Riel to one of our most 
important tourists routes will emphasize the seminal place 
Louis Riel has in the history of our great province and our 
nation, as well as recognize the contribution of Métis people to 
our shared experience. 
 
The ceremony this morning is the culmination of vision and 
work begun two years ago by the Mid-Lakes Community 
coalition consisting of communities along the route, the Métis 

Nation of Saskatchewan, and the Saskatchewan History & 
Folklore Society. This coalition approached the government and 
has now formed the Louis Riel Trail Association with the aim 
of capturing marketing and tourism opportunities along the trail. 
 
$225,000 from the Centenary Fund will be dedicated to 
promoting these opportunities over the next three years and to 
replacing or enhancing the existing signs along the way. Mr. 
Speaker, it is a proud day for the Métis people of Saskatchewan. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Actor to Attend Missoula 
Children’s Theatre Performing Arts Camp 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a 
performer from Humboldt has been chosen to attend a 
prestigious acting camp this summer. Nathan Jenkins will be 
attending the Missoula Children’s Theatre Performing Arts 
camp from August 12 to 25 in Missoula, Montana. 
 
Nathan has taken part in Missoula productions in Humboldt for 
the past five years. This past year he played the lead role of Jim 
in Treasure Island, which involved both singing and acting. He 
has also been involved in the local productions of both Oliver 
and Anne of Green Gables. 
 
Though Nathan does take voice lessons and plays a variety of 
instruments, acting is his passion, and it is his dream one day to 
have a career in that field. This Missoula Children’s Theatre 
Performing Arts camp will take Nathan one step closer to that 
goal. He will work on improving his acting and singing skills as 
well as making contact in the world of entertainment. 
 
Junior actors from Japan, United States, and Canada will be 
attending this two-week camp, which will culminate in a 
performance on the last night. The Jenkins family is planning 
on being there for that performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fee for the camp is $900 Canadian, plus travel 
and accommodation costs. Nathan has received a working 
scholarship from the camp, which means his tuition is paid in 
exchange for performing odd jobs. The Humboldt Area Arts 
Council will provide some funding. As well, Nathan has started 
fundraising himself and he is hopeful he will have enough 
money in time to embark on his trip to Missoula. 
Congratulations, Nathan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Five New Doctors Welcomed in Rural Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to 
welcome five new doctors to their new homes right here in 
Saskatchewan. Dr. Johan Geldenhuys of Carlyle; Dr. Anna and 
Dr. Michael Nsisi of Macklin; Dr. Dali Dewa of Melfort; and 
Dr. Salomine Theron, who recently moved to Kipling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been very successful in 
recruiting capable and qualified doctors for our rural 



1980 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

communities. The addition of these new doctors will have a 
positive impact on each respective community. 
 
No matter how you look at it, Mr. Speaker, the arrival of these 
new doctors is good news for rural Saskatchewan. The health 
care system in this province is based on a solid foundation 
making it possible to build a future full of both opportunity and 
prosperity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like all members of this Assembly to join 
with me in officially welcoming the new doctors who are 
calling rural Saskatchewan home. Their contributions to the 
health care system in this province are greatly appreciated. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Used Oil Filter and Container EcoCentre 
Opens in Grenfell 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last Friday 
I attended the official opening of the Used Oil Filter and 
Container EcoCentre No. 13 situated in the town of Grenfell. 
Mr. Speaker, this ecocentre is run by the community in 
conjunction with the Saskatchewan Association for Resource 
Recovery Corporation. 
 
The Saskatchewan Association for Resource Recovery 
Corporation, or SARRC, is a non-profit corporation formed by 
the oil and oil filter industry in Saskatchewan to develop, 
implement, and maintain a province-wide used oil materials 
recycling program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the recycling program encourages the 
development of used oil collection facilities for the use of 
consumers, in addition to the province-wide collection network 
of over 30 used oil filter and container ecocentres; over 250 
independent locations are also used to accept used oil materials 
across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ecocentre in Grenfell becomes one of these 30 
collection centres in Saskatchewan offering the area residents 
who are concerned about our environment, a place where they 
can dispose of their used oil, oil filters, and containers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the community and the 
surrounding area for this worthwhile effort. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Good News for Industry in North Battleford 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, as anyone with a spoonful of sense 
knows, an economy and the infrastructure that supports that 
economy is built piece by piece, bit by bit, business by 
business. Like those huge complex gizmos our kids and 
grandkids build out of Lego pieces, a total economy is the sum 
of all its parts. And contrary to some bits of gloom that we hear 
from time to time in this Assembly the parts of our economy 
and the infrastructure are humming along quite nicely. 
 
Let’s take for instance, the city of North Battleford. For openers 

North Battleford has received $755,000 from the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, the first 
instalment in May, the second last Friday courtesy of the 
minister of Municipal Government. 
 
And work today . . . begins today on a $10.2 million bridge over 
the North Saskatchewan River on Highway 4. Of course the 
Yellowhead Highway between Saskatoon and North Battleford 
had already been twinned by this government. 
 
And what about the private sector? Well in the June 10 edition 
of the North Battleford Optimist — I say the North Battleford 
Optimist, Mr. Speaker — there is a story about Parkland Pulse 
Company of North Battleford that is currently undergoing a 
$500,000 expansion in three stages, an expansion that will 
double its capacity, create five new jobs, increase its export 
markets, have significant spinoff benefits for other community 
firms, and set the stage for further expansion in the near future. 
 
That’s a fair bit of good news for one month in one town, I 
think. Wouldn’t you say? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Economic Forecast for Province 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Finance. 
 
Today one of Canada’s leading economists is saying the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) budget is based on a forecast for 
economic failure. According to Dale Orr, an economic adviser 
to federal and provincial governments of all political stripes, 
quote: 
 

The Saskatchewan budget is very pessimistic on 
Saskatchewan’s economic growth prospects. 

 
Dr. Orr notes that the NDP’s own budget forecasts 
Saskatchewan’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. We seem to have many 
answers; we have not yet had the question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ll get to that. 
 
Dr. Orr notes that Saskatchewan’s economy is going to fall 
further and further behind the rest of Canada. In fact the 2001 
NDP budget forecasts Saskatchewan’s economy to grow at only 
59 per cent of the Canadian economy over the next four years. 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government forecasting economic 
failure? Why is the Finance minister’s own budget so 
pessimistic about their ability to grow the economy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, I think this has to 
be a first for any opposition party, and I’ll tell you why. What 
this report the opposition has come up with and paid good 
money for, taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker, says is this. It says 
that whereas the government projects that in 2002 our economy 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1981 

 

will grow by 2.2 per cent, their economist says no, Mr. Speaker, 
the economy will grow by 2.8 per cent. 
 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, what they’re accusing us of is not 
that we’re going to fail to meet our targets, but that we’re going 
to exceed our targets, Mr. Speaker. Have you ever heard any 
more ridiculous criticism from an opposition, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s a wonder that 
this Finance minister can be satisfied by projecting a 59 per cent 
growth of the Canadian economy. That’s what his document is 
saying, Mr. Speaker — 59 per cent of the rest of Canada and 
he’s satisfied with that. You wonder where his guidance is 
coming from. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party agrees with 
the NDP on this one instance. It appears the Finance minister’s 
dismal outlook for Saskatchewan was well-founded, Mr. 
Speaker, because over the last 12 months Saskatchewan has lost 
over 21,000 jobs. That’s the worst one-year record since the 
Great Depression. And the NDP’s budget is forecasting that 
things are even going to get worse, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Two weeks ago the Premier and the minister of economic 
delusions trotted out the partnership for poverty document, you 
know, but all the glossy brochures can’t hide the real facts, Mr. 
Speaker. In his own budget, Mr. Speaker, the Finance minister 
is pessimistic about their ability to grow the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member put the question. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — My question, Mr. Speaker: why is the NDP 
planning for economic failure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There’s a scandal here, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s a scandal because the opposition is saying we’re going 
to do better than the government projected in the budget. And 
you know what, Mr. Speaker? I and my colleagues are prepared 
to plead guilty. 
 
We’re prepared to agree with the opposition and it is our hope 
that the economy will grow even more than we projected in the 
budget, Mr. Speaker. We’re prepared to say that. That’s what 
the opposition says; that’s what their economic forecaster says. 
We’re prepared to throw in the towel and agree with them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’re prepared to agree that the sky is not falling, the economy 
has grown, the economy will continue to grow. The budget 
projects that 4,000 new jobs will be created this year, and their 
economic forecaster says we’ll exceed that, Mr. Speaker. And 
we’re prepared to plead guilty and say they’re right, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — I’m not sure if the Finance minister is 
familiar with some track and field competitions, Mr. Speaker, 
but you know, anyone — anyone — can be a high jumper if 
you set the bar at six inches. Anyone can be a high jumper; 
even that minister could be a high jumper. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — You know, Mr. Speaker, apparently the 
Finance minister has succeeded in fooling at least one person in 
Saskatchewan — himself. But the rest of the province wants an 
explanation. 
 
So I will ask the Finance minister once again: if the NDP’s 
latest economic development plan is based on the commitments 
in the minister’s 2001 budget, and the budget is based on the 
minister’s forecast of provincial economic failure, how can the 
NDP claim that they have a plan to create new jobs with an 
economy performing at 59 per cent of the rest of Canada, when 
they just finished killing 21,000 jobs in this economy 
performing at almost 90 per cent of the Canadian economy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There’s more scandal in this report, Mr. 
Speaker, more scandal. The opposition is accusing the 
government of underestimating the revenue to the year 2004-05, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And do you know what their own forecaster says, Mr. Speaker? 
They say we’re misleading the people. Their own forecaster 
says that in this year and in each of the next four years our 
revenue projections, Mr. Speaker, are within 1 per cent — 1 per 
cent — of the projections of the economic forecaster of the 
opposition. 
 
And their forecaster concludes this, Mr. Speaker. Their 
forecaster says the revenue forecast does not make a difference 
that could be considered significant. That’s their own 
forecaster, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But there’s one other thing that their forecaster says, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is that the economy has had good growth in 
the last number of years, something that the opposition denies 
day after day, Mr. Speaker. So we now have the reputation that 
we’re headed in the right direction and we thank them for that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Rates 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today more confirmation that SaskEnergy is 
overcharging for the price of natural gas. This time from the 
city of Regina. A report prepared for the city of Regina says 
that SaskEnergy’s current price is and I quote, “higher than the 
current market price.” 
 
As a result the city of Regina may bail out of its contract with 
SaskEnergy and start buying natural gas from CEG Energy 
Options of Saskatoon who are selling at a price apparently 
lower than SaskEnergy. This is good news for the city of 
Regina, Mr. Speaker. But unfortunately all of the homeowners 
that are SaskEnergy customers don’t have the same option. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is SaskEnergy overcharging 
for the price of natural gas? 
 



1982 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So is the 
expert over there now advising the city of Regina on when they 
should and shouldn’t buy gas and who they should be buying it 
from, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Last week, or the week before, that member advised us and 
SaskEnergy to lock in at $5.60. Then the next day he said no, 
buy on the spot; buy on a 24-hour basis. That’s what he advised 
SaskEnergy on behalf of the taxpayers of Saskatchewan to do. 
Then he said no, wait, it might go lower yet, Mr. Speaker. Well 
today he advises the city of Regina that they should lock in at 
$6.10. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member has no credibility whatsoever when it 
comes to buying gas on behalf of the city of Regina or the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we know that a lot of 
the front bench over there are shopping their resumés around. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I hope that that minister puts more time into 
preparing his resumé than he does for question period or his 
will be the never-ending job search, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The never-ending job search. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, apparently now he disagrees with the expert . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Just a little quieter please. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The experts on the issue 
have already spoken. The buyers at ATCO have confirmed that 
Alberta customers, effective July 1, will pay $4.95 a gigajoule. 
The experts at the city of Regina administration are exploring 
the opportunity of buying cheaper gas than they can get from 
SaskEnergy, which is still gouging consumers at $6.30 a 
gigajoule. 
 
The question remains, Mr. Speaker; it’s not been answered by 
the government. Why are they overcharging Saskatchewan 
people for natural gas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the member refers to 
resumes. On resumes lots of times there’s phone numbers. And 
you know I note, when he . . . last time he was up he talked to 
us about DLC-West, and I refer to The Leader-Post where it 
says here, Mr. Speaker, that Sask Party officials confirmed that 
they never spoke with Nickel, who is the president prior to 
raising . . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker. Never even spoke to 
him. 
 
So I wonder if maybe did he phone the city of Regina. Has he 
phoned CEG, Mr. Speaker? Has he phoned SaskEnergy about 
this stuff? I doubt it, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The truth is, Mr. Speaker, the truth is . . . the truth is that seeing 
that CEG’s business, primary business is that of commercial . . . 
of a commercial perspective, Mr. Speaker. That’s their primary 
business. 
 
We are in a competitive environment. SaskEnergy 
acknowledges that. Mr. Speaker, this is nothing new. The city 
of Regina in the past has purchased from CEG; they’ve 
purchased from SaskEnergy, they’ve gone back and forth. This 
is nothing new. 
 
While we regret losing customers in this particular case, if it 
happens this will be nothing new, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister regrets possibly losing a customer. Saskatchewan 
people across this province in the cities and in the country 
regret the fact that they are apparently overpaying for gas from 
this government, Mr. Speaker. And we still don’t have any 
answers. 
 
All over Saskatchewan consumers are right now, they’re 
opening up their latest SaskEnergy bill, and they’re getting 
quite a surprise. And top of that they’ve had to listen to a 
$75,000 NDP ad campaign telling them they should be grateful 
for a 24 per cent increase. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP isn’t fooling anyone. Saskatchewan 
people know that natural gas prices are falling, but theirs are 
going up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of this, the latest in a mounting lot of 
evidence that the NDP is overcharging SaskEnergy customers, 
will the minister at least tell the House at what point will he 
direct SaskEnergy to re-apply to the panel for a rate decrease in 
the price of natural gas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, that question clearly 
shows how little the member knows about how this actually 
works, Mr. Speaker. That is ridiculous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all, I’ve said in this House many times, and 
I’ve said outside of the House, that the rate that SaskEnergy has 
applied for is a maximum rate — a maximum rate. So if rates 
continue to decrease, it is nothing but a good thing for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as I understand it, Mr. 
Speaker, and as I have been advised and what I’ve read from 
the newspapers, Mr. Speaker, the rate that is being quoted by 
CEG, Mr. Speaker, is the rate that will be locked in. Well, 
SaskEnergy, hasn’t locked, hasn’t locked a rate in so if the city 
of Regina or any customer of SaskEnergy decides to stay with 
SaskEnergy their rates can continue to go down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well the city of Regina will have to make a decision. Do they 
want to lock in at the rate that that member advises them to lock 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1983 

 

in? Or do they want to stay with SaskEnergy and maybe get a 
better rate, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recommendations on the Implementation 
of the Fyke Commission 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. Yesterday the Chair of 
the Committee on Health Care told members of the media that 
recommendations for implementing Ken Fyke’s 
recommendations would come from a parallel process now 
underway by the Department of Health, Mr. Speaker — a 
parallel process undertaken by the Department of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister please detail this parallel process, 
and explain to the people of this province how they will have 
input into these department inputted regulations? 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister deliberately set up this parallel 
process to exclude meaningful input from the people of this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate this 
question because it’s the same question the member asked me 
in estimates and I talked about the process of what we are doing 
in the department, whereby we work with people in the 
community, but specifically the people within the health care 
community, so that we can address some of the very difficult 
issues? 
 
What we want to do is make sure that we’re also talking with all 
of the members of the medical profession, the nursing 
profession, and other places so that we can get the best advice 
on what the possibilities are. 
 
The member is working on the Standing Committee on Health 
and that’s an important part of this. But what we want to do is 
get the best advice we can from the people who are working 
within the system as well as what the communities say. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, there’s a problem with the 
mandate of the all-party committee. If we are to listen to 
people’s responses to the Fyke report and to let the government 
know what we’ve heard, but at the same time that we are 
supposed to be hearing this from the people, the Department of 
Health is going about drafting its own recommendations and 
making decisions about what the Fyke report is going to be 
implemented at in this province. 
 
This is exactly what they did in Channel Lake, Mr. Speaker. 
After months of hearings, after months of meetings, the 
government drafted its own report, made up its own mind, and 
went in its own direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government doing this to the 
people of Saskatchewan? Why should anybody in this province 
believe that any presentation that they make is going to be 

listened to in a meaningful way? And rather, why has the 
minister structured this so that people believe they have input, 
but in reality they’re going to not be listened to and this 
government is going to implement the Fyke report irregardless? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a lot of respect for the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale, and so what I’m led to believe is 
that this is not a question that he has written or the one that he 
has proposed because he understands what it is that we are 
doing as a community of Saskatchewan. 
 
We do not have a plan written. We are listening carefully to the 
people. I’m going out to various communities, and I’m saying 
to them: look, you have developed many things that work very 
well in your community; whatever we’re going to do as a 
province has to build on the positive things that we’ve done 
already. 
 
The member from Melfort-Tisdale knows that, because that’s 
what I said out in Melfort when we went forward with the plan 
for their new long-term care facility. And what we want to do as 
members of the government, working together with the 
members opposite, is to take the discussion away from this 
political banter here to what we really need which is building a 
health care system that will work for all of us. That’s our goal 
and that’s what we’re sticking to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has said that he 
has so much respect for our suggestions. Well if the minister is 
indeed respectful of our suggestions, he will listen to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m in receipt of a letter that’s addressed to the Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Health Care from the Rural 
Municipalities Association, and they say: 
 

This letter is to inform you of our disappointment with the 
fact that all public hearings scheduled are being held in 
Regina. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they go on to say: 
 

We strongly request that the public hearings that are not yet 
scheduled be held at different locations throughout the 
province so that residents can be given the opportunity to 
make meaningful input to this committee. 

 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Chair of the committee said: well 
we’re not doing this because people have to be forced to focus 
on the big picture, Mr. Speaker. She’s saying, and I quote: 
 

What we need to hear is the broad view on this. If you go 
into individual communities, the communities will only 
look to themselves. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government afraid to listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan? Why have you got the mandate such 
that we’re going to sit in Regina instead of listening to all the 
province? 



1984 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to answer, and I’m pleased to answer on behalf 
of the government. 
 
This committee was struck so that we could hear, so that we 
could listen to the people of Saskatchewan, and so that through 
the television media, we could share what the people of 
Saskatchewan were saying from north to south to east to west. 
 
What you have today, Mr. Speaker, is a member who is afraid 
and who is hesitating and who is trying to savage the process of 
these hearings so that the Saskatchewan people can’t have their 
say with respect to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that member why doesn’t he be willing to do 
the job, to listen to the Saskatchewan people, the job that he 
was sent here to do? 
 
If he’s not willing to do the job, maybe he should resign his seat 
and let someone come to this Chamber who wants to hear what 
the people of Saskatchewan have to say with respect to the Fyke 
committee report. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farmland Ownership Policy 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Earlier this month, the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business called on the provincial government to change its 
farmland ownership policy. The majority of Saskatchewan 
agribusiness people believe this change is needed now to 
encourage valuable investment in our agriculture sector. 
 
In response, the Minister of Agriculture is quoted as saying, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Changes are needed. It’s something that we’re looking at 
right now, but it won’t be this session because it’s too late 
in the day. 

 
But, Mr. Speaker, it’s not too late. My colleague, the member 
from Saltcoats, will be introducing legislation in this House this 
afternoon that will ease farmland ownership restrictions in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you support that legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that there has been a good deal of debate and 
discussion to date on The Farmland Security Act. 
 
And I said yesterday in estimates to the member opposite that 
we’re going to continue our exploration and make sure that 
when we proceed down this path, Mr. Speaker, that it’ll be 
encompassing, in fact that it will be inclusive of all 
Saskatchewan agriculture producers and industry in that 

decision. 
 
But what we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker, is we’re not going 
to adopt the direction that the members opposite recommend. 
Because, Mr. Speaker, we’ve witnessed it. We’ve had these 
people on our support when we went to get CFIP (Canada Farm 
Income Program) in this province or AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) in this province. What happened? 
They dragged us down the path, Mr. Speaker, where 
Saskatchewan farmers had to pay and lost money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then we went down to the old CFIP on to the 
CSAP (Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program) and what 
did the member opposite say when we’re talking about CSAP? 
Saskatchewan farmers don’t need any more money — they 
don’t need any more money. 
 
And that member there joined with Mr. Stockwell Day in his 
message saying Saskatchewan/Canadian farmers don’t need any 
more money. So we’re going to pay very little or no attention, 
Mr. Speaker, to the kind of recommendations that come from 
that side of the House because they have been a cost to 
Saskatchewan farmers every time it’s happened. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the minister says he’s been working on it 
for some time. I wonder if it’s the same kind of work that the 
minister of Agriculture previous to him did when the AIDA 
program was being introduced and debated. He sat on a beach 
in Mexico — that’s what he did — when it was being debated. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And when CSAP . . . and when CSAP was being 
formed, where were they? They weren’t anywhere near the 
debate then. And now when the discussions about a new farm 
safety net program are put in place, the minister goes to Ottawa, 
he doesn’t put one single idea on the table — not a thing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And now when the official opposition brings 
forward legislation, meaningful legislation to change farmland 
ownership laws in this province, the minister says no, we can’t 
do that either. 
 
Will you, Mr. Minister, stand in your place and do one thing for 
the province of Saskatchewan’s farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before the answer, I just remind the members 
to direct their questions through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member again, one more time, that what I’m not going to do is 
I’m not going to do what they do over there, Mr. Speaker. And 
we have a history of what they do over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because he makes an accusation of the previous deputy premier 
and the minister of Agriculture being away when we were 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1985 

 

discussing the AIDA. Well this member of the opposition was 
sitting in Holland, Mr. Speaker, in Holland is where he was. 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, this . . . the Leader of the Opposition in 
Holland. 
 
But I say to the member opposite and the Ag critic. When we’re 
out negotiating for more money for Saskatchewan/Canadian 
farmers, and what does the Leader of the Opposition, this year 
on CSAP, what does the Leader of the Opposition and the Ag 
critic do? They align themselves with Mr. Stockwell Day, who 
says, Mr. Speaker, there should be no more money for 
Canadian/Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the Ag critic goes on to say just recently 
. . . Not only, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t he support Saskatchewan 
farmers, but today, Mr. Speaker, he supports Stockwell Day. 
And he says: 
 

I support him and continue to support him, unqualified, and 
I don’t have any doubts, and I still believe he’s a good 
leader. 
 

Here’s the guy who’s taking Saskatchewan/Canadian farmers in 
the dump and that agriculture member represents him, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Launch of Northern Health Science Access Program 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, this morning I had the 
privilege of signing a memorandum of understanding in Prince 
Albert which will provide Aboriginal people with greater access 
to post-secondary and health science education opportunities 
with a particular emphasis on nurse training. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with my colleagues, the Minister of Health and the 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs, we have today joined with our 
post-secondary partners and educational institutions, First 
Nations and Métis organizations to launch the northern health 
science access program. 
 
The access program, Mr. Speaker, will provide students with 
the knowledge and skills needed to further their education in the 
health sciences generally, and in nursing specifically. 
 
The nursing initiative will focus on ensuring that students 
involved in the degree program will develop the necessary 
professional skills as well as the cultural and spiritual 
understandings needed to function effectively in northern 
communities, or for that matter, Mr. Speaker, anywhere else 
they would choose to work. 
 
The impetus for these initiatives came from the Northern 
Inter-Tribal Health Authority, who initially invited the other 
partners to work together to respond to the need for more 
Aboriginal people in the health sector in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 

I want to congratulate and thank the chiefs of the Northern 
Inter-Tribal Health Authority and their representatives for the 
vision and commitment to these initiatives. 
 
Our future, Mr. Speaker, success . . . our future success depends 
on developing initiatives like these that nurture the full 
participation of Aboriginal young people in post-secondary 
education. Initiatives that enable them upon graduation to gain 
employment that contributes to the economic . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. I’d ask the 
members to come to order. The minister will continue with his 
statement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I appreciate your assistance, Mr. Speaker. 
I would just like to say that I believe that the initiatives that 
enable these Aboriginal students upon graduation to gain 
employment that contributes to the economic and social 
development of their communities and their province is 
welcome. 
 
I congratulate the partners to this agreement for taking a 
flexible, inclusive, and strategic approach to supporting 
education that is responsive to the needs of northern 
communities, of Northerners, and of our needs for qualified 
health professionals in the North. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are sharing a vision for Saskatchewan’s future 
and we are acting on that vision today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
thank the minister for providing me with a copy of his 
statement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there certainly is a great need for more health care 
workers in northern Saskatchewan. A recent study by Health 
Canada’s First Nations Inuit health branch indicated that there’s 
a nurse vacancy of some 40 per cent on First Nations 
communities. And this is likely to worsen as the baby boomers 
retire. Prevention and education programs such as diabetes 
awareness, breast feeding, and prenatal care often suffer on 
reserves that are short-staffed. 
 
Last fall, Mr. Speaker, a number of our, of our . . . of my caucus 
members met with the Meadow Lake Tribal Council to discuss 
First Nations issues. And the people at the Meadow Lake Tribal 
Council quickly indicated to us that good health is very 
essential to their people, as it is to all people, for economic 
success. 
 
At a recent reception, Mr. Speaker, that Chief Perry Bellegarde 
of the First Nations association indicated that — as many of his 
previous people who have held that position have indicated — 
that education is a First Nations new buffalo. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I applaud all efforts to improve education and health 
care in First Nations people and congratulate the chiefs of the 
Northern Inter-Tribal Health Authority and the ministers on this 
initiative. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1986 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 206 — The Saskatchewan Farm Security 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move first reading of Bill No. 206, the Saskatchewan Farm 
Security Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government to table written 
responses to questions no. 234 and 235. And noting, Mr. 
Speaker, this exceeds the number in the last session by a fair 
number. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 234 and 235 are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 47 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 47 — The 
Miscellaneous Statutes (Domestic Relations) Amendment 
Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, several 
weeks ago the Minister of Justice came to our caucus to advise 
the official opposition about impending changes to the NDP 
government . . . or I’m sorry, that the NDP government was 
prepared to make to various existing pieces of legislation. 
 
These changes, according to the minister, were required as a 
result of a judgment of the Supreme Court of Canada in the M 
v. H case and trends in case law that require equal treatment of 
married and common-law partners. The minister said, and I 
quote: 
 

The amendments are needed to protect people who are 
vulnerable because they are in dependent relationships. The 
legislation provides for unmarried couples to be treated the 
same way in law as legally married couples. 

 
And thirdly, the minister insisted that: 
 

The definition of marriage remains federal jurisdiction. 
This legislation does not alter that or redefine marriage in 
any way. The federal government has affirmed that 
marriage is the union of one man and one woman. 

 

As a result, Mr. Speaker, some 24 pieces of legislation are to be 
amended as a result of this particular piece of legislation before 
the House today. 
 
At the outset of this discussion, Mr. Speaker, I need to make it 
perfectly clear that the official opposition accepts the authority 
of the Supreme Court under the constitutional and legal 
framework that exists in Canada today. We may as individuals 
disagree with some of the decisions taken by the court and work 
toward attaining legal remedies to change, revoke, or minimize 
the effects of such rulings, but as a whole we recognize the 
court’s authority in these areas. 
 
My concern with this Bill today is that I believe there are 
serious philosophical errors and negative societal consequences 
that will flow from the government’s legislation before us 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the first point of dispute, in my view, is the 
redefining of the word spouse, which this legislation 
undertakes. 
 
While it is said that the Supreme Court ruling in M v. H 
requires a redefining of the word spouse, I view this 
interpretation as overstated. I would argue that the court 
intended that financial benefits which might normally accrue to 
a spouse be extended to common-law and same-sex couples on 
the basis of their relationship as reasonably stable and caring, 
not because the court viewed their relationship as explicitly 
spousal. 
 
The usual and generally accepted definition of the word spouse 
is: the married partner of another person, either male or female. 
To say on one hand that the definition of marriage remains 
unchanged, while simultaneously changing the definition of 
spouse to suggest something more than its meaning, is in fact, a 
backdoor means of changing the definition of marriage. 
 
The Minister of Justice denies this to be the case. Nevertheless, 
this legislation attempts to do, through the back door, what the 
government cannot do directly. The minister knows full well 
that the definition of marriage is the prerogative of the federal 
government and that that government has so far chosen to 
remain with the traditional definition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in introducing this legislation the minister has 
chosen to arbitrarily extend the definition of the term spouse to 
mean partners of common law, or same-sex couples. 
Furthermore, the minister has granted all rights and privileges 
of married couples to common law and same-sex couples in this 
piece of legislation. Whether the minister is aware of it or not, 
he has set the stage for a classic Charter challenge on the 
definition of marriage, especially by same-sex couples. 
 
If, as the Charter states there cannot be discrimination on the 
basis of marital status or sexual preference, then to grant all 
rights and privilege of marriage to same-sex couples without 
giving them the right to legally marry is clearly discriminatory. 
And if the same-sex community doesn’t challenge it very 
quickly, I will be most surprised. 
 
For the minister to say that marriage is unaffected and remains 
protected by the federal definition is either naive or 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1987 

 

disingenuous. It’s only a matter of time until the legality of this 
situation is tested in the Supreme Court. 
 
Mr. Speaker, assurances to the contrary by government 
ministers tend to ring hollow. I recently read a letter written by 
the former attorney general, Bob Mitchell, to an acquaintance of 
mine, offering similar assurances that legislation introduced by 
the NDP government at that time, would not lead any further 
than the legislation explicitly provided. At that time it was 
legislation to protect gay men and women from discrimination. 
 
In his letter, Mr. Mitchell indicated that such protection would 
not lead to spousal benefits or to an adoption of children 
provision. He was clearly wrong. The courts have ruled on 
inequality issues on behalf of the gay community in a steady 
progression. 
 
For politicians to suggest anything to the contrary is misleading. 
And the public, the voters of Saskatchewan, have a right to 
know realistic outcomes generated by legislation such as the 
piece of legislation we have before us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Justice told the official opposition 
that this legislation was intended to do more than fulfill the 
province’s minimum obligations subsequent to the ruling of the 
Supreme Court. In the words of the minister, this legislation is 
intended to protect people who are vulnerable because they are 
in dependent relationships. 
 
If the minister’s stated goals are to be believed, he could have 
chosen another route to achieve his intentions. There are other 
means of protecting economically vulnerable people, examples 
of which are appearing in other jurisdictions. 
 
This particular piece of legislation only protects individuals on 
the basis of who is sleeping with whom. In other words, 
economic vulnerability and need of protection is limited by 
conjugal relations. Its effect is to offer protection to the partner 
that a given individual is having sex with most of the time. 
 
Such legislation is simply unnecessary when you consider the 
fact that there are perfectly acceptable models for achieving the 
minister’s expressed desires without the implications offered by 
this legislation. 
 
We know that some jurisdictions have already taken this matter 
beyond the concept of spousal relations, and that long-standing 
family or domestic relationships of all kinds have been 
acknowledged in law. 
 
In Hawaii for example, Mr. Speaker, they have a reciprocal 
beneficiaries law that recognizes benefits for people who cannot 
marry each other, thereby providing protection to all individuals 
who might experience economic vulnerability on the dissolution 
of a domestic relationship. 
 
This piece of legislation simply does meet the test of protecting 
the economically vulnerable as suggested by the minister. It 
advances the cause of common-law couples and same sex 
couples, but leaves many people in equally vulnerable situations 
completely unprotected and disenfranchised on this count. 
 
This legislation doesn’t help the middle-aged, unmarried 

daughter who has sacrificed personal pursuits and happiness to 
stay at home to look after her aging mother or father. It doesn’t 
protect two elderly brothers who have lived together all their 
lives, forming an equally dependent financial and domestic unit. 
 
It doesn’t protect any group of people who form all kinds of 
loving and committed relationships and who are equally 
vulnerable from an economic point of view but aren’t having 
sex with each other. 
 
This legislation isn’t simply about economic vulnerability in the 
face of break-up in previously stable relationships among same 
sex or common-law couples. It is about advancing the cause of 
these couples while never admitting to it for public review. 
 
If property disputes really are the issue, then this law should 
address property division in these circumstances and not 
confuse such matters with important categories that turn on the 
definition of terms such as spouse, conjugal, marriage, and the 
family. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Supreme Court has recognized the need to 
provide for equality and fairness in settling financial issues that 
arise out of failed relationships. The court insisted that this 
fairness be applied to common-law and same-sex partners, but 
it did not insist on redefining the term spouse as this legislation 
does, nor did the court encourage a redefinition of marriage, 
something else that is tacitly accomplished in this piece of 
legislation. 
 
In fact in its wisdom the Supreme Court has on more than one 
occasion recognized the right and requirement of the state to 
preserve marriage as a foundational unit for society. The court 
has indicated that it does not question that marriage is between 
a man and a woman. In Egan v. Canada, the court majority said, 
and I quote: 
 

Parliament may quite properly give special support to the 
institution of marriage . . . 
 
Viewed in the larger context, then, there is nothing 
arbitrary about the distinction supportive of heterosexual 
family units. 

 
Mr. Justice Sopinka, in a concurring judgment, indicated that 
the heterosexual family required support because most women 
in heterosexual unions made financial sacrifices to raise 
children and tended to earn lower salaries than men due to 
structural inequalities in the workplace. 
 
In the case M v. H, the court distinguished consideration of 
same-sex couples’ right to equal treatment from any 
consideration of marriage. The court took the position that the 
state had a clear, vested interest in preserving and even 
promoting marriage as significant to the well-being of the state. 
 
Why did the court make such an exception when there is 
growing pressure to accept and legitimatize any and every 
alternative? Because there is an importance to marriage as we 
have traditionally known it. 
 



1988 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote at length now from a joint 
presentation by several faith-based groups to the Ontario 
government when that institution was considering similar 
legislation: 
 

The importance of traditional marriage. The family, a group 
of people related by blood, marriage, or adoption, is based 
on a marriage which unites a man and a woman in a union 
fully contracted and publicly expressed, with a mutual 
commitment to faithfulness and permanency. 
 
A family, however, is much more than a mere legal, social, 
or economic unit. It is a community uniquely suited to 
teach and transmit cultural, ethical, social, spiritual, and 
religious values essential for the development and 
well-being of its own members and society as a whole. 
 
The family is also a binding, permanent commitment to 
past, present, and future generations and as such it is the 
cement that holds society together. In addition, the family 
is a relationship that provides health, education, and 
welfare benefits that meet the needs of individuals without 
cost to the taxpayer. Although not perfect, it is the best 
system mankind has ever devised in which to raise children 
and to care for the disabled and the aged. 

 
Most importantly, the family, according to American 
sociologist Christopher Lasch, is a haven in a heartless 
world since it is the only institution ever invented to 
provide children with a love that is centred on them. All 
other institutions such as child care and schools are 
intentionally impartial. But in order for children’s 
personalities to develop in a healthy manner, it is necessary 
that someone care intensely for them. It is within the family 
unit that this kind of intense caring usually takes place. 
 

Mr. Speaker, according to the 1996 census, 74 per cent of 
Canadian families conformed to the traditional union of 
husband and wife. This model is freely chosen because it’s the 
model that works best for them. 
 
According to Statistics Canada in its first report released in 
October 1996, the National Longitudinal Survey of Children 
and Youth, in which 23,000 children were tracked every two 
years from infancy to 11 years, the following was discovered: 
83 per cent of children under 12 years of age lived in a 
two-parent family in 1994; sixteen and a half per cent lived with 
a single parent; and thirdly, the vast majority of families were 
biological families, not reconstructed by marriage or other 
means. 
 
The survey also found that 41 per cent of children cared for by a 
single parent had at least one kind of developmental problem, 
compared to 26 per cent in all families and that children of 
single parents were one and a half to two times more likely to 
face problems compared with children of two-parent families. 
 
In its next release in 1998 of its finding in the National 
Longitudinal Survey of Children and Youth, StatsCanada 
reported that 20 per cent of all births in the period 1993-94, 
were in common-law unions — double those of 10 years prior. 
The study states the children followed in the study will 
experience changes in their family environments of 

unprecedented proportions as a result of their parents’ changing 
relationships. 
 
This is significant because common-law relationships break up 
more quickly than marriages, even where there are children. 
The study found that 12 per cent of married couples with 
children break up within 10 years compared to a breakup rate of 
63 per cent of common-law couples with children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is clear therefore that the preservation of the 
traditional family is in the best interests of children, and as 
such, is essential for the stability of society. It is crucial to 
encourage and support permanency and commitment in 
marriage. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that since the institution of legal 
marriage is the foundation of society and in the best interests of 
children, this institution should be distinguished from all others 
and should be given special recognition and support to promote 
and encourage its formation. Statutory protection can be 
extended to other interdependent couples by way of enacting a 
separate statute. 
 
It should be mentioned here, Mr. Speaker, that the Supreme 
Court of Canada in 1995 in the Nesbit and Egan case held that it 
was not discriminatory to provide special benefits for legally 
married heterosexual couples since their relationship is the 
fundamental social unit in society. The court further stated as a 
fact that the married heterosexual couple has the ability to 
procreate and nurture children, but also anchors other social 
relationships and other aspects of society. 
 
Mr. Justice Gerald La Forest on behalf of the majority stated the 
following. And I’m quoting from page 536 of the Supreme 
Court ruling: 
 

Suffice it to say that marriage has from time to time been 
firmly grounded in our legal tradition, one that is itself a 
reflection of long-standing philosophical and religious 
tradition. But its ultimate raison d’être transcends all of 
these and is firmly anchored in the biological and social 
realities that heterosexual couples have the unique ability to 
procreate, that most children are the product of these 
relationships, and that they are generally cared for and 
nurtured by those who live in that relationship. 
 

The Justice went on to say on page 538 of that Supreme Court 
judgment, and I quote: 
 

Viewed in the larger context, then, there is nothing 
arbitrary about the distinction supportive of heterosexual 
family units . . . It is the social unit that uniquely has the 
capacity to procreate children and generally cares for their 
upbringing, and as such warrants support by Parliament to 
meet its needs. This is the only unit in society that expends 
resources to care for children on a routine and sustained 
basis . . . his is the unit in society that fundamentally 
anchors other social relationships and other aspects of 
society . . . 
 
In a word, this distinction made by Parliament is grounded 
in a social relationship (I’m still quoting Justice La Forest). 
That unit, as I have attempted to explain, is unique . . . 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1989 

 

. . . It is relevant here to describe a fundamental social unit, 
indeed the fundamental social unit in society, to which 
some measure of support is given. I add, interstitially, that 
this support does not exacerbate an historic disadvantage; 
rather it ameliorates an historic economic disadvantage, 
both for couples who are legally married and those who 
live in a common law relationship. 
 

According to Justice Gonthier at page 177 in M v. H: 
 

However, the extension of support mechanisms to 
common-law couples was due to the political recognition 
that such couples also perform a social role similar to that 
of a married couple. 

 
Moreover, the Supreme Court of Canada, in Miron v. Trudel, 
1995, held that: 
 

Common-law couples are a historically disadvantaged 
group and that, in some circumstances, for instance motor 
vehicle accident benefits, they may receive the same 
benefits as legal spouses. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, it may be necessary to provide some statutory 
protection for common-law couples, as well as for other 
individuals living in economically interdependent relationships 
such as two siblings, two friends, same-sex couples, and a 
parent and an adult child. 
 
However, non-marital relationships should not receive 
equivalent-to-married recognition or benefits. Public policy 
should always promote the best option and that is legal 
marriage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another area of concern that this piece of 
legislation raises. In my view, if the minister has said this 
legislation is intended to provide security to individuals affected 
negatively by the breakup of a previously committed and stable 
relationship, he has sent the wrong message by reducing the 
time a relationship has to survive from three years down to two 
years. It would seem to me that if the goal of stability in 
relationships is to be encouraged, it might be more prudent to 
require relationships to survive for five years or more maybe 
before a legal remedy would be available to partners breaking 
up. 
 
Two years, Mr. Speaker, is hardly enough time to get to know 
one’s partner, let alone to be recognized as the beneficiary of 
financial support or relief. I can only imagine the floodgates of 
litigation that this particular change will open. 
 
Stability of relationships might be the real casualty of this 
provision in this piece of legislation. It will result in the exact 
opposite effect than what is intended and is doing a disservice 
to any two people who are in the throes of a developing loving 
relationship. 
 
I would call on the minister to rethink his position on this article 
of the legislation, unless of course it really isn’t his intention to 
enhance such relationships. It might well be that it is in this area 
that he is rewarding one or more groups of people who are 
seeking legitimacy before the law that is not otherwise afforded 
to them by society. 

Mr. Speaker, the views I put forward today are not simply my 
own. During several days last week, I asked the people of my 
constituency and my constituency office to do a complete 
random survey of individuals, people living in the constituency 
of Cypress Hills. I wanted to find out how they felt about the 
legislation before us today. 
 
I asked my constituency assistants to be as thorough as possible 
in assuring the unbiased results of a survey. They employed a 
modest, straightforward question about this legislation and 
provided for complete anonymity for the respondents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the results are in and they are unequivocal. By a 
margin of three to one — that’s 75 per cent — the citizens of 
Cypress Hills do not support this legislation brought forward by 
the NDP government. 
 
While I was quite sure of how my constituents felt, I wanted to 
be certain. My office conducted telephone calls until we had an 
even 100 responses. The results vary little from town to rural 
residents, from young to old, from men to women, although 
women did appear to be somewhat more sympathetic to the 
legislation, especially as it relates to common-law relationships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the reasons I have enunciated today, I cannot 
support this piece of legislation. It goes further in many areas 
than is required by the M v. H Supreme Court decision. It does 
not provide protection for economically vulnerable people 
except on the basis of who’s having sex with whom, and it fails 
to recognize the value of marriage and child raising to our 
society. 
 
In fact this legislation contributes to the undermining of that 
very institution by providing all the rights and privileges of 
marriage to people who are unmarried thereby subjecting that 
institution to probable litigation and a further diminished value. 
 
I would say on these bases alone, I cannot support the 
legislation. As a result of my phone survey, neither can my 
constituents. I would hope that the minister would be open to 
constructive changes that the official opposition may introduce 
as this legislation makes its way through the House. To 
facilitate his considered response, I would move that this Bill, 
the domestic relations amendment Act, 2001, move to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 14:45 until 15:01. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 35 
 
Calvert Addley Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Wartman Thomson Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 



1990 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

Harper Jones Higgins 
Kasperski Trew Osika 
Lorjé Yates McCall 
Krawetz Boyd D’Autremont 
Wakefield Huyghebaert  
 

Nays — 17 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Draude Gantefoer 
Toth Stewart Eagles 
Wall Bakken Bjornerud 
Kwiatkowski Brkich Wiberg 
Hart Peters  
 
The Bill read a second time and referred to a Committee of the 
Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 48 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 48 — The 
Miscellaneous Statues (Domestic Relations) Amendment 
Act, 2001 (No. 2)/Loi corrective (relations domestiques) de 
2001 (no 2) be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand in this Assembly today and just raise a few 
points regarding Bill No. 48, which incidentally is equivocally 
the same to what Bill No. 47 is, other than it’s the French 
version of the legislation. 
 
I would like to point out the fact that, Mr. Speaker, as we saw 
just a few moments ago, that this . . . these two pieces of 
legislation certainly initiated a fair bit of debate in our caucus 
— as I’m sure it has in other caucuses — and has raised . . . a 
lot of concerns have been raised. 
 
And as was noted just a few moments ago, our caucuses talked 
at end about free votes in the Legislative Assembly, and 
certainly what just transpired in this Assembly is something that 
we have talked about for a long time — that members should 
have that opportunity. 
 
And I can assure you, as my colleague the member from Maple 
Creek mentioned, when these two pieces of legislation were 
brought forward — and we certainly want to acknowledge and 
thank the minister for coming to our caucus and giving us a 
heads-up and giving us some explanations as to the two pieces 
of legislation and the intent — that my colleagues and I did take 
the time to do an intensive survey in all of our constituencies. 
And the vote that took place a moment ago reflected the views 
that came from our specific constituencies. 
 
I would be remiss if I did not thank my assistant and those in 
my office who did take the time to do the phone-around. And, 
Mr. Speaker, I can assure you it was a phone-around; it was just 
individuals picked at random so that we had an overview of 
how people felt about this issue before us today. 
 
And the fact was, Mr. Speaker, the results from my 
constituency reflected the same as the member from Maple 
Creek and a lot of other constituencies. And I want to thank my 

constituents who did respond to the phone-around, giving me an 
opportunity to really represent their viewpoints. While on many 
occasions . . . and I would have to say, Mr. Speaker, I believe 
the constituents I represent certainly is a constituency that is, 
that is . . . I have a fairly sound understanding of their views on 
many issues; certainly moral issues as well. 
 
While this piece of legislation isn’t strictly tied to a moral 
agenda, Mr. Speaker, this piece of legislation I believe, as was 
pointed out, tends to basically extend and actually promote — 
not necessarily promote views — but certainly really challenges 
the traditional views that society has had for a great period of 
time. 
 
And I would have to say, Mr. Speaker, that in talking to my 
constituents — and not just the, the survey that was taken — 
talking to individuals over the past few days, what I have found, 
that my constituents probably reflect the views of many people. 
They are not opposed to anyone, regardless of the relationships 
you’re in, having the rights to protection and the opportunity to 
be looked after financially; and to pass on, if a person chooses, 
to be able to buy a will or whatever form to make sure that 
their, their particular partner is looked after and looked after 
properly. And no one’s opposed to that. 
 
But certainly, Mr. Speaker, when it came to the areas of 
adoption . . . and I noticed, note in Manitoba, the Manitoba 
government is moving a number of amendments to laws in their 
lands to reflect the Supreme Court ruling as well. However 
what’s particularly noteworthy is that Manitoba is amending 10 
laws, where in the province of Saskatchewan we’ve chosen to 
move amendments to 24 provincial laws. 
 
And both of these amendments, in both provinces, they do deal 
with issues such as spousal support, death benefits, and pension 
benefits. The one major difference is that while Saskatchewan 
proposes to allow same-sex couples to adopt children of their 
partners, Manitoba chose not to go that far. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe we can from . . . for far too long we 
have argued that many times we make decisions and choices 
and change laws because somebody else has moved in that 
direction. My colleague talked about the fact that we were 
actually changing our laws to fit into the rulings brought down 
by the Supreme Court of Canada. And while the Supreme Court 
is certainly an institution that is revered in Canada, it’s also an 
institution that has all of the individuals on that, on that court 
have been appointed — appointed by someone or some 
government at one time or other. 
 
And I do have a particular concern when the elected 
representatives across this country — whether they’re at the 
provincial or the federal or even the local level — and the 
population in general, have the view and may move legislation 
as such, we’re beginning to find more and more often that those 
pieces of legislation may be challenged and eventually they find 
their way to the Supreme Court. And on many occasions we 
have found that the court is ruling and actually calling on 
elected members, duly elected members to then change the 
rules. 
 
And that is a concern to me, Mr. Speaker, and it’s a concern to 
many individuals. The feeling is that if we elect people to 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1991 

 

represent and be our voice, they should be able to pass 
legislation, move legislation that reflects our views and not 
have an appointed body then at the end of the day say, no, you 
have to change it because the law says . . . or this is our 
interpretation of the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve indicated earlier, there isn’t a problem with 
the fact of passing on the need to recognize spousal benefits and 
pension benefits and death benefits of that nature, but when it 
comes to adoption — and that was one of the issues that 
probably was raised, brought to the forefront in the survey that I 
had conducted, Mr. Speaker — that’s where my constituents 
really drew the line. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I think the other concern is the fact that 
we are watering down what is really seen in this country, this 
country that was based and the principles of our nation were 
based on Judeo-Christian, values and those Judeo-Christian 
values really have promoted and accepted the lifestyle of the 
heterosexual relationship of one man, one woman cohabiting 
together and having and raising children. 
 
And I really appreciated what the member from Maple Creek, 
some of the detail that the member went into in pointing out the 
differences in different relationships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I would have to conclude by saying is while 
we have given our members the opportunity to have the free 
vote, one concern we do have, and not specifically with the 
legislation, is that we had asked the minister when he had met 
with us about . . . or the minister had indicated that they had 
held off on this legislation for over a period of a year so that 
they could consult with many stakeholders and seek their views 
and opinions in regards to the legislation we have before us. 
And when we met with the minister, the minister did indicate 
that, and promise, that he would share the results of his 
research. 
 
However we could see that the officials disagreed with that, and 
as I understand, they have basically said no, we will not share 
those results. The concern I have with that, Mr. Speaker, is the 
fact of what did the results of their consultations reflect. Would 
those results have actually reflected what my colleagues and I 
have found in our survey? And, Mr. Speaker, it’s unfortunate 
that we probably will never know because those results will 
have . . . the indication is that the results are not and will not be 
made public. 
 
And one would have to ask, then what’s the point of consulting 
if you’re not going to let people know exactly what conclusions 
you’ve arrived at, at the end of the day, in your consultation 
process? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, having made those few points, I think it’s 
important that the public of Saskatchewan be represented and 
their voice be heard as well. And I certainly am pleased to have 
raised these issues, brought these points to the forefront, and 
reflect the fact that there is a difference . . . a differing view and 
opinion throughout this province on many of the issues. 
 
But again to say, that certain parts of the Bill everybody can 
agree with, because we’re not opposed to those spousal benefits 
and death benefits and pension benefits. But there are other 

areas that we’re afraid we’re going down a slippery slope that’s 
leading us into an area that I don’t believe most people really 
want to enter. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(15:15) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Political Contributions Tax Credit Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I have 
with me to my left Arun Srinivas, the senior taxation policy 
analyst for the Department of Finance. And to my right is Susan 
Amrud, director of legislative service with the Department of 
Justice. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, and officials, welcome today. Both parties . . . all 
three parties were involved in negotiations and discussions on 
this particular Bill and its development. I just wonder is there 
anything different in this Bill other than what was agreed to by 
the joint committee that was in place that initiated and 
developed this particular Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I think I can say to 
the member that I don’t believe there are any changes other than 
what the three parties agreed to. 
 
I should put the member on notice that I would like to do an 
amendment during the process to clause 5 of the printed Bill in 
that there was a printing error, as I understand. 
 
There’s a number in here of 33 per cent and I will be 
recommending that we strike out 33 per cent and put the proper 
figure in which was agreed to, which was thirty-three and a 
third per cent. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Yes, I noted that, Mr. Minister, and I 
thank you for bringing forward that House amendment. 
 
I guess the only other item on here that I noticed was slightly — 
not different because that was the original discussion — but the 
annual reporting day of the last day of April each year. I know 
there was some discussion. Was that cleared up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, I’m advised that the 
Department of Finance checked with Revenue Canada and they 
indicated that that was appropriate, that there was no difficulty 
with that. 



1992 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe 
that this Bill is an appropriate Bill to be passed in this 
legislature. It’s certainly something that has been needed for a 
while as was discussed in second reading debates. That it brings 
fairness to our democracy. It brings a level playing field and I 
would certainly support this Bill when it comes up for the vote. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I would just say to 
the member opposite that I think what it does is recognizes the 
changes in political circumstances and it allows our province to 
have, as you’ve indicated, a level playing field and balance. 
And government members will certainly be supporting the Bill 
as well. I think it’s something that the electorate will be 
comfortable with. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I noted one 
thing here that I forgot. 
 
You mentioned a figure of $625,000. Is that an average over a 
four-year term, including an election, or what is that number 
based on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, the Department of Finance 
indicates to me that in an election year it’s about a million 
dollars. And other years it would be about half a million dollars 
so the average would be something in the neighbourhood of six 
and a half. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes I’d like to move an amendment 
that clause 5 of the printed Bill be amended: 

 
. . . by striking out “33 %” and substituting “33 1/3%”. 

 
I so move. 
 
The Chair: — The minister has moved an amendment to: 
 

Amend clause 5(4)(a) of the printed Bill by striking out 
“33%” and substituting “33 1/3%”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 5 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 6 to 23 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Chairman, I’d just like to thank the officials who assisted me 
with today’s proceedings. 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2001 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 

right, Barbara Shourounis, who is director of Saskatchewan 
Securities Commission, and Brent Prenevost on my left is 
Crown counsel with the Department of Justice. And I’d ask all 
members to welcome them here today. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Welcome to the 
minister and to his officials. A number of questions that we do 
have dealing with The Securities Amendment Act, Bill No. 2. 
 
I guess, how many other provinces have such a permanent 
system in place? So this is . . . Saskatchewan’s moving in that 
direction. Are we are a leader; are we a follower; are we 
halfway in the pack? What’s happening throughout the rest of 
Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question. 
There’s a large process taking place across the country of 
consolidating and bringing together securities operations, 
indeed financial institutions regulation, if you would, across the 
country to try to have us all following the same path with the 
same rules and regulations. And this is part of that. 
 
And the . . . all provinces except Alberta are moving in this 
direction. We are all doing this roughly at the same time. So we 
are basically doing what the vast majority of other provinces are 
doing with regards to securities regulation. 
 
And I’ll think you’ll see — well I know you’ll see in the years 
ahead much more uniformity in securities regulation across 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I think, and that’s something that 
we appreciate, that when people move around the country and I 
think that happens more all the time — people move province 
to province — that they can feel secure that they have some 
understanding of what the rules and regulations are. 
 
Part of this Bill I believe deals with the fact that it explicitly 
prohibits people trading in securities to make statements that 
aren’t true. 
 
I would like a bit of an explanation of that. Like is this just an 
outright lie on a number, or is it just sort of a shady 
misrepresentation? Exactly what has been occurring that has 
sort of triggered this response throughout the country? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises, I think, an 
important question in terms of security that people will have 
with a system of . . . when they’re investing their savings or 
whatever they might be investing they want to know that what 
they’re being told about the investment is accurate so that they 
can judge whether or not to invest in it. 
 
And the legislation defines the phrase “misrepresentation” as 
follows: 
 

(i) an untrue statement of a material fact; or 
 
(ii) an omission to state a material fact that is required to be 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1993 

 

stated or that is necessary to make a statement not 
misleading in the light of the circumstances in which is was 
made; 

 
In other words, you can mislead somebody by saying something 
that is untrue. You can also mislead somebody by not . . . by 
giving an impression of something being true when it is not in 
fact the case and by leaving out some phrase or some 
representation that would clarify that in the person’s . . . the 
investor’s mind. 
 
If I think back to when I was a law professor, these things are 
. . . in the common law decided by judges but this makes it clear 
and more precise. 
 
I should also say too that there are a number of other provisions 
that we have ensured to make sure that people don’t receive 
misrepresentations. 
 
For example, we have existing prohibitions against making 
representations about the future value of a security, about 
whether security will be listed on exchange, about whether 
anyone will repurchase the security, and things of that sort to 
try and ensure that when a person is investing in an investment 
— I’m not being very clear here today but I seem to not have 
very many words to say — but when the person is making an 
investment you want to make sure that it’s as they perceive it to 
be. 
 
These are always risky, of course, transactions because they are 
based upon speculation but you want to make sure that people 
have all the facts available to them and that we would . . . might 
even of heard of a number of cases or people might have come 
to your constituency office with cases where they feel they’ve 
been misrepresented, invested their savings and lost them. 
 
So it’s particularly important for those individuals to be 
protected. I think it’s also very important to facilitate the 
accumulation of capital to invest in our economy and to build 
the economy here in the province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you and thank you for the answer. I 
think it’s one of those areas that people are always concerned 
about because as a minister, as you mentioned, there’s always a 
certain amount of risk in any investment, and it’s important that 
people understand the risk that they’re taking and not find out 
later on that there was something else involved that they 
perceived that wasn’t actually there. 
 
The question or two on the Securities Commission. What is the 
makeup of the Securities Commission and how do people get to 
hold a position on the Securities Commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In section 4 of the Act there’s 
significant provisions dealing with the commission itself. 
 
The member asks how are people appointed to the Securities 
Commission. They’re appointed by cabinet, and of course we 
try to ensure that there’s a mix of expertise and a wide range of 
experience to ensure that the Securities Commission does both 
have the trust of the community at large as well as an 
understanding of how securities and business operates. 
 

There is a chairperson, of course, a vice-chairperson, and six 
other members . . . or a maximum of six members as well as the 
chairperson for the Securities Commission. 
 
At the present time there’s the Chair and three members. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. A question or two 
on the work that the Securities Commission does. 
 
On an average year . . . how many investigations into 
wrongdoing does the commission do in an average year? And I 
believe that there’s also the change now that this can be up to 
two years to do that. 
 
And my second question — because I’m noted for having a 
barrage of questions is — approximately what percentage of the 
cases are sort of the two-year cases? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — While I don’t have the number of 
investigations, for example, over the last year at hand, I’ll get 
that for the member as soon as possible. But at any given time 
about 80 files are opened and being investigated by the 
Securities Commission. So you can see the commission has, 
you know, a fair bit of work to do ensuring that people are 
protected in the province. 
 
With regards to the limitation period, while there haven’t been 
cases where the shorter limitation period has been a problem, 
it’s easy to conceive of a situation in which that might be the 
case. So the extension of a limitation period is more of a 
preventative measure. 
 
I might, if I may, take the opportunity to say that the 
commission . . . the member asked the question earlier about 
where we are in the pack and how we’re playing our role across 
Canada in securities commissions. And the chairperson, Mr. de 
la Gorgendiere, has played a significant role both in Canada and 
in North America in representing smaller securities 
commissions and the concerns and interests and particular 
priorities of smaller securities commissions in the overall 
scheme of things. This is plainly a venture which is dominated 
by Toronto and to some extent the Nasdaq or the Canadian 
exchange now. 
 
So we played a significant role I think and played our part in 
making sure that this consolidation is in the interests of 
Saskatchewan and other smaller . . . provinces with smaller 
commissions. I would just add that. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for that answer and the 
clarification of the broad scope that we play. Mr. Chair, I 
believe that takes care of the questions we have on Bill No. 2 
from Committee of the Whole. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, members. This Bill has very many 
number of sections and with the pleasure of the committee, 
would it be appropriate . . . or is leave granted to deal with it by 
page. Is that agreed? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



1994 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

Clauses 2 to 31 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Professional Corporations Act 
 
The Chair: — Order. I invite the minister to introduce his 
official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Most of you 
will know Susan Amrud on my right, the director of legislative 
services, who is here for The Professional Corporations Act and 
probably a few more as well. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
welcome again to the minister and his official. Fewer officials 
means they must definitely know more. 
 
Anyways, on this particular Bill, Bill No. 17, I think all sides of 
the House have had numerous people contact us from various 
professions asking for this to move ahead, so I think we’re all 
on the same page on this one for the most part. 
 
But I think one of the questions that should probably be asked 
is: exactly what groups are considered professional for the 
purpose of this Act so we know who’s covered under it and 
who isn’t? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Those professions who are . . . who 
will have the capacity to have their members incorporate under 
this legislation are those professions which are regulated by an 
Act of the legislature; for example, accountants, lawyers, 
dentists, chiropractors, optometrists, and investment dealers. 
And they will apply to be designated as a profession which can 
have its members incorporate to the appropriate minister that 
they answer to. 
 
So it’s an opportunity here, as the member I think indicated, for 
professionals, those who work in partnerships rather than as 
corporations, to obtain now the same benefits as other business 
people who are incorporated, and indeed to be on an equal 
footing with professions in other provinces who’ve passed 
similar . . . which have passed similar legislation; and should be 
a significant assistance to the province and to citizens of the 
province in ensuring that there are professionals who . . . there’s 
another encouragement to professionals to stay in the province. 
 
And we look forward to this being a useful adjunct to other 
programs within the government in terms of economic 
development to ensure that we do have the professionals we 
need here in our communities, not just in our larger 
communities but in our smaller communities as well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for that answer, Mr. Minister. 
And I believe we fully support the government and the initiative 
on this particular Bill because I think the concerns that are there 
are definitely ones that are shared by everyone. 
 
Somewhat of a similar question to the previous Bill: are we sort 
of in keeping now with all the rest of Canada, our neighbouring 
provinces — and I’d probably refer particularly to Ontario and 

west — are we all on the same page at this point? 
 
And another question which I wouldn’t expect the minister to 
have an answer for, but he just might. How do we compare with 
the States in this area? Because a lot of our professionals are 
also lured into the US (United States). 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In most provinces — in response to 
the member’s question — in most provinces the availability of 
incorporation for professions is dealt with on a case-by-case 
basis, rather similar to the way in which we dealt with the 
medical physicians last year. 
 
And we’re the only province that has taken this route, to 
implement a process so that, so that professionals can come . . . 
can seek a process which is other than coming to the legislature 
and asking for legislation to be passed. So this facilitates in a 
much better way than the one . . . than the piecemeal process. 
 
And I would say, too, that just in contrast with Alberta, the 
member might know that this legislation will be of more 
assistance to professionals who are of course concerned, 
amongst other things, with planning their tax strategies than the 
Alberta provisions does. This will provide for non-voting shares 
in the corporation to be held by family members as well as 
other active members of the corporation. 
 
So it permits the professionals . . . the individual professionals 
to better plan their tax regime than would be the case in Alberta. 
And of course, that’s a big part of ensuring that Saskatchewan 
is more attractive to those professionals, and thereby 
encouraging them to stay in the province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, and I appreciate that direction. 
As I said earlier on, we support that direction totally. 
 
Obviously the benefits that we’re trying to give to the various 
professions is a financial benefit in this particular case. And it’s 
obviously going to be a sort of a short-term pain for a long-term 
gain, I think is what we’re all looking for. 
 
Obviously I would imagine, or I would hope, that when the 
province looked at doing this, they would have looked at the 
dollar issues and would have said, okay, on the short-term for 
the year 2002 — because these people have the opportunity to 
go ahead and experience a tax saving — I would imagine and I 
guess is part of the question, that government has done some 
research to see what percentage would probably use this Bill to 
their advantage . . . that in the short term will have some cost on 
government coffers. 
 
Over the long term, I think it should definitely be to the benefit 
of the province and the long term, it’ll be a financial gain for 
the province. 
 
But my question is, in the short term, saying probably for the 
year 2002-2003, what would be the cost to the government 
coffers from Bill No. 17? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — This obviously is an important 
question when a policy change like this is being made as the 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1995 

 

member rightly points out. 
 
We can only kind of estimate who might take up this 
opportunity because not every professional will decide to 
incorporate. But it’s anticipated that about 200 accountants, 200 
lawyers, 300 dentists, and perhaps 400 other professionals 
might take advantage of this provision. It’s not likely that it will 
all happen in one year and the people will do this over a period 
of time. 
 
And I think the member mentioned that this is really not a tax 
loss issue; it’s a tax deferral question. Of course, in the short 
term it means that tax will not come into the provincial coffers. 
But it’s anticipated that at its maximum this might cost between 
3 and $5 million a year. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s good to see that 
government has done some research on this and has some idea 
of exactly what the short-term costs are going to be. And I think 
we all agree that the long-term benefits are definitely going to 
be high for this particular province. 
 
That, Mr. Deputy Chair, I believe concludes the questions that 
we have on this side of the House for Committee of the Whole 
on this Bill. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to 
 
Clauses 2 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Commercial Liens Act/ 
Loi sur les privilèges à base commerciale 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you very much. Mr. Chair, on 
my right is Andrea Seale —again, no stranger to this House — 
the Crown counsel in the Department of Justice, and I ask you 
to welcome her. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Again to the 
minister, welcome to his officials. 
 
A few comments or questions on The Commercial Liens Act, 
Bill No. 28. There are three specific areas that are brought 
under one roof as it were, under Bill No. 28. They are repair 
work, storage facilities, and movers. And I’m wondering if 
there are still other separate lien Acts out there that aren’t 
underneath here, and why just these three were put underneath 
this Bill if there are other ones out there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member might be aware that 
builders’ liens are dealt with differently by a separate piece of 
legislation. We have had a series of Acts dealing with 
commercial liens based upon different occupations — The 
Garage Keepers Act, The Hotel Keepers Act, The 
Warehousemen’s Lien Act, and what remains of The 
Mechanics’ Lien Act. All those are repealed and absorbed 

within this piece of legislation. 
 
So, for example, the member could easily understand that The 
Garage Keepers Act would go in a storer’s lien because mostly 
that’s what they would be doing. But he’s quite right that the 
attempt here is to codify liens under three headings: repairer’s 
liens, storer’s lien, and carrier’s lien. 
 
I might say, maybe to pre-empt one of the member’s questions, 
that this is legislation flowing from the Uniform Law 
Conference of Canada, worked on by all provinces. 
 
I’m sure the member will be interested to know where we are in 
the pack in terms of introducing this legislation. Ontario has 
introduced this legislation, pretty similar legislation already and 
the other provinces can be expected to do so in the near future. 
 
So we’re actually at the beginning of the pack on this. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s good to see that 
we’re leading the pack and it’s also good to see that my 
questions make so much sense that people have imminent 
knowledge of where they’re going. 
 
I wonder if the minister could just briefly describe how the lien 
process works, so that if someone was going to put a lien 
against a piece of property or something, what’s the system that 
takes place there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks really what this 
legislation pertains to and how it works. If, for example, some 
improvements are made to someone’s property and they’re not 
paid for, then the person providing those services who hasn’t 
been paid would place a lien on the property, which would give 
that person the first right to the proceeds of the property should 
it be sold at some later date. 
 
The process really fits in with the personal property securities 
registry, which requires then . . . so to effect the lien, the person 
who was not paid would register the lien with the personal 
property registry. It would be there for all to see. And it would 
be enforced in the normal way so that if that property was sold, 
the proceeds of the lien would be . . . the first call on those 
proceeds would be to the lien holder. 
 
So it’s a fairly structured, I think well understood process by 
those in the business community who might access this 
legislation, who might be in need of a lien, and works well. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thanks, Mr. Minister, for the explanation of 
how it operates. 
 
Is it possible in Saskatchewan to file a lien against a piece of 
government property? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I think the member’s question is 
primarily concerned with The Builders’ Lien Act, and he’s 
raised this matter before. And there’s nothing in that Act which 
would prevent anyone from having a lien against the 
government, although there is . . . there isn’t the possibility to 
register that lien against the land that the government owns. 



1996 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

But bearing in mind that this is a process designed to enforce 
outstanding debts, to enforce somebody who’s received a 
service to pay for that service, the government is always going 
to be in a position of having resources to pay for that service. 
And there would be ways in which to pursue that through all the 
normal processes of collecting a debt. 
 
So there would be no disadvantage to a person who’s provided 
services to the government, not being paid, not being able to 
register that lien against the land. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you for that answer. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that concludes the questions that we have on 
commercial liens, Bill No. 28. 
 
The Chair: — This is quite a lengthy Bill. Do I have leave to 
do the clauses page by page? Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 36 inclusive agreed to 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 
 
The Chair: — I’ll give a moment for the minister to bring in 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Brent Prenevost 
on my right, Crown counsel in Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Welcome to 
your official. I feel a bit like an old schoolmaster checking 
typographical and grammar errors here. 
 
But I do have one question. Just for the record: are there any 
substantive changes being made to any of the Acts through this 
Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, no, there are no substantive 
changes here. Just the points the schoolteacher mentioned — 
the grammar, typographical errors, spelling, and so on. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I’m always prepared to be reprimanded by a 
teacher if we’re making grammatical or other errors, which of 
course we do on a regular basis. And then every once in a while 
we have to clean them all up, as we’re doing today. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I can assure 
the minister that, unless I pointed my finger, there’s no 
reprimand intended. 
 
That is the only question that we have on Bill No. 37. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you. Again this Bill is extremely lengthy 
as it pertains to clauses. Do I have leave to deal with it by page? 
Is leave granted? 
 

Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 
(No. 2)/Loi corrective de 2001 (no 2) 

 
Mr. Heppner: — No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have no further 
questions on this one. We would just hope that the government 
doesn’t make the same mistakes in French as they do in English 
when they write those things. 
 
The Chair: — Again this Bill has very many clauses, and do I 
have leave to deal with it page by page? Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clauses 1 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Political Contributions Tax Credit Act 
 

The Speaker: — When shall the amendments be read the first 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the House, to 
proceed immediately now. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education that the amendments be now read the 
first and second time. Is it the pleasure of the Assembly to adopt 
the motion? 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that the Bill be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
(16:15) 
 

Bill No. 2 — The Securities Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 17 — The Professional Corporations Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1997 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Commercial Liens Act/ 
Loi sur les privilèges à base commerciale 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 37 be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 38 – The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 
(No. 2)/Loi corrective de 2001 (no 2) 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 38 be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvote (JU01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Justice to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
happy to welcome to the Assembly the following officials. On 
my right, Doug Moen, who is the executive director of public 
law and community justice. On my left is Don Head, who is the 
executive director of corrections; behind Don Head is Murray 
Brown, who’s director of appeals and public prosecutions 
division. 
 
Behind me is Mike Pestill, the acting director of administrative 
services branch. Sitting to his right is Colleen Matthews, the 
executive assistant to the deputy minister; and behind Murray 
Brown is Keith Laxdal, who is associate deputy minister of 
Justice. And at the back, Rod Crook who’s executive director of 
registry services; Darryl Bogdasavich who is not on my list but 
we all know who Darryl Bogdasavich is; and Betty Ann 
Pottruff who is the director of policy, planning, and evaluation. 
And that’s it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Welcome to the 
minister and his officials this evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, there has been a call by the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) for a public inquiry into the 

deaths . . . or into the justice system, and that call was based on, 
primarily on the deaths of First Nations people outside of 
Saskatoon near the Queen Elizabeth station. 
 
I’m wondering why your government has not responded to the 
FSIN by leading a public inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises the important 
question of the relationship between the justice system and 
Aboriginal peoples and . . . which was brought to a head by 
deaths in Saskatoon. We know that that’s not the full extent of 
the challenges we face with regards to the relationship between 
Aboriginal peoples and the justice system, and we’re committed 
to ensuring that the system is more responsive and more 
respectful and more productive in its relationship with 
Aboriginal peoples. 
 
These are complex matters. We are in discussion, and have been 
in discussion with the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations and Métis Nation of Saskatchewan over how to best 
proceed in response to the call by Métis for a public inquiry, a 
judicial inquiry into the relationship. And those negotiations, 
those discussions are ongoing. And we anticipate being able to 
develop and announce the process in the very near future. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, to my 
knowledge the FSIN are, to this day, are calling for a public 
inquiry. And I think there is a lot of rationale and good 
reasoning behind their call. A public inquiry could possibly 
expose just what was behind the whole sequence of events that 
happened. If in fact there are underlying issues that contributed 
to these deaths, then those things would also come to light. 
 
I think many of us in the province know and recognize that 
health issues, mental health issues, as well as addiction issues 
— that are certainly unfortunate but happening within the First 
Nations community — sometimes are the reason that there is a 
snowballing of events that happens like this. 
 
And a public inquiry would expose that. A public inquiry could 
bring that forward and then we could deal with the underlying 
issue here, which I believe is a health issue. 
 
But nonetheless I think in due respect to the First Nations, to the 
FSIN, and to Chief Perry Bellegarde, who is calling for this 
public inquiry, that in fact it should be done. Because we have a 
number of issues that have come forward in the past few years 
where there has been question about the justice system and this 
is just one of them, but it’s a very important issue and I think 
needs to be addressed. 
 
So I’m asking you again, in your deliberations with First 
Nations people — as you have indicated you’ve been having 
ongoing talks with them — have they, at any time, told you that 
they were not interested in continuing with a call for a public 
inquiry? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises important 
questions and is quite right in pointing out that the issues that 
we have to address above and beyond all of the individual 
situations are the underlying issues, the underlying causes of 
this tension between Aboriginal people and the justice system. 
And there are many ways in which we can do that. 



1998 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

In response to the specific instances, the member will know that 
there have been coroner’s inquiries into two deaths in 
Saskatoon — the deaths of Mr. Ironchild and Mr. Dustyhorn — 
and that those coroner’s inquests and the reports out of those 
inquests have been well received by the First Nations and Métis 
communities in the sense that they have, in large measure, 
brought closure to the families and also presented, as the 
member will well know, some specific issues that really need to 
be addressed if we’re going to prevent the reoccurrence of 
similar events. 
 
So in response to those two cases, I think we acted quickly and 
had inquests. We will also, if other instances arise and charges 
are not recommended and charges are not laid, we would have 
inquiries, coroners’ inquires into those . . . inquests into those 
cases too. There are then specific issues, specific cases, which 
can be addressed in that way. 
 
The member points out the need to look at underlying causes. 
And our approach all along has been, as the member will know, 
to focus on reform, to focus on how we make . . . how we 
understand the issues that generate concern within the system 
and with its relationship with Aboriginal peoples, and that we 
focus on making the system work better; that it be more 
respectful, more responsive, and in fact, more effective. 
 
The member also quite rightly points out that these are very 
often health issues which are being dealt with in a criminal way. 
So we have many challenges which we have to work on 
together. 
 
It is not an issue which can be resolved by the member 
personally, or by me, no matter how well-intentioned we might 
be. We have to find ways to work with those most affected to 
find solutions, and that’s what we’ve been doing over the last 
while. And as I said earlier, I anticipate a process in place quite 
soon, but the negotiations and the discussions can continue. 
 
And I want to say at this stage that we have . . . First Nations 
and Métis Nation and the Department of Justice have spent 
many hours trying to work out a process which will be the most 
productive. I might say that in particular we want to focus on 
reform. 
 
It’s important to hear people’s experiences with the justice 
system. It’s important to hear ordinary people tell us how they 
think the system could work better. It’s also important to look at 
the recommendations of the many Aboriginal justice inquiries 
which have taken place. And the member might know there are 
some over 4,000 recommendations which need to be addressed, 
which need to be focused on as well. And some, I’m sure, could 
be implemented quite quickly if we all agreed that that was the 
best course of action. 
 
So we are focusing on making the system better. And I must say 
that all officials in the Department of Justice who have been 
working on this are thoroughly committed to ensuring that we 
have a system that works better, that is more responsive, and 
that is a true partnership between Aboriginal peoples and the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:30) 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there’s a 
reason that I put this forward to you today. I have commented to 
you just a few minutes ago about the underlying causes being 
identified, the underlying . . . I guess all the aspects of one’s life 
needs to be addressed. And we need to look at the whole 
picture, of course. But because there have been a number of 
calls for justice from the First Nations people and those calls 
have not been responded to, there is a feeling by First Nations 
people that racism is quite rampant and that they’re not being 
heard. 
 
And so this is the reason that, I believe, that it is important to 
have a public inquiry into this so that everyone can have input 
into just what is happening, what we need to do to address it, 
and so on. I think it certainly would help to clear the air and it 
would also identify where we need to go immediately to 
address these issues. And I think, in fact, it would help in 
maintaining and restoring, where necessary, the relationship 
between Aboriginal people and non-Aboriginal people in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m going to take you to another issue, and it 
certainly is a Justice issue also, that I have found that I’m quite 
disturbed about, and I’m wondering why within the justice 
system we’re not doing a little bit more in this regard. 
 
I have with me a newspaper article entitled, “Reporter wonders 
why society cared so little about murdered Indians.” Okay. And 
this article refers to a serial killer, John Martin Crofford, who 
sexually assaulted and murdered Mary Jane Serloin, a Native 
woman in Lethbridge, Alberta, in 1981. He was 19. 
 
Eleven years later in Saskatoon, he assaulted and murdered Eva 
Taysup, Shelley Napope, and Calinda Waterhen — all Natives 
— in the space of just a few a months. And he continues to be a 
suspect in the murder of a fourth woman the same year and the 
disappearances of two other women. 
 
Now this man was convicted and sentenced to a term in jail. 
And that is fine. However, previously he was sentenced, I 
believe, in 1981 and had a sentencing of 10 years. He served 
two-thirds of that term and was out of jail. 
 
I’m wondering in cases like this, for one thing there is another 
— like I’d mentioned to you — there’s another, there’s some 
suspicion that this person, this Mr. Crofford, was also 
responsible or could have been responsible for the death of 
Janet Sylvestre because her killing is still unsolved and there’s 
obviously quite a bit of evidence surrounding his doings with 
this person. 
 
Now that murder has not been resolved. The family continue to 
wait for news about what’s going to be done, and still we don’t 
see anyone pursuing this matter. 
 
So I want to make that point, Mr. Minister, because I think it’s 
important that these things are followed up on — whether it’s in 
fact whether the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
don’t have the resources to follow up or whether in fact we care 
so little about First Nations people that we don’t think it’s 
necessary to follow up. I’m not sure what it is, Mr. Minister, but 
I think it’s important that we ensure these things are followed 
up. 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1999 

 

And I want to just get back, Mr. Minister, to the reference I 
made about the release from jail of Mr. Crofford after he was 
convicted of manslaughter for killing a Lethbridge girl with a 
brick in 1981, and that he only served two-thirds of a 10-year 
sentence before being released. 
 
I’m wondering why is it not the policy for RCMP to warn the 
wider public about the threat of a possible serial killer and rapist 
on the loose? I mean this person has not really been identified 
as a serial killer, although he certainly has the characteristics of 
one because he has murdered a number of people. 
 
When Paul Bernardo did that, there was all kinds of headlines. 
When this Mr. Crofford did the same thing, it seems like the 
whole issue was downplayed. Mr. Crofford apparently is the 
murderer of First Nations people; Paul Bernardo was not. Is that 
the difference? 
 
But I just take you back. Why do you believe it’s not the policy 
of the RCMP to warn the wider public about the threat of a 
possible serial killer in their midst — a serial killer who is also 
a rapist? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises many serious 
questions, and in particular she asks about the RCMP’s practice 
with regards to notifying the public about the presence of 
dangerous offenders in their community. 
 
And the member will be aware of The Public Disclosure Act 
which provides for a process should the police, municipal or 
RCMP, wish to disclose information for the protection of the 
public; a process whereby they go to the Public Disclosure 
Committee, which is a committee made up of nine members of 
the public to review whether or not it would be in the public 
interest to in fact disclose that information. 
 
So there is, if you want, a community response to whether or 
not it would be useful in any given circumstance to advise a 
community of the presence of a dangerous offender within it. 
And of course sometimes the Public Disclosure Committee will 
decide that it is in the public interest to do so, other times it will 
not. 
 
It does beg the question too of, if a community is advised that 
there is an offender in their community who has served his or 
her time and paid his or her penalty to society, what would that 
community then do? How would that community then respond? 
And the member might remember the case here in Regina last 
year where that disclosure caused great consternation in the 
community. 
 
But there’s obviously a balance between the interests of the 
community, the protection of our children in particular, and the 
rights of somebody who has served his time and is now, in 
accordance with our law, free to be at large. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d like to 
just take you now to another issue and we’ve spoken of this 
issue in the last couple of days in the Assembly, and it’s the 
issue of fetal alcohol syndrome. I would like to speak with you 
particularly today about the youth justice system in relation to 
fetal alcohol effects. 
 

And, Mr. Minister, we did have a court case where a young 
adolescent was brought before the courts, before a 
Saskatchewan Provincial Court judge I believe it was last year, 
and the judge obviously was quite frustrated that we didn’t have 
any intervention methods in the province to deal with children 
and youth affected by fetal alcohol syndrome. 
 
Clearly I don’t believe that the court has any opportunity or 
provides any opportunity for alternative sentencing in that, and 
for a provision for services for youth that are suffering from 
FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) rather than recycling them 
through the court system time and time again. 
 
When this judge brought forward the need for these kind of 
services and ordered social workers to create a treatment 
program for a young arsonist with fetal alcohol syndrome, the 
government didn’t like it, I guess, because it was deemed that 
the Provincial Court judge doesn’t have that kind of authority. 
And so the government is appealing the ruling and argues that 
the judge went beyond her jurisdiction in making the order. 
 
And in a sense I agree with the government, but I think it’s sort 
of a sad day when we have to . . . when people like judges have 
got to issue to the government a major statement like this, 
saying we need to have something alternative to what is going 
on now because this is not serving these children well. They are 
needing intervention treatment as a sentence. 
 
And what is needed, Mr. Minister, is a great deal of coaching 
for these children — specialized learning, life skills training, 
and pro-social-interaction. It’s vital. 
 
Holistic approaches have been suggested and they have worked. 
They assist by grounding the child both mentally and physically 
and spiritually and intellectually. These are the kind of 
programs that need to be happening so that we are actually 
doing something that’s meaningful and beneficial for youth 
affected with FAS. 
 
I know very well that as a judge in the court system there is a 
deep challenge that they feel when they’re confronted by trying 
to determine what it is that’s best for these youth — what to do 
with them. Many youth have disabilities. 
 
This judge says law, criminal law especially, is a constructive 
social instrument most of the time. It promotes beneficial social 
norms and social solidarity. It’s rooted in the practices of 
respect for people and property which benefits society based on 
notions of intention and individual ability to make choices. 
 
Yet what happens if this doesn’t seem to hold . . . if this theory 
in practice doesn’t work, what happens? What if we have 
suspicions that the criminal justice system is not a constructive 
social instrument, that it is a destructive one, especially towards 
certain groups in society such as those affected by FAS, and it 
simply labels them and recycles them through the correctional 
facilities. 
 
So I think it’s very important, Mr. Minister, that we have some 
comprehensive intervention treatment programs because this is 
happening in other provinces. And I think it’s up to the justice 
system and yourself as minister to make sure that these 
alternative methods are put in place. And I hope this can be 



2000 Saskatchewan Hansard June 20, 2001 

 

done soon because it is no good to continue labelling and 
recycling people. 
 
Now having said that, Mr. Minister, I’m aware that government 
is putting in some prevention measures to prevent FAS and so 
on. And that’s very laudable; we all agree with that. But we 
have got to also address the many children out there, children 
and youth, who need to have intervention and meaningful 
intervention programs. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m asking if you and your government are 
looking at having those programs in place so the courts have an 
alternative whereby to really help these youth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well once again the member raises an 
important question not only for the justice system but, as she 
rightly points out, to the health care system, to social services, 
to education, and indeed to the government and to our society 
as a whole. 
 
And the government is doing precisely what the member 
suggests we need to do — develop a strategy to respond in a 
comprehensive way to the range of issues, a range of challenges 
we face together as we address the impact of fetal alcohol 
syndrome and the fetal alcohol effects. 
 
So in short order the government will be considering a strategy, 
as I say, a comprehensive strategy for dealing with precisely the 
issues the member raises in pretty close to the way the member 
suggests. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I will turn over some questioning to 
my colleague from Arm River. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chair, I’m going to lump a few questions 
together for the minister so I hope you will bear in mind with 
that. And I won’t read any letters; I’ll just make this very quick. 
 
But I think he’s heard about the Hanley-Dundurn Community 
Consultative Group which was formed several years ago. It has 
to do with — they’ve sent you a letter, so if you don’t know you 
can look it up — and it deals with the man hours that the RCMP 
officers have been cut back . . . there’s been two. It deals with 
highway patrol officers that were originally based in Hanley, 
but now they base them out of Saskatoon. They would like that 
funding restored so then police officers could be living in the 
town of Hanley. 
 
And also I was just wondering, was . . . is there any funding 
available for the Hanley-Dundurn Community Consultative 
Group? 
 
(16:45) 
 
And one other issue I want to raise is the mayor from Craik has 
. . . I’ll just give you a quick list of his policing costs — in 1999 
it was $33 per capita with $30 grant money back from the 
province; 2000, it was still $33 per capita with $15 per capita 
grant from the province; last year, it was still $33 per capita but 
no grant from the province. 
 
So basically, he’s gone from about . . . That town has gone from 
about $300 to $14,500 — paying policing costs — in three 

years, which makes it very hard for the town to budget. 
 
So with the three questions I will give you, can you give me any 
indication of funding being restored at any of the levels? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member raises a question of the 
allocation of . . . raises a number of questions. One, the 
allocation of RCMP resources; and the other, the costs to each 
community of RCMP policing services. And he also raises the 
question of support for the Hanley-Dundurn community efforts. 
 
On that last point, I would just suggest to that community that 
we find a way to get together and talk about their concerns and 
their issues and, yes, we’ll find a way to facilitate speaking with 
them about those questions. And indeed, it’s important that 
communities do play a significant role in addressing and 
assessing and considering policing services and security in their 
communities. 
 
With regards to the allocation of resources and where RCMP 
officers would be based when they’re on highway patrol or 
indeed in any other activity, that is the matter within the 
purview of the commander of “F” Division of the RCMP, our 
RCMP police service here in the province. And Commander 
Boucher would make those decisions based upon what he saw 
to be the best use of resources and the best way to allocate those 
resources. 
 
And when that happens and when a police officer is no longer 
situated in a community, that of course raises concerns for the 
community; in particular it raises concerns about their own 
security. And it also raises concerns about the amount of money 
they’re paying for police services. And there are frequently 
problems in this regard. 
 
But I would suggest that the member take this matter up with 
Commander Boucher as to the allocation of resources where 
police officers are placed with regards to . . . I think it’s Hanley 
he’s mainly concerned about. And of course, we’ll facilitate 
those efforts wherever we can. 
 
In regards to the contribution paid by individual communities 
for their RCMP services, the member might know that a couple 
of communities who once had free-standing police services 
have moved to be covered by the RCMP in the province, seeing 
that as the most efficient use of resources for them. 
 
While it plainly is the case that the costs of RCMP services 
have increased because of salary increases, because of the new 
radio system, and the need for individual communities to 
continue to contribute as they always have done from the 
beginning of the province to the policing costs in their 
communities, there has been an increase to the communities and 
there have been discussions about how best to allocate that 
increase. 
 
That task force met and agreed on a particular formula. That 
formula is not well received by everyone and efforts are being 
made to find another formula. 
 
But I would say to the member that the dollars provided by 
those communities for their RCMP services are, as the member 
well knows, much less than they were three or four years ago. 



June 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2001 

 

So I think we’re offering a good value service to the 
communities. The RCMP of course is a police service with a 
very close, long, and important relationship to this province; 
which has provided terrific service to the people of the 
province. 
 
A world-class police service is not . . . doesn’t come cheaply 
and we are doing our best to ensure that the costs are spread as 
fairly and equitably as possible and don’t create too big a 
burden on the communities. But I think it is worth remembering 
that the costs to the communities is significantly less than was 
the case three or four years ago. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well maybe you can respond back to the letter 
from the Hanley-Dundurn community group — I’ll let you do 
that. 
 
On the costing end of it you say it’s less, but you know, you’ve 
cut the funding back per capita to go to them. So how can it be 
less? It’s costing them $14,500 this year; three years ago it cost 
them under $600. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — At the suggestion of SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association) some years 
ago, there was an effort to spread the costs of policing, which 
were previously borne by 100 communities, to 800 
communities. 
 
It being the view of SUMA, and I think a view we would all 
share, that there should be some form of equitable contribution 
to police services in the province, based upon the population of 
the communities and the service provided. 
 
Then there was an effort to assess how best to allocate those 
costs, and there was an offsetting $4 million contribution from 
the province to ease the transition. 
 
The member picks one year where because of that, because of 
the change of the formula and the contribution from the 
province, the costs to the communities would have been lower. 
 
But if the member goes back just a couple of years before that, 
he’ll see that they were much higher, and that even today that 
those costs are not as high as they were back then for the vast 
majority of communities. 
 
And if I had more time, I could go into this at much greater 
length. 
 
Subvote (JU01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (JU02), (JU04), (JU03), (JU06), (JU05), (JU07), 
(JU08) agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 159 

 
Vote 159 — Statutory. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Justice 
Vote 3 

 
Subvotes (JU04), (JU03), (JU06), (JU05), (JU07), (JU08) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 3 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you very much. I would like to thank 
the minister and his officials for the time they’ve given us this 
afternoon and for the help in going through some of those Bills. 
So thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Let me thank the member for his 
co-operation too, and thank the officials who are here today to 
help us with our estimates and with the legislation. As always, 
they do a terrific job under quite difficult circumstances. And if 
I had more time, I would thank them for even longer. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 16:58 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 57  - The Political Contributions Tax Credit Act 
Bill No. 2 - The Securities Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 17  - The Professional Corporations Act 
Bill No. 28 - The Commercial Liens Act/Loi sur les 

privilèges à base commerciale 
Bill No. 37 - The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 38 - The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001      

(No. 2)/Loi corrective de 2001 (no 2) 
 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 17:02. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:03. 
 
 


