















































Hansard: July 03, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2283 
 July 3, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 
The Chair: — Earlier today the Opposition House Leader 
raised a point of order with respect to an instruction made by 
the Assembly that the Committee of Finance reconsider a 
supply motion for Vote 45, Department of Economic and 
Co-operative Development. The supply resolution was defeated 
in the committee on Tuesday, June 26, 2001. It is the 
Opposition House Leader’s argument that, I quote: 
 

The committee cannot simply pass the exact same motion 
which has already been defeated. 

 
I thank the member for supplying me with his speaking notes 
and for the intervention of other members on this point of order. 
As the member points out, the established practice of 
parliament is that, quote: 
 

A question, being once made and carried in the affirmative 
or negative, cannot be questioned again, but must stand as a 
judgment of the House. 

 
May, 22nd Edition, page 368. 
 
It is clear that if this decision had been made in the House, the 
proposition of a negatived question a second time would be out 
of order. The same would apply if the motion was initiated in 
the Committee of Finance. In this situation, however, there is an 
overriding factor which the Opposition House Leader has 
alluded to. 
 
I will first address the motion as an instruction to the 
Committee of Finance. As the member for Moose Jaw North 
argued, indeed all committees are creatures of the Assembly 
and subjected to the Assembly’s orders. The latest order of 
reference to the Committee of Finance, being the estimates and 
supplementary estimates, was made March 30, 2001. However 
as outlined in Beauchesne's 6th Edition, paragraph 831, 
subparagraph (3), quote: 
 

When it has been thought desirable to do so, the House has 
enlarged the Order of Reference of a committee by means 
of an Instruction. 

 
The House Leader’s motion is made in terms of an instruction, 
which is proper. I don’t think this is at dispute here. The 
Opposition House Leader did say in his point of order that, 
quote: 
 

The government is perfectly within its rights to refer this 
matter back to the committee. 
 

I will now address the propriety of the instruction itself. 
 
When a committee makes a report to the Assembly, it is the 
prerogative of the Assembly to recommit any matter in that 

report back to the committee with an instruction. The subject of 
recommittal of a report, with instruction, is addressed in 
paragraphs 896 through 899 of Beauchesne's, 6th Edition. 
 
Moreover, in contrast to the Opposition House Leader’s 
contention, it is not out of order for a committee to be instructed 
to overturn a decision made in the committee. I will cite a 
number of parliamentary authorities and precedents to illustrate 
this point. 
 
It is not so unusual in parliaments, where legislation is 
commonly considered in standing committee, to have the House 
instruct a committee to overturn a decision. Erskine May, 22nd 
Edition, page 517 states: 
 

On recommittal of a bill to the former standing committee, 
a permissive instruction has been given to the committee 
allowing it to insert in the bill provisions with a like effect 
to a clause to which it had previously disagreed. 

 
A similar citation can be found on pages 706 and 707. 
 
With respect to supply motions . . . pardon me. With respect to 
supply resolutions, May, 12th Edition, page 741 states as 
follows: 
 

When the amount of a supply grant has been reduced in 
committee, and an alteration of that sum is sought, either by 
a complete or partial restoration of the original sum, the 
resolution is recommitted. 

 
In the case before the Committee of Finance, the Assembly is 
ordering provisions previously disagreed to be reconsidered and 
that the vote be restored to its original sum. The motion is 
consistent with practice as outlined in various editions of 
Erskine May. 
 
In Canada there are precedents directly relevant to the situation 
here in Saskatchewan as it concerns budgetary supply. The 
Opposition House Leader cited a 1986 case from British 
Columbia. He is correct. The British Columbia Committee of 
Supply amended a vote so that it was reduced to $1. 
Subsequently, an order of the Assembly declared that the 
proceedings on the vote to have no force and the matter referred 
back to the Committee of Supply to be reconsidered. 
 
The motion read as follows: 
 

That this House does not concur in the report of the 
Committee of Supply with respect to Vote 70 and the 
proceedings therein are declared of no force and effect and 
Orders the said Vote be referred back to the Committee of 
Supply to be considered. 

 
Consequently, the question was again put on vote 70, it being 
the same question that had been previously amended, but this 
time it passed without amendment and in its full amount. 
 
I refer members to page 97 of the British Columbia Votes and 
Proceedings for June 17, 1986. Similarly, on June 29, 1994, a 
defeated supply vote was reinstated to its original amount by 
order of the Manitoba Legislative Assembly. In this case, 



2284 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

reconsideration of the question was not permitted by the 
Committee of Supply and its vote simply overturned. 
 
In another precedent, on May 11, 1989, the Quebec National 
Assembly ordered reinstatement of estimates of the inspector 
general of financial institutions which had been negatived in 
committee. The National Assembly then took action to forestall 
any future consequences of the reduction or the defeat of 
estimates in committee by creating a standing order to permit a 
minister to amend any committee report that reduced or 
negatived a budgetary estimate. The House of Commons in 
Ottawa has also adopted a standing order that more easily 
enables any estimate to be restored or reinstated. 
 
The examples from the parliamentary authorities and from other 
legislative assemblies demonstrate that the situation the 
Committee of Finance finds itself in is not unique and the 
measures taken by the government not unprecedented. I find 
that the House does have final authority over decisions made in 
its committees even if it means the committee re-voting the 
same question. The same-question rule does not apply as an 
overriding factor in the case of a House giving one of its 
committees an instruction, as is illustrated in practice and 
precedent of other parliaments. 
 
I find the point of order not well taken and the committee must 
re-vote the question on vote 45, Department of Economic 
Development and Co-operative Development as ordered by the 
House. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to on division. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Lending and Investing Activities 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 167 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Would the Minister of Finance 
please remove his officials while we conclude the Department 
of Economic and Co-operative Development. 
 
I would invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I have 
to my right Larry Spannier, the deputy minister of Economic 
Development. To my left, Doreen Yurkoski, director of 
administrative and financial services. Immediately behind me is 
Jim Marshall, the assistant deputy minister of policy; and to his 
right is Bryon Burnett, assistant deputy minister of community 
economic and business development. 
 
Vote 167 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Economic and Co-operative Development 
Vote 45 

 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Would the committee please come 
to order. Thank you. Order. Thank you. 
 

Subvote (EC07) (EC09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 45 agreed to. 
 
(19:15) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
The Chair: — Before we begin I’d invite the Minister of 
Finance to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me here this 
evening to my left is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who is the acting 
deputy minister of Finance. To his left is Mr. Chris Bayda, who 
is the executive director of financial management of the 
provincial comptroller’s division. Behind Mr. Bayda is Ms. 
Joanne Brockman, who is the executive director of economic 
and fiscal policy in the Department of Finance. 
 
Behind Mr. McGregor is Mr. Bill Van Sickle, who is the 
executive director of corporate services division in the 
Department of Finance. Behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle, the 
assistant deputy minister of the treasury board branch of the 
Department of Finance. To my right is Mr. Len Rog, who is the 
assistant deputy minister in the revenue division of the 
Department of Finance. And sitting behind Mr. Rog is Mr. 
Dennis Polowyk,, who is the assistant deputy minister of the 
treasury and debt management division of the Department of 
Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. 
Minister, welcome to all of your officials this evening. 
 
A few areas that we need to touch on this evening, Mr. 
Minister, and a couple of other questions I believe from a 
couple of my colleagues as well tonight, sir. 
 
Mr. Minister, under vote (F04) there is . . . sorry, (F03), the 
Provincial Comptroller, there is a huge increase in the amount 
of money. And we’ve had a bit of a discussion about this, Mr. 
Minister, from 5 million to $10 million. Could you explain to 
the people of Saskatchewan and to the House exactly what you 
expect that the huge increase in that budget will produce in 
terms of the work that you see happening throughout the fiscal 
year that we’re in, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Actually, Mr. Chair, I believe we 
discussed this one other day in estimates but I’m happy to talk 
about it again. It has to do with one-time expenditures of $6 
million for replacement of the government’s quite dated central 
financial systems. 
 
And in particular we’re going to consolidate payroll into the 
Department of Finance, thereby saving money in future years 
across government. We’re making a one-time investment to 
centralize payroll. This will save some millions of dollars each 
and every year in the future. And that’s the reason for this 
year’s increase in the budget for the Provincial Comptroller’s 
division. 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2285 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as 
you are aware, the Provincial Auditor in his spring report has 
indicated that there are a number of concerns with the Public 
Trustee and the computer programming equipment that was put 
in place there. 
 
Mr. Minister, in Public Accounts questions were asked as to 
whether or not your department, through the Provincial 
Comptroller’s office, is looking at broadening the introduction 
of computer equipment and the introduction of new software 
programs to ensure that all departments are coordinated, from 
your point of view as Finance minister, to ensure that the kind 
of thing that the Provincial Auditor is being recognized. 
 
And I think the Provincial Auditor indicated that there was need 
for, if you like, there was need for a supervisor to ensure that 
the game plan and all of the things that were being put in place 
by the Public Trustee’s office were indeed supervised by 
somebody to ensure that they were on time and that they were 
going to meet their objectives. And you’ve indicated, Mr. 
Minister, that the budget of the Comptroller’s office is being 
enlarged to ensure that certain other things like payroll and 
those kinds of things are met. 
 
Has your department given any consideration to ensuring that, 
as departments restructure and reorganize to ensure that new 
software programs are put in place, that there is someone that is 
overseeing all of the departments to ensure that the kind of 
message and the kind of delivery system that you would like to 
see put in place is indeed going to be the outcome? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, that is indeed a concern of 
the Department of Finance and that is why we’re very glad that 
in the last few years the government has actually created the 
information technology office to co-ordinate the acquisition and 
organization of information technology across government. So 
what the member is concerned about, which is a very legitimate 
concern, is a concern that we share and a concern that has been 
acted upon through the creation of the information technology 
office whose mandate it is to do just what the member says, and 
we’re glad to agree with the member that it’s good to have that 
co-ordinated approach through the information technology 
office. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. I’m glad 
to see that that’s happening. 
 
Mr. Minister, I thank you for submitting the information that I 
requested back on May 16 where you indicated the various 
amounts that you as the Finance minister have received from 
the federal government. You’ve indicated, of course, that the 
sum of money that you have indicated for this budget is $136.8 
million. Since your budget and the plan that shows that amount 
of money, have there been any other agreements with the 
federal government that will produce or allow for additional 
transfers of money from the federal government to the 
provincial treasury? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Unfortunately none that I’m aware of, Mr. 
Chair. But if there are any small agreements between 
departments and the federal government that I’m not aware of, 
certainly we’ll let the opposition know. But in terms of any big 
money or substantive transfers from the federal government to 

us, we would certainly welcome that, but none have occurred 
since the budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, a concern that has been 
expressed by a number of individuals and municipalities is the 
property tax rebate, the education portion of property tax rebate 
that has been going on. Your budget indicates a sum of $25 
million that will be rebated back to individuals who make 
application. There was a suggestion made to you, Mr. Minister, 
that there would be need to consider possibly eliminating some 
of the bureaucracy in eliminating time delay to have that 
administered through the local RM (rural municipality) offices. 
The RM administrators could be doing that program on a 
weekly basis and then submitting a request to your Finance 
department for the rebates that they would already have credited 
to various farmers. 
 
Mr. Minister, are you giving any indication as to whether or not 
you’re considering that for the next year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised by the officials, Mr. Chair, that 
this is a program that is administered by Agriculture and Food. 
However, there has been some consideration of whether it could 
be more cost-effectively delivered through the rural 
municipalities. The conclusion reached was that the most 
cost-effective way to administer the program was through the 
Department of Agriculture and Food. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
final area that I’d like to have your answers to is in the area of 
Crown debt. Mr. Minister, as Crown corporations expend 
money and actually go into debt, do they seek . . . does the 
Minister Responsible for Crown Investments Corporations . . . 
is that done co-operatively with you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Ultimately, Mr. Chair, any borrowing by a 
Crown, whether Crown Investments Corporation Crown or a 
Treasury Board Crown, must be approved by the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council. So the Minister of Finance would play a 
role either as Chair of Treasury Board or at present a member of 
the Crown Investments Corporation Board, and ultimately 
discussing the recommendation at the cabinet table because the 
cabinet would have to make the final decision and approve the 
borrowing. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, for a number of years the 
Provincial Auditor has been putting out his report that shows 
the government debt and the total of government debt that 
would include not only the GRF (General Revenue Fund) of 
Crown debt, as well as unfunded pension liability. And that 
number has been hovering around that $19 billion mark, in 
total, Mr. Minister. 
 
Do you agree with that number that the Provincial Auditor has 
put forward for this last report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as I’ve indicated to the member 
opposite before in committee, Mr. Chair, there are different 
ways of looking at debt. And in fact, whether you’re talking to 
the Provincial Auditor, the bond rating agencies, the Provincial 
Comptroller, it depends what you’re including as debt. 
 
The figure that the member cites that the Provincial Auditor for 



2286 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

one purpose uses, certainly I wouldn’t disagree with it. But as I 
pointed out before, it would include the current liabilities of the 
province as well as the unfunded pension liability. There are 
various components to debt and we always have to be 
comparing apples to apples when we’re looking at questions of 
debt. 
 
Certainly in anticipation of another question that may arise from 
the member, I can tell you that the debt of the province is going 
down; has been going down for several years. And nobody has 
to take my word for that, Mr. Chair, because the simple reality 
is that we have received five credit rating upgrades in the last 
three years. 
 
And I can tell you that what the credit rating agencies look at — 
and they’re not easy to deal with, Mr. Chair — is primarily 
whether your debt is going down. And our credit rating has 
returned to a straight A rating because our debt is going down. 
 
Having said that, I don’t disagree with the Provincial Auditor. If 
you include the unfunded pension liability, the current 
liabilities, and the long-term debt of the province, then you 
would get probably a figure of $19 billion. The figure would 
certainly have been higher in the past. The main point is the 
long-term debt of the province is being paid off. That’s being 
recognized by the credit rating agencies and we’re getting credit 
rating upgrades because we’re paying off our debt in a gradual 
and reasonable way. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
Crown debt of about a year ago or two years ago was just over 
the $3 billion mark. And your estimates indicate that by the 
year 2004, I believe, you’re going to rise to about 3.7. So you’re 
looking at about a half a billion dollar increase in Crown debt. 
 
And I know you’ve indicated before that you see some 
development projects going on in SaskPower and the like. Does 
the fact that the Crown debt . . . or the debt of the whole 
province is going to rise by the year 2004, does that concern 
you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I want to be very clear, Mr. Chair, and I’ve 
made this clear in the House actually on several occasions 
during this session, that I think there are different kinds of debt. 
And I think some debt is good debt, some debt is bad debt. I 
mean I suppose no debt at all would be the best situation, but I 
would explain it this way. When you need a car or when you 
need a house, I mean we don’t expect that we will go out and 
pay cash for a house. We expect because that’s a valuable asset 
that will increase in value over time, it’s reasonable to borrow 
money to buy that house because that house will serve you not 
only today but hopefully many years to come. 
 
(19:30) 
 
On the other hand, if you go into big debt just to go on a 
holiday, buy new clothes, day-to-day living expenses that is 
going to benefit you just today but not in the future, that’s not 
so good. It’s like the difference between if we have a $60,000 
mortgage we think that’s reasonable. If we had a $60,000 Visa 
bill we’d say that’s not reasonable. 
 
And similarly when we look at government debt in the Crown 

corporations . . . SaskPower for example needs to put up power 
poles, power lines, build another power generating station 
perhaps. They’re increasing their generating capacity at the 
Cory Potash Mine, at the Queen Elizabeth power station. 
Perhaps they’ll build Shand 2 in the future to generate more 
power. 
 
My argument would be that if SaskPower wants to do that, they 
should be allowed to borrow the money, have a mortgage 
against what is a very real and valuable asset, and it’s okay for 
us to pay for that today but to amortize it over 20 years for 
example because we will benefit from that, but so will people in 
the future. 
 
So I would say this, that the Crown corporations should rebuild 
their infrastructure whether it’s SaskPower, SaskTel, or 
otherwise; SaskEnergy taking natural gas into the North and so 
on. It is not reasonable to say to the people of the province that 
we should raise their taxes today to pay all the cost of doing that 
today. It’s reasonable for the Crown corporations to borrow 
some money as long as the industry standard is met which says 
that the debt/equity ratio for that company is within reasonable 
industry standards. 
 
So in answer to the question, do I believe that the Crown 
corporations should be allowed to borrow to improve their 
infrastructure and serve the people of the province, yes I do, as 
long as their debt/equity ratio is reasonable. And I might add 
that when this government came to office in 1991 their 
debt/equity ratio was not reasonable. I don’t remember the exact 
numbers, but they may have had 90 per cent debt and 10 per 
cent equity. Now they are within what the credit rating agencies 
in the private sector would consider to be reasonable. 
 
So let us not burden the taxpayers with saying you have to pay 
increased sales tax or income tax to give the Crown 
corporations the money that they need to build their 
infrastructure. 
 
On the other hand, there is tax-supported debt. That’s the debt 
that we have built up over years — this government has not, but 
inherited the debt — simply to carry on the day-to-day 
operations of government. That debt should not be increased. 
That debt should be decreased over time and that’s what we’re 
doing. 
 
I would draw a distinction between — in that regard — between 
debt that was acquired or created to build infrastructure, and 
debt that was taken on simply to pay for, let’s say, the 
operations of the health system today. So that for example, if 
we wanted to build a school or a health care centre, I think it 
might be reasonable to go into debt, amortize that over 20 years. 
If we want to simply have money to spend on the health care 
system or Social Services or to pay the teachers this year in 
Education, we shouldn’t go into debt to do that. 
 
So, sorry to be so long-winded but my answer is if we’re 
building for tomorrow as well as today, it’s okay to finance that 
in the same way that a reasonable family would do so if they 
wanted to buy a house or build an addition on their house or 
buy a cabin at the lake. If we’re just going on a holiday, we 
ought not to borrow money for that. 
 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2287 

 

And I’m quite prepared to defend my position to the opposition 
and say there are some circumstances where it’s reasonable for 
the public sector to take on debt as long as you’re getting value 
for that debt. And there are circumstances where it’s not 
reasonable to go into debt, and that’s the position of this 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — That was long-winded but I guess it deserved 
an applause from your colleagues, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year one of your estimates indicated that you 
were going to transfer $150 million from CIC as a dividend to 
the GRF to ensure that you had a balanced budget. At the end of 
the year you didn’t because you’ve indicated that there was a 
windfall in oil and gas royalties. 
 
Mr. Minister, same type of projection for this year: you will 
transfer $200 million from CIC. My question to you, Mr. 
Minister: if indeed the price of oil and the price of gas stays up 
at the higher level — a little bit higher than your estimates right 
now for your budget — and you find by the end of the year that 
you will not require that $200 million to have a balanced 
budget, will you, in that fashion . . . Because the $200 million 
will be left in CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), will there be a reduction of debt at the CIC 
level by 200 million because they will have kept $200 million 
in their bank account? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to the question, no I would not 
see . . . Well I should say first of all that of course it’s a 
hypothetical question, but I have to say to the member that I 
don’t believe that we will be in a position whereby we would be 
able to forgo the dividend from CIC. However the question is 
premised on if we were in that position would that be applied 
toward CIC debt. The answer is no, because CIC debt is not that 
large, therefore, it would go into retained earnings of CIC in 
that event. 
 
But having said that, I think I would tend to want to, if we were 
in that position, look at using some of that kind of resource to 
reduce debt perhaps on the General Revenue Fund side. But it’s 
a very speculative question and I don’t think that situation is 
likely to arise. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One final question 
and I want to take you back to the sheet that you provided of the 
federal/provincial programs and the transfers of money. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve noticed . . . one of my colleagues has 
noticed of course that in the early childhood development 
program that has been instituted in Education, Health, and I 
believe Social Services — those are the three areas — that there 
are expenditures of monies that is taking place in each of those 
areas. There is a joint program between the federal government 
and the provincial government to fund those . . . that type of 
program. I don’t notice it in the column, and would you please 
clarify that as to where we would find the transfer of federal 
dollars for the early childhood education program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, that money is included in 
the Canada Health and Social Transfer, the CHST, which is the 

transfer payment that comes from Ottawa. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, and officials. I believe as of January 1 of this year, the 
procedures dealing with bulk fuel and taxation on those fuels, 
gasoline, changed. There was no longer a cap in place on what 
would be rebated on bulk fuel. In fact, bulk fuel purchased at 
dealers was exempted for those people who have a tax-free 
status, that they didn’t have to pay the tax up front as was the 
case previously, continued to be the case, but that it applied to 
all bulk gasoline that was purchased that way for those with 
tax-free status. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that’s essentially correct, Mr. Chair, 
with this minor modification. It was January 1, 2000 that the 
cap was removed, and then January 1, 2001 that the provision 
was brought in that you didn’t have to pay the tax up front. In 
the first year of operation after the cap was removed, you had to 
pay the tax and then still get it back, but there was no cap on 
how much you could get back. 
 
But last year at this time, I did tell the members of the 
opposition and the House that we would try to find a way 
through the revenue division that the producer could go to the 
bulk fuel station and purchase the fuel without paying the tax in 
the first place. And indeed we did, you know, bring about that 
change which is, I think, certainly beneficial to producers, 
especially at this particular time. 
 
So yes, that is what we have done. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Unfortunately 
though, there was a change made after January 1 that has been 
raised with me, and that happened on January 25. Those people 
who were buying their bulk fuel from a card lock no longer 
received that fuel tax-free but now again had to start paying the 
tax on that bulk fuel. 
 
Why was that change made? You yourself just finished saying 
that the producers needed that cash today, not at some future 
point a year down the road. So you’re now . . . you took the tax 
off for them when they purchased bulk fuel through a card lock 
on January 1, then you reinstated it on January 25. What was 
the rationale for that, Mr. Minister? The producers you were 
talking about needing the cash in their pockets now continue to 
need that cash in their pocket today, but you’re taking it away 
from them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The situation the member describes is that 
producers who went to card lock operators were able to, 
originally, get the fuel without paying the tax up front. The 
change was made not to accommodate the revenue division or 
the Department of Finance or the government but to 
accommodate retail dealers in gasoline who are not card lock 
operators, key lock or card lock operators, because those 
retailers that didn’t have a key lock or card lock operation were 
complaining to government that they were placed at a 
competitive disadvantage if producers could go to the key lock 
or card lock operators and get their fuel, and nobody would go 
to the retailers without that operation because they’d have to 
pay the tax up front. So we decided to level the playing field as 
between the gas retailers, and that’s what we did, not for our 
benefit, for the benefit of small business largely in rural 



2288 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

communities. 
 
And I would hasten to add, Mr. Chair, that any producer that 
goes to the key lock or card lock operation and pays the fuel tax 
is eligible to get that tax back. Now I will acknowledge that, of 
course, that’s less convenient than not paying the tax because 
you have to apply to get it back, but nevertheless it seemed 
more fair to the retailers in small towns who said to them — 
this put them at a competitive disadvantage. 
 
And you know, I understand the member’s question, but I have 
to also say that if we had gone the other way, I suspect we 
would have complaints coming forward about how we were 
treating the retailers, and as I said, the producer can certainly 
apply to — and they do apply — to get that tax back. And 
we’ve removed the tax so that every penny that is paid in tax 
can be got back by the producer. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t know 
many producers that have opportunities to access a card lock 
and then turn around and buy their gasoline retail because the 
purpose of having the card lock and bulk sales is that it’s 
cheaper than retail. Otherwise what’s the point of having it? 
People would simply just go to the retail and fill up. 
 
So Mr. Minister, I don’t think your argument holds water. It 
may be the odd occasion where a retailer some place is having a 
gas war and it may be cheaper than the bulk. But in most cases 
certainly the bulk sales are going to be less than what the 
retailers are charging including tax on both of the purchases, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, on the fuel sales that are made to producers, what 
percentage reapply or apply for the rebates, and what dollar 
values are placed on those that are seeking the rebates and those 
that don’t seek the rebates? 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In response to the first part of the 
member’s question, Mr. Chair, I will say that producers who 
have access to a key lock are certainly entitled to get bulk fuel 
at the key lock. It’s just that if they want to fill up a vehicle or a 
slip-tank on a truck they cannot . . . then they have to pay the 
tax up front to the retailer. The exemption . . . well not 
exemption, but the payment of no tax up front applies to bulk 
sales and that’s the answer to the member’s question. 
 
With respect to the second part of the question, because this 
program only came into effect January 1 of this year at least 
with respect to being able to purchase the farm fuel without 
paying the tax up front, we do not yet have the figures as to how 
much will be purchased without paying the tax up front and 
how much will be rebated because we haven’t had time to 
actually go through the fiscal year. 
 
In this case I guess it would straddle two fiscal years — that 
would be the calendar year for 2001 — to see what those 
numbers add up to. And I don’t think we would have that 
information for the member until the year 2002. But when we 
do have that information I’d certainly be very happy to give that 
information to the member. 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. Mr. 
Minister, I have a couple of situations in my area. We’ve talked 
about them in the past. I’m wondering if other consideration 
have been given to these situations. 
 
Let me outline one of them. As you know, in my area there is 
economic . . . similar economic opportunities on either side of 
the border, Alberta to Saskatchewan, based on the petroleum 
industry in that area. To an oil company, they have operations 
on both sides of the border. 
 
The equipment operators that are based in Alberta, when they 
are called to bring their equipment across into the Saskatchewan 
side, have been required to pay the full PST (provincial sales 
tax) on the entire amount of that equipment the minute it comes 
across the border. 
 
It may in fact work for 20 minutes, it may work for 2 minutes, it 
may work for several days, it may never come back into 
Saskatchewan. These equipment companies dealing in lease 
roads and construction are required at a moment’s notice by the 
companies to do the work. These companies are very reluctant 
and find it very awkward to have to pay the PST on that 
equipment, unlike in the trucking industry, pay the full amount. 
And the request that I think you and I talked about earlier was 
to pro-rate some of the tax or to put a tax on a piece of 
machinery and it may not be on a specific one but that company 
would only be then allowed to bring in one piece — no matter 
which one it was — but one piece into Saskatchewan. 
 
Any kind of a tax PST consideration would be most welcome 
and probably facilitate the work done on the Saskatchewan side. 
As it is now, these companies virtually stay away from 
Saskatchewan, which causes an increase in price for the work 
done there. Could you help me with that? Has there been further 
consideration, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, the member is not correct when 
he says that if you’re an Alberta contractor and you come into 
Saskatchewan that you would pay the full amount of PST on 
your equipment which was purchased in Alberta. In fact, you 
would pay, for example, if you operated one year in 
Saskatchewan you would pay one-third of the amount of the 
PST. 
 
But I’m a bit surprised that the member would put the question 
in the way he has because in fact what we’re trying to do by 
levying a PST on Alberta contractors that are coming in with 
their equipment, which is purchased in Alberta PST-free, is to 
protect Saskatchewan business. And if you let the Alberta 
companies come in who haven’t paid PST on their equipment 
do work here and you don’t charge them any PST, then what 
does that do to your local suppliers and contractors in 
Saskatchewan who are required to pay PST on their equipment? 
 
So in fact what we’re trying to do is make the playing field 
level to protect Saskatchewan business. The premise of the 
member’s question is that people should be able to come in 
from Alberta and not pay any tax and then do work here. And 
where does that leave the contractors and suppliers in 
Saskatchewan? It leaves them high and dry. 
 
And so what you’ve got to have, Mr. Chair, is the system we do 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2289 

 

have that if Alberta contractors come in they can come in; it’s a 
free country. But they must pay something toward the PST that 
they would have paid on their equipment if they had been from 
Saskatchewan because otherwise it would not be possible to do 
business in Saskatchewan or at least there would be a 
competitive disadvantage from the PST standpoint. So that’s 
why we do it. 
 
And I have to say to the member, Mr. Chair, the contractors and 
suppliers, construction companies in Saskatchewan have been 
very vocal to me, wanting the Department of Finance to do 
audits and make sure that out-of-province contractors pay their 
fair share of the PST. 
 
And in fact we have people in our revenue division who do just 
that and collect millions of dollars a year from out-of-province 
contractors who are bringing in equipment that no tax has been 
paid on. And that’s what we should be doing. That’s what we 
are doing. It’s the fair thing to do, and it’s the right thing to do. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Two points, Mr. Minister, if I could. I am 
very pleased to hear that an operator in Alberta does not have to 
pay the full amount of the PST on his equipment. That has been 
a ruling that people on the Alberta side, contractors on the 
Alberta side, have been trying to obtain for some time. And I’ll 
be pleased to relate to them the fact that they do not have to pay 
the full PST. 
 
The other point, Mr. Minister, I think that I had to mention is 
that my comments earlier were not intended to have Alberta 
operators come into Saskatchewan and operating PST-free. 
What I’m suggesting is that they pay their fair share. 
 
But my question was, could it not be in a pro-rated manner, just 
as if I had a truck operating in Alberta and I was operating some 
time in Saskatchewan, I would pay a pro-rated amount of PST. I 
cannot see why there is a difference in this situation. Correct me 
if I am wrong, Mr. Minister, but I do believe that operators in 
Alberta have had to pay the full amount of the PST. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is, it is pro-rated. The longer 
the equipment is here, the more PST they will pay. If they bring 
in their equipment for one year, they pay one-third. If it’s two 
years, two-thirds. If it’s here for three years, then they would 
pay the full amount of the PST. But the answer is, it is 
pro-rated. 
 
There is a bulletin from the Department of Finance that explains 
this in detail, and I would be happy to send that bulletin to the 
member opposite for his information. And I’ll ask the officials 
in fact to do so. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t want to 
dwell on this any longer because I’ll be anxious to see the 
bulletin. 
 
I guess the point I was bringing up is that equipment doesn’t 
come into and remain in Saskatchewan for a long period of 
time. It might do a job for several hours or several days. It could 
be . . . and it goes back and forth across the border. However 
I’ll wait for the bulletin. 
 
The other situation that has caused some concern, and it is not 

only in my area but I think in other areas as well, and that is 
with regards to a service station, a gas pumping . . . car fuel 
pump station right on the Yellowhead Highway not very far 
from the Indian reserves of Poundmaker and Little Pine. 
 
Now that service stations can sell gas on the reserve with the 
PST consideration compared to the service stations that are off 
the PST . . . or off the reserve, there was a suggestion and a 
request that these service stations will not be competitive with 
the gas stations for the natives that are buying gas on the 
reserve. 
 
And I think similar to the GST (goods and services tax), there is 
a distance-rated concession to those kinds of service stations. 
Has further consideration been given in that situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Certainly it has been considered. The 
member asks has consideration been given. The answer to that 
is yes. But the consideration has led to the conclusion that 
nothing should be done in the sense that . . . well I’ll explain it 
this way. 
 
We have no jurisdiction over the gas station on the reserve. 
Under federal law, they do not have to charge fuel tax and our 
advice is we’re not allowed to impose fuel tax. So there is no 
fuel tax on the reserve for First Nations people. 
 
Then you get the gas station off-reserve that may be close to 
them. The difficulty is if you change the rules with respect to 
that gas station, then you simply move the problem out slightly 
further because there will then be a gas station that is within the 
proximity of the first gas station off-reserve. 
 
So our conclusion was that the best thing to do was to let the 
status quo operate and that’s . . . Consideration was given. 
That’s the conclusion we reached. And that’s the policy of the 
government. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’ll pass that 
along too to the operator of the service station that has now a 
for sale sign on it. I’m sure he’ll be happy with your answer. 
 
I just have one more question, Mr. Minister. And that is going 
back to the debt of the province because I just wouldn’t feel 
right if I didn’t have a chance to talk about that because I really 
believe that that is one of the signals that we’ve talked about in 
the past, one of the signals that people look to Saskatchewan 
and see, and I think that they wonder if there is an opportunity 
here. 
 
I’m looking at the accumulated debt in the statement of 
revenue, expenditure and accumulated debt. This is actually on 
page number 10 of your budget document. And I see that the 
accumulated debt which you talked about is going down, is in 
fact down from the forecast of 2000-2001 to your estimated 
budget of 2001-2002 by a very, very small amount. The 
prospect of paying down the long-term debt at that rate is . . . 
it’s amazingly small the chance of it paying down or becoming 
significantly less. 
 
Realizing that there isn’t always the amount of money and 
opportunity to be able to do that, but we do find that there is 
money available for other expenditures including an increase in 



2290 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

the number of civil servants and also increasing the expenditure 
of at least 7 per cent overall this year. 
 
Can you explain to me why there would be a good feeling in the 
investment industry when our accumulated debt is virtually 
stationary and not moving? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I would say this, Mr. Chair. To put 
this in context, 10 years ago, in terms of tax-supported debt, I 
believe that Saskatchewan was probably the worst province in 
the country in terms of level of debt. Newfoundland may have 
been worse or they were close to one another. And today we are 
sort of in the middle of the pack, and am I satisfied to be in the 
middle of the pack? The answer is no, I’d like to be at the head 
of the class. But we are moving toward the head of the class and 
that’s what we want to be. 
 
What I would say to the member is that in 1993 our 
tax-supported debt was equivalent to about 41.5 per cent of the 
gross domestic product — 41.5 per cent. This year, 2001, our 
tax-supported debt is 23.2 per cent of the gross domestic 
product. In other words, the economy is growing, the debt is 
going down somewhat in absolute terms. But the important 
point is that the debt as a . . . the size of our annual production 
has gone from 41.5 to 23.2. Obviously, that’s progress, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
(20:00) 
 
And I think even the member would agree that that’s progress. 
And as I said before, the most significant thing is that the credit 
rating agencies who are objective — they’re not the 
government; they’re not the opposition; they’re people from 
outside, from Toronto and New York that look at the debt and 
say, is it getting better? And they all say, yes, it is getting better, 
and so the credit rating goes back up to straight A’s from where 
it was because it is getting better. 
 
But the other thing I would say to the member opposite is I had 
occasion last week to have dinner with a couple of the credit 
rating agency representatives from New York who were in town 
looking at our books, and we were talking about this, and they 
said the most important thing to look at really is the percentage 
of your spending that you’re spending servicing your debt, that 
you’re spending on interest. And our interest charges have gone 
from about $862 million in 1993 to, I think, about $650 million 
this year; and they’ve gone from almost 20 per cent or 20 cents 
on every dollar that we spend to between 10 and 11 cents today 
— almost twice as good or almost half as much of our operating 
spending spent servicing the debt. And again, Mr. Chair, I 
would say that’s progress. 
 
So are we where we would want to be? No, I don’t think we’re 
there yet. Are we going in the right direction in terms of 
reducing the amount of debt? You don’t have to take my word 
for it, Mr. Chair. You can talk to Moody’s Financial Services in 
New York City or Standard and Poor’s or Dominion Bond 
Rating Service or the investment dealers of Canada or any 
credible objective outside organization, and they’ll all tell you 
the same thing which is that the debt of the province of 
Saskatchewan is going down. It is more manageable than it 
used to be, and we’re going to keep making it even more 
manageable in the future. That’s why we have a straight A 

credit rating, unlike what we had 10 years ago. 
 
And, so do we have no debt? No, we still have debt. Is our debt 
more reasonable? Yes, it is more reasonable. Are we going in 
the right direction? We definitely are going in the right 
direction, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to continue the 
discussion and I’m sure we’ll have an opportunity to talk about 
debt, General Revenue Fund debt, total debt, and what these 
calculations are based on, and the signals that evolve from that. 
But at this time I’ll delay that pleasure for another time and 
thank you and your officials for responding to the questions. 
 
Subvote (FI01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (FI02), (FI04), (FI03), (FI06), (FI05), (FI10), (FI08), 
(FI09) agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 18 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 

Servicing the Public Debt — Government Share 
Vote 12 

Subvote (FD01) — Statutory. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Debt Redemption, Sinking Fund and Interest Payments 

Votes 175, 176 and 177 
 
Votes 175, 176, 177 — Statutory. 
 
The Chair: — That concludes the Department of Finance 
within the Committee of Finance. And I would invite the 
minister to move that report progress on Department of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that we report progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, the question is . . . that the 
officials have is whether the Fiscal Stabilization Fund at page 
139 of the Estimates book, being vote 71, needs to be raised and 
voted off. 
 
The Chair: — It is listed as statutory, page 139, Fiscal 
Stabilization Transfer, so there’s no vote required. But if there 
were questions, you’re correct; now would be the time to raise 
them. I did not raise it, though. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I don’t have any questions. My point 
was simply if the opposition had any questions, they should 
have the opportunity to ask them. 
 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2291 

 

The Chair: — That’s correct, so if there are any questions on 
that now would be the time to raise them. Seeing none, I would 
now ask the minister to report progress on the Department of 
Finance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, thank you very much. 
Before I do that, I’d like to thank the opposition for their 
co-operation in moving the estimates of the Department of 
Finance along. And I’d like to thank the officials for their 
assistance here today and indeed throughout the year. 
 
And with that I’d like to move that we report progress and ask 
for leave to sit again. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board 

Vote 22 
 
Subvote (SM01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce this evening to all members and yourself, Ms. 
Marilyn Turanich, who’s the secretary for the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board. She’s seated to my immediate right. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your official. 
 
Just a few questions tonight, Mr. Minister. I guess maybe if you 
could just give me a quick mandate of an overview of the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board and any changes that may have 
took place in the last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m pleased to respond to 
the member opposite. The mandate for this particular board, and 
I’ll just . . . just to make sure I have it perfectly stated: the board 
is legislatively mandated and empowered to exercise discretion 
of a judicial and regulatory nature. The board is to ensure 
financial credibility for cities, towns, and villages, northern 
municipalities, and school divisions. And as well, to ensure that 
appeals respecting planning, assessment, fire prevention, and 
property maintenance are heard promptly and fairly. And it is 
basically to be there when people need them in these areas of 
concern. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
2000 I believe there was about 15.5 full-time equivalent jobs in 
Municipal Board. Has that changed or has there been people 
added to that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 
there have been no changes to the Board — 15.5 remains as is, 
and there have been no other significant changes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One final 
question, Mr. Minister. Being that reassessment is this year, 
what do you envision happening? Are we feeling that the same 
thing is going to happen as after the last reassessment? 
Everything just broke up out there. Are you expecting the same 
kind of response this time from the new reassessment numbers? 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it’s difficult to make an 
assumption, but the Board is geared up and prepared for 500 to 
1,000 appeals. If in fact there are not that many, then whatever 
part-time assistance is put in place will not be used. So I just 
want to assure the member that the Board is geared up to deal 
with any number of assessments, primarily between 500 and 
1,000. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we 
had more questions, many more questions, but I think we’ve 
had a lot of them answered through a lot of the different times 
that we’ve had this session, this sitting of the legislature. So at 
this time I would like to thank your official tonight and thank 
you for your co-operation this session. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — And, Mr. Chairman, I would also like to 
thank the member opposite, the member from Saltcoats, for the 
questions. And I want to thank Ms. Turanich for being here to 
assist us in seeing through these estimates. Thank you. 
 
Subvote (SM01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 22 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I would move that we 
report progress. 
 
(20:15) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This evening 
I have Craig Dotson, deputy minister of Education, to my 
immediate right. And to his immediate right we have Don 
Sangster, who’s the executive director, school finance. 
Immediately on my left is Michael Littlewood, executive 
director, legislation and school administration. 
 
And directly behind me is Ken Horsman, associate deputy 
minister of Education. And beside Ken is Frances Bast, 
director, finance and administration, corporate services. And at 
the back of the room we’ve got Cal Kirby, facilities planning, 
the director. And beside him is John McLaughlin, the executive 
director, Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. These are the 
officials this evening. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And to the 
minister and to the officials, welcome. I would think this is 
probably the last opportunity we’ll have to discuss Education 
this session unless of course something happens that you might 
decide to stay for a couple of months yet. 
 
But I have a few questions that some people around the 
province have asked me to ask, and I guess maybe the most 
important one is still the 60/40 split. I mean we’ve talked about 
the extra money that went into Education many times this 
session but really there’s not a lot of school divisions that saw a 



2292 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

great big difference in the amount of money that they were 
receiving. There was about $385 million that really was taken 
away from Education since 1992, and yet the education system 
is still on the rails, and not only on the rails, but most people are 
appreciative of the system. I think we can thank the school 
boards and the trustees and the teachers for making this issue 
still work . . . the education system still working so very well. 
And I think that it’s something that we can see when it’s in the 
hands of the local people that the money is used very well. 
 
But can you tell me when your government is prepared to really 
address the 60/40 split. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly when we talk 
about the Education budget this year, it was recognized as the 
largest budgetary increase in some 15 years. And when we talk 
about the actual per capita, per student increase it was the 
largest increase in some 20 years. So the provincial 
commitment to education, K to 12 education, is substantive. 
We’re talking about the foundation operating grant on a 
calendar year basis, just two short years ago of roughly 397 
million. To date it’s well over 460 million which is a 16 per 
cent increase in just two years and substantially more than the 
rate of inflation. 
 
Now we can talk about the 60/40 ratio, and this is one that 
specifically school trustees, school boards tend to talk about in 
terms of the proportion coming from the property tax base and 
the proportion coming from the provincial government. Now 
over the course of the 1990s there wasn’t really any substantive 
difference in that ratio. We’re talking roughly that 60/40 dipped 
a little bit below in the late 1990s into that 39 per cent range. 
We don’t have the estimates for this current year in terms of 
what the actual expenditures and revenue will be from school 
divisions, but we would anticipate that there would be an 
increase in the ratio. 
 
The problem that I really see with regard to the funding of 
education in the K to 12 system is not so much the 
responsibilities between the property tax and the provincial 
government, because jurisdictions throughout Canada have 
different ways of funding education. When you talk about how 
education is funded for example in Alberta, there is no longer 
any access by school boards to the local property tax base and 
the provincial government actually sets the mill rate and 
collects the dollars from the property tax base directly from 
ratepayers. 
 
If you look at situations in Quebec and Ontario where there’s 
less reliance on the property tax base, but they have payroll 
taxes to a substantive amount on gross payrolls for all 
employers, which then is called an education tax. So there’s 
different ways of looking at how you fund the K to 12 system in 
the province of Saskatchewan. Traditionally we have a 
proportion that comes from the provincial government and a 
proportion that comes from the local tax base, the ratepayers, 
Mr. Chair, and what we find is that the grant that comes from 
the provincial government is an equalization grant. 
 
So it’s designed to fill in the crevices where there might be less 
revenue that is generated from that local tax base so that we can 
have equitable educational experiences in the province of 
Saskatchewan no matter where you reside. So if you’re in a 

remote area of Saskatchewan, in northern Saskatchewan or rural 
Saskatchewan, you roughly have similar experiences and 
resources with regard to your K to 12 education. 
 
So we have made a substantive contribution. Trustees rated the 
budget an A, the best they’ve seen in years. The Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation rated the budget an A, the best they’ve 
seen in years. We’ve had comments from individual school 
boards throughout the province telling us that they really 
appreciate the contributions of the provincial government this 
year. 
 
And when you talk about other jurisdictions, well I would stack 
up the last two years in terms of budgetary increases in any 
jurisdiction in Canada. I think Saskatchewan is number one in 
the provincial increases. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I think that when the school 
divisions and school trustees first looked at the budget they 
were very excited and appreciative of the fact that there was an 
extra $33 million put into the budget. But at the end of the day 
after reassessment came out, most school divisions found out 
they were going to be taking more money from their property 
tax owners. 
 
And at the same time a high assessment doesn’t mean that you 
have more cash in your pocket. So it’s hurting very many 
taxpayers, and I know that you’ve heard these complaints right 
around the province. It’s the kind of articles that you see written 
in all the papers and it’s the things that we have been discussing 
in the House. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you talked about some of the other 
jurisdictions and how they are collecting taxes for education. 
And I know at the beginning of this year there was a fear that 
there was going to be a pooling of the industrial commercial 
portion of assessment. What is your government doing to look 
at this aspect of taxation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly there has been 
some discussion with regard to commercial and industrial 
pooling. The discussion really highlights a problem that we 
currently have with regard to equity in the province of 
Saskatchewan. We have 99 school divisions and the capacity to 
raise revenue in these school divisions is very diverse. 
 
We have some school divisions, for example, that have very 
little assessment and cannot raise the local revenues that would 
be considered appropriate to provide a good experience. So the 
province then kicks in the dollars to bring them up to an 
average amount. 
 
We also have school divisions that have lots of assessment, 
mainly on the commercial development side where they then 
can access that property tax base, and we have four school 
divisions this year that received no grant from the provincial 
government because they are able to access local revenue that 
other divisions may not have. 
 
What we’re finding is that development within the province of 
Saskatchewan is not put out in a pattern that all divisions are 
being increasing their assessment to the same level. 
 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2293 

 

This was a problem that was identified in Alberta some years 
ago where the eastern half of the province compared to the 
western half of the province, there was a marked difference in 
the ability to raise local revenue. So the provincial government 
there basically said we’re going to step in and talk about 
creating a, creating a mill rate, provincial mill rate, that would 
then actually apply across the piece, and they would then collect 
those revenues and provide them on a grant basis in the 
province of Alberta. 
 
This, of course, was challenged by local boards in Alberta and 
went to the Supreme Court. We have similar constitutional 
parameters here in Saskatchewan with regard to education, and 
that makes sense because we came into confederation at the 
same time in 1905. 
 
So when the Supreme Court made its ruling, it said that it was 
exactly within the realm and the prerogative of the Government 
of Alberta to level the provincial tax and not have local school 
boards access the tax base any longer. 
 
We’re not considering that in the province of Saskatchewan, but 
the equity issue has been identified, so what we have asked as a 
department, and myself as the minister, is for our stakeholders 
to talk and see what we can do in improving the equity 
situation, and the External Reference Committee has met. The 
school trustees and all members, the stakeholders, are talking 
now to see what are possible solutions in improving the equity 
situation so that we can have comparable experiences 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. And it’s my 
understanding that there will be an expanded stakeholder 
meeting in September to talk about this very issue on how we 
can improve equity in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, then just short 
question, short answer. You’re not looking at doing the same 
type of taxation that they’re doing in Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly not, Mr. Chair. We in 
Saskatchewan have had what I would consider a very valuable 
relationship amongst the stakeholders in this province, and we 
look to our stakeholders for solutions, and we are looking to our 
stakeholders again for a solution on this issue. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the other 
issues that we discussed this year was the fact that your 
department has projected that we’re going to lose 30,000 
students over the next eight years. How many less teachers is 
that going to mean for the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly when we talk about 
projections with regard to declining student enrolment, we are 
looking at over the next 10 to 12 years within the public system 
a decline of roughly those numbers. We also recognize that 
there has been an increase in the number of students enrolled in 
band schools in the province of Saskatchewan which will 
require teachers as well. 
 
So in terms of how many teachers we may need or may not 
need in the future, it’s difficult to predict that. Certainly school 
divisions and school boards make the decisions. They apply in 
an aggregate way pupil/teacher ratios to determine the overall 
teacher requirements for a given school. They then allocate their 

full-time equivalents on that basis. So to know how many 
teachers may or may not be needed in the future, it depends 
entirely on school divisions, and they have the full authority to 
make decisions on the hiring of teachers and the allocation in 
the classrooms, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I’m sure you’re aware 
that the 30,000-student drop that your department’s projecting 
includes the number of students that are in band schools 
already, so it’s not that there is going to be students in band 
schools that are on top of that number. And I would think even 
if we say that there is a . . . each teacher is looking at 30 
students — which we know doesn’t happen — it still could 
mean an area of a thousand teachers that we would be looking 
at, which is very scary. 
 
Mr. Minister, one area that we haven’t touched on that I just 
want some clarification on is the Role of the School which was 
something that brought a lot of discussion earlier in this year. I 
know that part of it is talking about setting up an 
implementation team or a team that’s going to actually deal 
with some of the recommendations. Have you set up that team 
yet, and if you haven’t when do you expect to? 
 
(20:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — First off, Mr. Chair, I just wanted to 
clarify a point made by the member opposite. The predictions in 
terms of declining enrolment apply only to the public system. 
They do not apply to the band schools which are federal, okay. 
So the projections there have shown a growth. 
 
And when we make the comparisons in terms of the total, 
overall, student population within the province of Saskatchewan 
in 1989, there are roughly 205,000 students. When we look at 
the enrolment in the year . . . well 1989 compared to the year 
2000, there are roughly 204,000 students. 
 
Even though we’ve seen a decline in the public system, there 
has been an increase in the band schools to the point where 
there’s somewhere between 15 and 17,000 students now in our 
band schools. Those are not included in the public education K 
to 12, in terms of the projected enrolments. And we have no 
way to predict what the growth will be in the band schools, but 
we anticipate that the demographics are showing that there will 
be an increase in that population. So I just wanted to clarify that 
point, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now with regard to the Role of the School Task Force, yes the 
Role of the School Task Force did recommend an 
implementation committee. We have senior officials now that 
are out meeting with various groups throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we have written all of the stakeholders and 
have given them a target date of October 15 to have their 
responses in, in terms of implementation. 
 
So this fall we’ll be able to lay out an implementation cycle for 
the Role of the School Task Force. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, one of areas of concern that was 
addressed by the Role of the School was the hidden youth and 
the number of students that are not in school in Saskatoon and 
Regina. 



2294 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

I’m wondering, there was also some thoughts that we would 
need some way of monitoring students to see if they’re going 
from various schools and maybe out to band schools. Has your 
department been doing any work on this issue, and if so, what 
are you working on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly the department 
has allocated, with the most recent budget dollars, some money 
to look at creating a tracking system. 
 
We also recognize . . . we recognize that tracking students is 
important but we also believe that the initiatives that we put 
forward with regard to safe and caring schools that was 
announced last fall will improve the retention rate of students. 
But also the massive expansion with regard from community 
school programs where we’ve doubled the numbers this year is 
an important initiative in creating an environment where there is 
retention of students. 
 
And what we have learned from the community schools 
experience is that especially within core neighbourhoods in 
urban Saskatoon and Regina, once they have the designation of 
community schools and the programming that is associated with 
the community schools, not only do their enrolments increase 
but their retention rates increase. 
 
And certainly having had an opportunity to visit schools in 
Saskatoon, Pleasant Hill and Westmount, what I was told at the 
time by the principals of those schools is that their retention 
rates for kids coming into the kindergarten system and who will 
come out in grade 8 has tripled or quadrupled in those schools. 
So there is significant retention. The families are staying in their 
communities. They are welcomed into the school environment 
and that is extremely important in terms of having those 
children stay within the school environment and keeping them 
off the street. 
 
The hidden youth problem that we’ve been experiencing, some 
of that will be corrected by our community schools initiative. 
Our caring, respectful schools program will help. And also a 
tracking system to know where the failures are in terms of the 
system and how we can correct those. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, my question was the 
tracking system. What kind of work are you doing on it? Have 
you got anything underway at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The answer to the member is yes. 
The program will allow for schools to start inputting data on 
their students this fall from kindergarten right to grade 12. 
We’ll also be including band schools and, after the initial 
glitches in the system, I would expect that we would have a 
fairly good tracking system within the next year with regard to 
all the students in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, maybe you could clarify that a 
little more. Is this a computer program where each student is 
given a number? Is it different from their hospitalization 
number? Is it something that can be kept between schools so 
that they can just use it through the computers, or is it a number 
that the students have to carry themselves? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes, certainly, Mr. Chair, there will 

be a unique student identifier for each student. We are currently 
working on how that identifier would work. As the member 
opposite knows, we currently have student identifiers beginning 
in grade 10, and all marks, of course, are collected by the 
Department of Education for grade 10, 11 and 12 and a unique 
student identifier. So that unique identifier will be applied to all 
students beginning in kindergarten, and how that number or 
what that process will be hasn’t actually been worked out at this 
point. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, just one more question on this 
issue. I heard you indicated that there has been some kind of an 
arrangement made with band schools. Does that mean that you 
have an agreement with the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations) or with individual bands that each child within 
the band schools are going to be tracked? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, those discussions are 
currently underway, and we would anticipate that we’ll have 
that in place over the next several months. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I have a question on teachers’ 
pensions and benefits. I noted that this year there was a 
considerable drop in the amount of money spent on teachers’ 
pensions and benefits, and I’m wondering if you can give me an 
idea how long this drop is going to continue and when we’re 
going to start seeing the large increase in the amount of money 
that will be paid out under the old teachers’ pension plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, with regard to the old 
plan, teachers’ superannuation, the actuarial predictions would 
indicate a drop with regard to the requirements from the 
General Revenue Fund to the year 2009-2010. At that point we 
will see a steady increase to a peak in the year 2026, where the 
funding requirements at that time would be substantive. 
 
So certainly the unfunded pension liability under the old plan is 
one recognized, and certainly one that the Teachers’ Federation 
has some concerns about, as well as we as a government. In 
terms of how we can deal with that unfunded pension liability is 
something that obviously really goes unaddressed this current 
budget year, but it’s something that we will be looking at in the 
near future. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, what do you mean by 
substantive? How many dollars are we looking at, starting in 
2009? I believe you were saying that there’s going to be a 
decrease. I’d like to give the people an idea of how much 
money we’re looking at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — In actual dollars, the dollar amount 
in 2009 would roughly be a low of 48 million in terms of the 
General Revenue Fund requirements. And from 2009 to 2026 it 
will peak at 297 million. These are current dollars and when 
you factor in the adjusted dollars of course, doing the rate of 
inflation, I’m not too sure exactly what that would equate in 
today’s dollars, but it would be substantially less than the 
current or that actual amount. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. 
Minister, officials. I’d like to ask some questions at the present 
time about special needs services and students. I believe that the 
Department of Education supplies funding to school divisions 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2295 

 

for students with special needs but that the students have to 
provide some documentation to verify their special need. 
 
I’d like to ask you, what documentation is needed, what does it 
need to indicate, and to what purpose is that documentation 
used? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the only documentation 
that would be required would be for high needs level 1 and high 
needs level 2. And the documentation would be achieved by the 
school division, and it would be clinical documentation. So that 
if it was a deaf child or if it was a cerebral palsy, then that 
evaluation would be based on clinicians and consultants within 
the school division. There is no actual documentation that is 
needed to be provided by the child or the parents of that child. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would this 
documentation follow the student? What happens to it within 
the school year or subsequent school years? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the documentation would 
be included in the student’s file, and that file would be 
transferred with the student if they moved within schools within 
the division — or outside the division, I imagine. 
 
The question arises is that because of our special needs to high 
level 1 and 2, the funding associated with that is important. So I 
don’t imagine that many school divisions would not want to . . . 
that they would want to have that documentation in place 
because the additional funding to that school division from the 
provincial grant is substantive and has increased dramatically in 
the last two years. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does the 
department have copies of this documentation for the purposes 
of supplying funding, or do you simply rely on the school 
division to make the determination that the documentation is 
correct and therefore proceed with the funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the regional offices and 
the superintendents of children’s services would review the 
documentation. There is no documentation kept centrally by the 
Department of Education. And the regional offices would then 
approve as a level 1 or level 2 high needs, and would also 
approve the programming for these high needs students within 
that division as well. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The 
reason I’m asking this is, you’re probably aware I have a child, 
a special needs student in high school. And the beginning of the 
year to receive funding, we need to supply a document from his 
doctor stating what his needs are, what his disabilities are, and 
what he can do. 
 
So as you move through the year, you come to departmental 
exams. All of a sudden we need to re-supply those very same 
documents again for every departmental exam. Now the 
Department of Education has been funding that student high 
cost needs for the year based on the documentation that was 
supplied. All of a sudden this documentation is either not 
available — it’s disappeared, whatever reason — and it has to 

be re-supplied again for departmental exams. 
 
What you’re doing is you’re forcing the doctors of all disabled 
students to continue to write these letters over and over and 
over again even when there’s no change in that student’s 
disabilities. 
 
Why can’t your department communicate in itself to the various 
agencies that need this information? You’re funding it. Now 
why can’t that information be passed on to all the other areas in 
your department that need that information? Why can’t you tell 
the people at the departmental exams that this student is 
disabled? Here’s his file; here’s what he needs. But you’re 
forcing the students, their parents, and their doctors, more 
importantly, to go through this thing time and time and time 
again for no useful purpose. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite 
makes a very good point. And from what my officials tell me, 
that the . . . in the context of a departmental examination, this is 
the actual first time that they’ve heard this particular scenario 
for them. 
 
Certainly when I made comments earlier with regard to the 
Department of Education actually keeping files on disabled, it 
was more in the context of funding, and certainly they wouldn’t 
have that information. But this is something that we will look 
into. 
 
Certainly I don’t think any parent or any physician in the 
province of Saskatchewan likes to repeatedly provide 
documentation with regard to disabilities, especially 
considering that the nature of most of these disabilities are such 
that they’re permanent and one documentation is all that should 
be required. And that should follow that student throughout his 
time within our education system. 
 
So this is a very good point that the member opposite has 
raised. And we will certainly be looking at this and developing 
plans to correct this . . . what I would consider an inequity at 
this point in time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I hope 
that your department takes it to heart and does make those 
changes because it certainly is an impediment to all the students 
and the parents involved and to the doctors and the health care 
professionals that have to keep doing this over and over again. 
It’s a frustration. It wastes time and for no good purpose. 
 
Subvote (ED01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (ED02), (ED03), (ED08), (ED04) agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Education 
Vote 5 

 
Subvote (ED03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 5 agreed to. 



2296 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Education to 
move that we report progress on Department of Education. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Before I do that, Mr. Chair, I just 
would like to thank the members opposite and the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena, the critic for Education, for their 
thoughtful and well-researched questions throughout the 
estimates that we’ve done on Education this year. And I’d also 
like to thank my officials who’ve been here as a group faithfully 
over the session and have provided what I would consider very 
appropriate and very accurate information during this estimate 
progress. 
 
So with that, Mr. Chair, I would move that the committee report 
progress. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister’s 
officials, I’d really like to take the opportunity to thank your 
officials as well. I know they’ve done an excellent job and I do 
appreciate your time. 
 
The Chair: — Actually, I’ve just been advised that because we 
voted everything off that we do not need to move that we report 
progress. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
would like to introduce the officials that are here from Sask 
Water: Clare Kirkland, to my left, who is the president; Mr. 
Wayne Dybvig, who is the vice-president of water resource 
management, to my right; Bill Duncan, chief engineer; and 
Dave Schiman who is sitting right behind me and is the 
manager of financial planning. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I welcome the 
minister and his officials here today. I just have a few questions 
today. 
 
The last time we were here we discussed some acres that were 
planted in 2000 for Sask Valley Potato Corp. I think you had 
quoted at 1,329 acres, I believe. And when I was looking back 
through the estimates I did last year with the hon. member from 
Meadow Lake, I had asked him on June 13 how many acres 
were planted. And his quote was, “we are of the view that it 
would be under 300 acres right now that we’re leasing.” 
 
My question to you is: did you plant them thousand acres after 
June 13? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, honest I wouldn’t seed 
potatoes after the final seeding date. 
 
I’m told that they were likely seeded prior to the date mentioned 
by the member and the number of acres, the total acres, 
involved the SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 

Development Company) people . . . with the SPUDCO 
involvement was 1,329 acres. So that’s where that came from. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just wanted to 
clarify. The only reason I brought that up, there was about a 
thousand acres is about . . . costs close to about 1,000 acres to 
plant them so that’s about a million dollars in the budget. So it 
does, you know, throw out the budget estimates. 
 
When I was doing them last year to this year, I’d just like to 
make a note to the House, the minister would hopefully maybe 
next . . . or the one that did it last year that would be a little 
more accurate in his . . . the old minister, like the minister from 
Cannington pointed out, you seem to be right on this time with 
your 13 and 29 hundred acres. So that’s good. 
 
One other question I would like to ask is was there any updates 
on the Meridian dam, any new announcements made with that? 
I know the member from Cypress Hills before had made some 
inquiries and . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the member would be 
familiar with the announcement that Sask Water will be 
participating in a feasibility study which is being funded 
$75,000 by the Alberta environment people and $25,000 by 
Sask Water to review the potential, to review the pros and cons, 
an initial feasibility study. 
 
And up to this point in time what’s happened is that a 
consultant, Golder Associates, have been selected to assist in 
carrying out this feasibility study which will include the 
opportunity for groups, for people that are concerned about the 
impact of such a major consideration in the future, on the 
environment. People will have an opportunity to appear before 
a committee, a group of people, and express their support or 
their lack of support if you wish, their opposition to it. And that 
will be . . . that’ll probably take until at least the end of this 
year. 
 
(21:00) 
 
One thing that I know that there’s a concern on both sides of the 
border to ensure, and by the way we’re . . . Sask Water has 
agreed to participate in that portion of the funding for the study 
because we feel we’re good neighbours with Alberta and 
they’re initiating the project. And as a participant we want to 
ensure that we have first-hand knowledge of the results of any 
inquiries and impact studies on this type of a project. 
 
So I hope that’s brought you up to date. I hope that’s brought 
the member up to date, Mr. Chair, on where we’re at, at this 
point. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. 
Thanks for the information on that. As you know that I guess 
we’re in a very, going into a very bad drought this year, through 
about half the province or a little more. I know you had made 
some announcements a little while ago on water pumping 
equipment rental, cutting that in half. And I’m asking: did you 
have many inquiries at that end of it with that program? Has 
there been an increase from last year to this year for people 
renting pumps, equipment, lines? 
 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2297 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, I 
apologize for not having specific numbers that have responded 
to the option that’s been offered, but there have been quite a 
few have requested or inquired about the over . . . particularly 
the over mile in length that needs to be . . . have additional 
pumping and for that 50 cents . . . 50 per cent reduction in fees. 
So there has been a good response to what may be of benefit to 
those people that are in a position to take advantage of it. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you looking at 
any other, bringing any other programs such as well digging or 
dugout programs and grant money through that, or possibly 
some of the water going through channels, diverting that, 
holding that back into some PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration) pastures that could be running dry, short of 
water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the seriousness of the 
conditions that the member refers to is acknowledged. There is 
a drought committee that’s made up of PFRA, Saskatchewan 
Agriculture and Food, and Sask Water. And this committee 
works closely . . . PFRA supplies or makes available some 
financial resources to dig wells and dugouts. 
 
And Sask Water is available for any technical advice, 
information, to assist those producers who find themselves in a 
situation where they may require to carry out some of these 
projects. 
 
But as far as the specifics that the member opposite has asked 
about, nothing like that is in place specifically. But the 
resources, the people are there to offer advice, and/or in the case 
of PFRA for wells and dugouts, to offer under some of their 
programs some financial assistance. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Checking with 
PFRA, most of their programming for this year, their funding is 
gone. I’ve got some information from them. There’s very little 
funding left. In fact when the one office we phoned, they were 
done. They said there will be nothing new until next April. 
 
At that end of it . . . and people are looking at dugouts drying 
up. I’ve talked to various ranchers and people with cattle that 
are hauling water roughly 15 miles, you know, and it looks like 
they’re going to be hauling for the rest of the summer. So 
there’s a lot of people in dire straits out there with the water. So 
I hope or I implore that you will look at some programs this 
summer, any way that you can help anybody that needs water 
out there. 
 
With that I will turn it over to my colleague from Saskatchewan 
Rivers. I believe he has a few questions. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome this evening and welcome to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just have a short line of questioning I would like 
to put to you this evening. It’s just concerns that were raised in 
my constituency over some people that were dealing with 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Mr. Minister, what has been indicated to me is that some 
problems arose with water flows in my constituency. And when 

these individuals approached Sask Water to have the problem 
dealt with, they found that they were dealing with antiquated 
maps, Mr. Minister. The one gentleman said that the maps that 
they were using were dated 1956. And I don’t remember the 
exact year off the top of my head, Mr. Minister, but the other 
gentleman said the maps that Sask Water was using in reference 
to his case was dated in the late 1940s — in 1947, 1948. 
 
And from their perspective they’re wondering what Sask Water 
is doing to upgrade their mapping system so that a more modern 
approach can be taken to studying to water movement. 
 
As you’re probably well aware, in my area of the world there 
has been a significant removal of brush in that area. Water 
flows in the spring are much quicker than they ever used to be. 
And certainly the maps that they’re using nowadays certainly 
don’t reflect the exact land as it is now, as it is much more wide 
open. 
 
So they’re just kind of wondering what Sask Water is doing to 
upgrade their mapping system so that should problems like this 
arise in the future, the people that would need to deal with Sask 
Water would have a more up-to-date maps in which to work 
with. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member in response 
to the question concerning the maps, the outdated, antiquated 
. . . There’s a reason for it, I’m told, and it does make sense that 
you would use the maps from previous years to determine what 
has changed and perhaps be able to identify why those changes 
have taken place. So what it was like a number of years ago and 
what the situation is now, and perhaps be able to follow the 
reason for the current situation or perhaps even why it was 
created. 
 
Now as far as the maps used, they are current. Each year Sask 
Water does use updated maps that are aerial photos. But the old 
maps are used again, as I said, to compare what it was like then 
to what it is now and perhaps connect through looking at these 
two maps why there may be certain problems that have 
suddenly arisen or come into existence, whether they were 
natural or man-made. But they serve that useful purpose, so it’s 
not that Sask Water does not have updated maps. They do 
operate with current maps that are updated on an annual basis at 
the minimum. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, it keeps me going then with my second question here. 
In both instances, when they were working with . . . these 
individuals were working with Sask Water in trying to 
understand the problems that they were dealing with when 
working with these maps. And I appreciate the answer that it’s 
sometimes better to be able to see it through the way it was, so 
to help you understand how it ended up where we are today 
with movement of water, which is the direction I want to go 
with these couple of last questions. Nowadays in modern 
farming practices, of course, farmers are trying to create 
efficiencies of drainage on a lot of their land. To improve the 
water flow in the spring so that the runoff is much more prudent 
so that you maximize the amount of land you can use without 
having water laying around for extended periods of time. 
 
In both of these instances what’s happened is that neighbours of 



2298 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

these individuals, in trying to achieve efficiencies, have 
inappropriately or accidentally probably in most cases actually 
diverted water flows from their natural long-time runoff 
patterns in the spring. These gentlemen are wondering what is 
Sask Water’s policy in regards to diversion of natural water 
runoffs and its relationship as it affects their neighbours. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, in the event that people do 
have a concern about water being diverted on to their land by 
others, Sask Water is available to accept formal complaints in 
order to investigate those kinds of incidents to determine where 
the problem has arisen. 
 
And I just might add that that’s why it’s so important to have a 
corporation like Sask Water to be available to offer guidance 
and/or advice to people before they do in fact divert water from 
one particular area to another for the very reasons that the 
member has mentioned, that what in fact may be done for the 
benefit of being able to get on my land may adversely affect the 
neighbour down the stream, if you wish. 
 
And if that does happen, as I say, there is a process to follow 
whereby a formal complaint is lodged with Sask Water and 
investigated and I am told that the corporation investigates 
upwards of 200 and better on an annual basis, concerns that are 
brought to them about that type of a situation being created. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister just real quickly. Then are you saying that there’s no 
formal policy in place to address this issue, and rather you’re 
saying that it’s handled yearly on an ad hoc basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I apologize. I didn’t make 
myself clear enough that any channels to divert the flow of 
water requires the individual to obtain a permit to allow them to 
do that. So that’s the control mechanism and that’s why in the 
event that downstream someone is having a problem as a result 
of what’s taken place upstream where a ditch or a culvert has 
been dug without this permit, then the investigation is 
conducted and that’s where the formal complaint process 
begins. So there is a need for people to obtain permits if they’re 
going to divert the flow of water unto someone else’s land. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have one final 
question here to go and maybe it’ll lead to a second one. I hope 
not. One of the problems that also arose through this process 
was the issue of restricted water flows. 
 
Living as I do in north central Saskatchewan is that of course 
we often have that beautiful rodent — the beaver — set up shop 
and certainly has proliferated to a large degree. Many people 
live along waterways of some sort, small ones where the cricks 
and rills to a small degree that the beaver has moved in, built 
dams, and starting to back up water. 
 
What we’re starting to find now is that there’s some problem 
arising from the removal of those beaver dams. And of course 
the problem is two-fold. On one side of the coin the restricted 
water flows are backing up onto farmland into people’s yards, 
and on the other side of the coin to remove the beaver dam 
holus-bolus, Mr. Minister, creates a large deluge of water going 

downstream again. And I’m wondering what the policy is for 
Sask Water on being able to handle this kind of a problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, with respect to the beaver 
dams that have struck the flow of water, the rural municipalities 
generally maintain a fairly close watch on those types of 
situations arising, and if they do find an area where they need to 
take some action, generally what they will do as well is notify 
the people downstream of what problem they might anticipate. 
At the same time, if the RM is concerned that the backlog of 
water is so great that the problem may cause further problems 
downstream, Sask Water is available to advise, to give some 
technical advice on how perhaps they may control that 
temporary problem. And I appreciate that sometimes these 
beaver dams are not . . . maybe folks aren’t alerted to them until 
there has been a backlog of a considerable amount of water. 
 
But that’s the process that would be followed. The RM would 
notify, if they planned on releasing all that water, would notify 
people downstream. But if they did have a serious concern 
about a greater impact than what people would appreciate, then 
the opportunity to contact Sask Water for some advice on how 
to perhaps ease the flow, the amount of the flow after getting rid 
of one of those beaver dams. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, just one 
quick question. When a municipality is advising people that live 
downstream from a beaver dam that may be removed, is there 
an appeal process that could take place in order to slow up the 
process until a solution can be reached? Or can it be handled in 
an expedient manner, or does an appeal process be allowed to 
take place that could actually compound the damage that’s 
being done by not removing the beaver dam in a prudent and 
efficient manner? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, those situations are dealt 
with between the rural municipality and the landowner or 
landowners. Sask Water does not get involved with the 
exception of being available to offer technical advice and 
assistance. But as far as holding up a situation in a particular 
area, that’s strictly between the landowner and the RM. 
 
The appeal process . . . the discussions would be between the 
landowner . . . I’m sure the person that’s having the water back 
up on his or her land would be concerned and want something 
to happen immediately. And I’m sure the RM would be anxious 
to similarly ease the problem there with creating as little 
problem as possible downstream, but alerting people 
downstream. And, if necessary, if it looks like it’s going to 
create a lot of problems, then the opportunity is there to contact 
people in Sask Water and have the technicians come out, 
perhaps offer some advice on how a potential problem might be 
alleviated at least in a temporary basis. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — If the drought persists, Mr. Minister, is there 
emergency funds set aside to help farmers, ranchers dig 
dugouts, or ones that have to haul water for any substantial 
amount of length of . . . if they have to haul water for let’s say 
for more than 15, 20 miles, for digging of wells — do you have 
money budgeted for that? 
 
And also I want to ask if the drought persists, for Lake 
Diefenbaker, for the irrigation there, will they still be able to . . . 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2299 

 

will you still be able to meet your quotas there? Will the people 
be able to take the water that was allotted out to them or will 
irrigation be cut back there too? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I can advise the member 
that there will be no cutbacks on allotments from Lake 
Diefenbaker for irrigators. Again with respect to the question 
about drought assistance there is a drought committee, as I 
mentioned, that’s looking at monitoring what is happening. 
 
The answer to the question with respect to funding, there is no 
disaster assistance in the case . . . in the event of drought within 
our department. But as I mentioned there is the committee . . . 
the drought committee that’s keeping an eye on what’s 
happening. 
 
And there is concern, no question about it, and I know the 
member has raised it for that reason. If there wouldn’t . . . if 
there is any assistance it may be through federal/provincial 
programs of which we do not have access to through Sask 
Water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you know . . . I 
think when I talked to my Grandma she said this is the driest 
it’s been since 1937 in our area. Just I hope you, like I say, you 
keep monitoring the situation and we hope it rains. 
 
I just want to thank you and your officials for your patience and 
time in my questions and answering them. And thank you and 
I’ll turn it over to the chairman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I wanted to acknowledge 
the member from Arm River and his colleague from 
Saskatchewan Rivers as well for the questions that they have 
asked on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan with respect to 
Sask Water. 
 
I want to thank you as well for the opportunity to thank the 
officials of Sask Water and assure the people that need to 
receive some technical advice and assistance that the people in 
the corporation are there to assist in these matters that are a 
concern to all of us. So thank you again. 
 
Subvote (SW01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (SW02), (SW03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 50 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Water Corporation 
Vote 140 

 
Subvote (SW01) — Statutory. 
 
The Chair: — Were there any questions on that area? Seeing 
none then this concludes the — and that was on lending and 
investing activities — seeing none this concludes the estimates 
on Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 

Vote 37 
 
Subvote (PE01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. The officials 
have all been before the committee before. And to my 
immediate left is Deputy Minister Neil Yeates. Seated directly 
behind him is Mae Boa, executive director of finance and 
operations. Immediately behind me is Assistant Deputy 
Minister Lily Stonehouse, and to my immediate right is Brady 
Salloum, the executive director of student financial assistance. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening, Mr. 
Minister, and good evening to your officials. 
 
I checked the Hansard the last time we met and discussed 
Post-Secondary Education and I noted that the questions were 
perhaps a bit on the lengthy side and so were the answers. So in 
the interest of getting . . . you know speeding things up a bit, I’ll 
try and keep my questions fairly short and hopefully perhaps 
the minister will be able to work towards a short answer too. 
Because I do have a number of topics I’d like to cover this 
evening. 
 
I guess the first thing that I would like to do is . . . We were 
talking last time about university issues, when the hour . . . or 
when we closed the last session of estimates off, and we talked 
about some university issues dealing with funding and 
particularly the adjustment funding, and the minister had 
indicated at that time that you were close to making the 
calculations for this current fiscal year. I wonder if you could 
just give me an update as to what those numbers are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member 
for his quick snapper of a question and I will do my best to 
provide a quick snapper of a response. 
 
The formula was applied and the universities were advised that 
the $3 million was distributed in the amount of approximately 
$2.4 million to the University of Saskatchewan and then the 
balance of it went to the two federated colleges of St. Thomas 
More and Luther College — St. Thomas More at the U of S 
(University of Saskatchewan) campus and Luther College at the 
U of R (University of Regina) campus. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that information. 
Mr. Minister, just a couple more questions dealing with the 
universities and then we will move on to another area. In 
speaking to the universities, they seem to . . . they have 
indicated that they have some problems with long-term 
planning. They seem to . . . there seems to be a lack of direction 
for the universities. They would more comfortable, I guess, and 
would be able to plan and work on program development and 
all the things that universities do, whether it be with research 
and that sort of thing. And I wonder . . . and along with that, of 
course they would need to have some stable funding. And I 
guess it’s perhaps what I’m doing now, and I’m sure you’ve 
heard it from the universities as well, that in order for them to 
do some long-term planning they need to have some stability 



2300 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

and that I think has been lacking perhaps in the recent past and 
so on. 
 
And I wonder if you could just give us a very brief indication as 
to what your government’s long-term vision is for the 
universities and so on, and I said I would prefer to have the 
condensed executive summary in that area, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, again I do appreciate the short, 
snappy little question. I do also commit to the member that I 
won’t deprive him of any necessary information in the answers 
and I’m sure he’d be disappointed if I did. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Chair, as we look forward at the role 
of the universities in Saskatchewan at this point in our time, in 
our history, we see both of our universities continuing to play 
an important role in the well-being of Saskatchewan people. We 
are engaged, as part of the process recommended by the 
MacKay report on the university revitalization, in the exercise 
of reviewing mandates of the universities together with them. 
 
This was part of an ongoing process and we are responding 
consistent with the Public Interest and Revitalization of 
Saskatchewan’s Universities paper that was released in 1996. 
This is all really quite public information in its reports in the 
past and as we go forward we will be working together with the 
universities to bring some clarity to that. 
 
On the matter of funding, the hon. member will recognize, Mr. 
Chair, that over the course of the last three years, as has been 
said several times during this course of estimates, that the 
funding to the university, base funding, has increased in excess 
of 15 per cent over the course of the last three years. And I’ll 
avoid the reference to comparative amounts, comparing one 
side of the House to the other unless of course the hon. member 
would like to go there in which case I’d be happy to respond. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, for that brief vision 
statement, I guess, and we won’t go there tonight. We’ve 
already discussed university funding although I would probably 
just like to reiterate that we on this side of the House see 
post-secondary education as a very important issue, as very 
important to this province when we look at it not as an 
expenditure but as an investment, and we are certainly would be 
prepared to make investments in post-secondary education. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Minister, I would like to ask a question 
dealing with research at our universities, and in particular 
research in relation to the Canadian Light Source that is 
currently being built on the University of Saskatchewan 
campus. 
 
At the opening earlier, or this winter, of the building of the 
Light Source, I noticed that the Alberta people already have an 
Alberta Synchrotron Institute set up. They were there. They 
were talking to people. And there wasn’t . . . I didn’t see 
anything, I didn’t see a Saskatchewan institute. 
 
And I was just, my question is, are you . . . do you have any 
special initiatives or programs that you’re thinking of putting in 
place so that we can be the benefactors of this complex that’s 
being built? 
 

My fear is that if we don’t do something, you know, act and act 
quickly, that we will simply be the operators of this facility and 
we won’t be users of the facility or users at a very low level, 
and I think we would really miss an opportunity if we don’t 
become major users of that facility. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Again I thank the hon. member for his 
question, Mr. Chair. The significant amount of the investment 
in research will not actually be through the allocation of funds 
from the budget before us, Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training. Some is but maybe first of all before coming to 
Post-Secondary’s involvement, I do point out to the hon. 
member that the province of Saskatchewan is investing $25 
million into the synchrotron itself, which is by no means a small 
investment. That through the Economic and Co-operative 
Development funds. And so I know that the hon. member will 
express some relief that we finally got those passed and that 
economic development and co-operation is alive and well in 
Saskatchewan again. 
 
Also we do have a $10 million matching fund that is available, 
also through Economic and Co-operative Development. The 
$10 million that we have in that fund is to match the Canada 
Foundation for Innovation grants, much of which will be done, 
the large bulk of the research being done here in Saskatchewan 
is at our universities. 
 
And so I know when I’ve talked to people in research, they 
appreciate very deeply that what we’ve implemented in this 
province is a fund that supports their applications to the CFI 
(Canada Foundation for Innovation) without having to do it 
separately and to convince two different adjudicators. And so 
that’s $10 million that over the course of the next four years, 
Mr. Chair, will support $100 million in research activity. 
 
We also do, through Post-Secondary . . . matching, through 
Post-Secondary . . . through Ec Dev, the matching support 
funding for the Canada research chairs, through Economic and 
Co-operative Development. 
 
The universities as well then receive base funding. And the base 
funding, as the hon. member will know, Mr. Chair, goes to the 
operations of the universities which will include of course 
research activities. And I will point out as well . . . The hon. 
member asked with his first question about the university 
funding formula. One of the things about the university funding 
formula is that it is sensitive to the research activity to 
determine the apportionment of those funds granted to the 
university sector through Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training. 
 
So when you put all of that together, I think that spells a pretty 
fair level of support for research. And research as I said . . . in 
Saskatchewan we’re talking almost exclusively occurring at the 
universities. And I think it’s also fair to say, when you look at 
the support for it then, Mr. Chair, that largely that is research 
that is not dictated by the province per se. 
 
In addition to what I’ve referred of course, Health will be 
investing in health research at the University of Saskatchewan 
as well, and that’ll be another significant investment. I don’t 
have that number in front of me. 
 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2301 

 

But when you roll it all together, because it comes from a 
number of different pools, in fact it is a more substantial 
number of dollars, millions of dollars being invested in research 
than perhaps we’re inclined to think at first glance. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The question . . . I 
guess the follow-up question that I would have then is: are you 
aware of or is your government taking a leadership role with 
regards to the research specifically associated with the light 
source? And are you doing . . . Have you any initiatives or do 
you plan to take any initiatives to say perhaps create a 
Saskatchewan synchrotronic institute or at least play a . . . 
maybe even you yourselves don’t have to create it, I wouldn’t 
think, but encourage that sort of thing. I wonder have you got 
any special initiatives in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, in response to the hon. 
member’s questions, a lot of these questions would probably 
actually have been more appropriately put to the Minister of 
Economic and Co-operative Development when his estimates 
were here because this government’s research activity largely is 
generated through that department rather than Post-Secondary. 
It’s research which is housed at institutions that are funded by 
Post-Secondary, but the government’s research, specific 
generation of funds will come through Economic and 
Co-operative Development. They will work together with the 
University of Saskatchewan, they are our lead department in the 
provincial government regarding the marketing of the 
synchrotron. 
 
And I do want to advise the member as well that the 
Government of Saskatchewan, in a collaborative way, with the 
two lead departments being Economic and Co-operative 
Development and Post-Secondary and Skills Training, are 
developing an updated research strategy for the future. That’s a 
work in progress and has not yet been released at this time. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would now like to 
discuss for a moment the College of Medicine at the University 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
As we all are aware, there has certainly been some problems at 
the college. And I believe earlier, the Minister of Health had 
indicated that your government is committed to working with 
the university and . . . working towards achieving their new 
health sciences facility and that sort of thing. 
 
I’m looking at an article in The Leader-Post last March where it 
talks about the statements that Dr. Roger Pierson made with 
regards to the College of Medicine. And I realize, I think, that 
funding at that college in part comes from the Department of 
Health, but it also comes from your department. 
 
And I wonder if you could just give us an indication as to any 
. . . how you are dealing with that crises there? What are your 
plans to address some of the immediate concerns that Dr. 
Pierson raised in his article? 
 
(21:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, first of all I do want to reassure 
the hon. member and the people of Saskatchewan that the 
Government of Saskatchewan considers the College of 

Medicine to be an important part of the future of health care in 
this province. 
 
So having said that — and it’s maybe not necessary but better 
said than left unsaid perhaps — having said that, the hon. 
member raises a very important question and that’s then where 
do we see the future of the College of Medicine here in the 
province? And the hon. member will be aware of some 
comments that have been made pointing to operational 
difficulties in the functioning of the College of Medicine. 
 
It is important to note that the Department of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training together with the Department of 
Health are active participants on the Health Services Advisory 
Council, which are also the two departments then very 
importantly acting together with the University of 
Saskatchewan and the Saskatoon and Health . . . Saskatoon and 
Regina Health Districts. 
 
The Health Services Advisory Council is working hard and I 
would say constructively. And I would also suggest, Mr. Chair, 
effectively in the development or the development of a plan 
towards the development of a new sciences, Health Sciences 
Centre, part of which is of course the College of Medicine. The 
Saskatoon Health District and the University of Saskatchewan 
make up a joint management board which is looking at the very 
important matter of the operation of the College of Medicine, 
and there is some good work being done there, Mr. Chair. 
 
The university has made a proposal for a health sciences 
facility, but quite admittedly the university has said it’s been far 
from definite. And so I think the important thing is that the 
province of Saskatchewan, the Government of Saskatchewan, is 
actively involved in the review of the facility and is supporting 
that with input from the Department of Post-Secondary and 
Health and is working collaboratively with the health districts 
and the universities. 
 
This will also, in my judgment, have to include some reference 
to the future of health care that Mr. Fyke has brought to our 
agenda before the Legislative Assembly, as the province of 
Saskatchewan looks to the future in the offering of health care 
and the certainty that we have not only good teaching taking 
place for health professionals, but also effective research that is 
targeted to the future needs of our Saskatchewan to provide a 
sustainable and quality health care system for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure the people of 
this province are happy to hear that you are committed to that 
college and we certainly must work to ensure that that college 
remains vibrant and in fact grows and provides the doctors and 
continues to train the doctors that we so desperately need in this 
province. 
 
And that leads me to my next question, and that is just a 
question of training spaces for health care workers, whether it 
be the NEPS (Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan) 
program, or the medical technician programs at SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology), 
and those sorts of things. Are you looking at, because we are 
told that there’s a shortage of nurses in this province and so on, 
what are your plans for training spots for the various health care 



2302 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

worker programs that your department is responsible for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, first of all as the hon. member 
raises the question regarding the planning of . . . training for 
health services, provision of health service providers in the 
future, it is important to note that the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training is an active 
participant in the Health Human Resources Council. The hon. 
member will recognize, I know, Mr. Chair, but perhaps not all 
those who are listening would necessarily know. 
 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training doesn’t just kind 
of sit in the back room somewhere and think up how many 
people do you think we’d like to fund for training in various 
professions at various places. Conclusions are drawn in many 
professions through consultations with the professions, and 
that’s no less important in the area of health human resources 
planning. 
 
And it is important as well, I think, Mr. Chair, before coming 
back directly to the member’s specific question, to note that the 
Health Human Resources Council, while it addresses the 
important matter of training, it also addresses the other two 
important matters of recruitment and retention. Clearly the 
objective would be to train the appropriate number of people, 
ensure that we recruit the people that we need to provide our 
quality health care services to our citizens and to retain them in 
those positions. 
 
Now on the NEPS, or the Nursing Education Program 
specifically, I do remind the hon. member that two years ago we 
increased the number of nurses being trained here in 
Saskatchewan from 180 up to 260. So an increase of 80 places 
in addition to the previous 180. So today in Saskatchewan each 
year we’re admitting an additional 216 new trainees. 
 
The hon. member will also be aware that with some discussions 
and the co-operation of the post-secondary institutions that the 
four-year nurse training program has got several variations 
including some that provide for training over the course of the 
summer months where the four years of accredited training can 
actually be achieved within three calendar years to assist in 
speeding up that process to graduates. 
 
And I do point out as well, Mr. Chair, I was a part of making a 
very exciting announcement just two weeks ago, week before 
last, in northern Saskatchewan where what was announced is 
that this fall, this September, there will be 40 northern health 
access training spaces that will be put in place in Prince Albert 
that will accommodate 40 northern residents, the large majority 
of whom I expect to be aboriginal in ancestry, who will be 
taking the training program to prepare them to participate in 
health training programs. 
 
Now I quite expect that the bulk of them will be interested in 
nurse training, and there is a strategy that’s in place now 
looking forward to the introduction of an additional 40 nursing 
places in the fall of 2003. 
 
But with that additional growth in the training then being 
targeted specifically for northern trainees to provide health care 
in the North in Saskatchewan, I think there’s some real sound 
thinking in that, Mr. Chair, because it has been difficult for 

northern Saskatchewan to recruit and retain the necessary 
people to provide good quality health care in the North, and 
that’s part of the total picture. 
 
So when you talk about NEPS, a couple of years ago we had 
180 nurses each year going into training. So over the course of 
four years, 180 times four would be about 720 according to my 
rough math calculations. And that’s now up to 260, so 260 
times four means that we have over a thousand nurses in the 
training system at any given point in time, and we look at the 
distinct likelihood of having a strategy in place that gives that 
added by another 40. 
 
So when we put that all together, Mr. Chair, I remain optimistic 
that within a couple of years or less we’ll be having some 1,200 
nurses in training in Saskatchewan in any given point in time. 
 
And I think many would suggest that that’s an appropriate 
number; but as I say, we have . . . if you’re going to do this 
thing right, you’ve got to be looking not only at training which 
is a Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training activity, but 
also Health’s involvement and our involvement as well in the 
matter of recruitment and retention. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, did I understand you correctly that 
there will be 40 new spaces, seats created to look after the 
initiative that you spoke about, nurses for northern 
Saskatchewan? There will be 40 new spaces; they won’t be 
taken from the . . . taken out of the 260? 
 
And I guess just one other question regarding the NEPS 
program. If in fact the advisory groups that you deal with 
suggest that we need to increase the nursing spaces rather 
quickly, do the training institutions — whether they be SIAST 
and the University of Saskatchewan — have they got that 
capacity now to expand, or do we need . . . I know we hear from 
the dean of the College of Nursing that they’re working under 
duress in old facilities and that sort of thing. But I’m 
wondering, what capacity is there in the existing system for 
expansion, if in fact that recommendation came forth that we 
should increase the number of nursing seats by 50 as an 
example. Does that capacity exist now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair, and I appreciate the 
hon. member’s question, chance to correct. I said previously I 
would hope in 2003; I really, I mean 2002. In 2001, the fall of 
2001, there will be 40 northern health access seats. That’s 
definite; that’s in place; that’s been announced. 
 
And then there is a strategy in place that brings together 
actually a number of actors. The Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College is really the lead institution on this and it 
brings together both First Nations as well as Métis Nation 
involvement, University of Saskatchewan, SIAST, working 
collaboratively with the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College. 
 
So they are now working . . . With the announcement of the 40 
health access spaces, they are working collaboratively now on a 
strategy with the objective of introducing 40 additional nurse 
training spaces in the fall of 2002. That would be held in Prince 
Albert and we do believe that there is capacity to take those 
additional numbers. 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2303 

 

In terms of the system as it currently exists, the . . . right now, 
there isn’t the current plan to be adding more than the additional 
40 which, as I say, would bring us up to 300 entrance positions 
per year, and this whole matter of training has to balanced with 
the matter of recruitment and retention. That’s part of the total 
picture. And at this point in time, the plan to be expanding is 
focused on the northern nurse training. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That gives me a bit of 
an indication as to what will be happening in particularly in the 
nurse training program. 
 
I would like to turn, ask a couple . . . or now turn to the area of 
student loan. I realize we have discussed this with Bill 29 and 
so on. There’s just a couple of things that I would like to put 
forward this evening. One I guess is . . . It’s an idea that was 
presented to me dealing with bursaries. Your department has 
monies allocated in the Student Aid Fund to deal with bursaries 
I believe, if I understand the process correctly. There was a 
suggestion made that perhaps some of those monies could be 
allocated to the universities and the universities could use them 
as bursaries, thereby not reducing the amount of dollars 
available to students in the form of bursaries. But it would have 
the effect of . . . I guess a couple of effects. It would probably 
keep the students at our universities because they’d only be 
eligible for a bursary if they were attending our two 
universities. And the other effect that may be useful, it would 
help in the Maclean’s ratings. 
 
And I just simply put those forward and I wonder if you would 
have a brief thought on that idea? 
 
(22:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well the short answer to the hon. 
member’s question, Mr. Chair, is yes. Yes I do have a brief 
thought on the matter. 
 
And what I would say, Mr. Chair, is this; is that this is a matter 
of which we’ve already had some discussion with the 
universities and will continue to. The hon. member is quite 
correct, Mr. Chair, in pointing to the bursaries as being one of 
the real strengths of the Saskatchewan student loan program and 
considered by many students to be therefore the best in the 
nation. And who am I to argue with that? 
 
But this is a subject that we’re looking at. We are sensitive as 
well to sometimes the artificiality of the Maclean’s rankings, 
which is kind of interesting. Even though Saskatchewan has the 
most attractive bursary program in the nation on our student 
loans, when they do their calculations of the universities the 
way they choose to do; it is something that the universities 
don’t — our universities — don’t benefit from having 
acknowledged. 
 
So we’re looking at it. And if there is some way that we can 
manage to keep the same integrity of the bursary system and 
without inconveniencing the students and at the same time 
we’re able to help our universities, then we’re more than happy 
to do that. Also we would have to do that of course looking at 
the administrative implications and cost factors and so on. 
 
So it’s far too early to say just where we’re going to end up. But 

are we looking at it? The answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m pleased to hear that 
you’re looking at new ideas and explore some new options. 
 
I’d like to now turn my questions to the area of skills training. I 
have a couple of questions dealing with a community-based 
organization that contacted myself and some other members of 
this caucus with some problems that they ran into with your 
department and this community organization is the Women of 
the Dawn. And as you well know, Mr. Minister, they’re an 
Aboriginal women’s organization that was formed back in 1993 
to . . . and their first project was an awareness project where 
they focused on literary skills, computer skills, personal 
development, work placement, and so on. 
 
And then the . . . Back in 1999 they tell me that they had to 
change their emphasis because of the funding from your 
department and they went into delivering career and 
employment services. And I believe in the year . . . last year 
they responded to a request for or they bid on or made a request 
to your department to supply community-based services and 
were turned down. 
 
This had some pretty serious consequences for their 
organization. I have a letter in my hands dated March 7 from 
Barbara McLean to Ms. Ivy Kennedy, the president of their 
organization indicating that your department was going to . . . 
providing them with $30,000 for transitional funding. 
 
And subsequent to that I believe they have another request into 
your department, and they received a letter dated May 31 from 
Keith Landry of the career employment services outlining some 
conditions I guess that would be placed upon them if they were 
in fact to be successful to receive further funding from your 
department. 
 
I guess, Mr. Minister, what I am asking at this time is that 
would you look closely at the three recommendations that are 
outlined in the May 31 letter to the Women of the Dawn, and if 
in fact that they can meet these conditions would you reconsider 
their request for funding to provide services to their 
community? 
 
I have had limited contact with this organization and I see . . . 
you know I have seen some of the work that they do and it 
seems to me that they do provide a useful service. I certainly do 
not have a full complement of information, and I guess as I had 
indicated I would just ask you to look at this letter and if in fact 
they can meet those conditions that perhaps their situation be 
re-examined. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, first of all 
a direct answer and then if I may provide a bit of background 
and context for it. If the Women of the Dawn or for that matter 
any other community-based organizations, which were not 
successful in their bid to be selected in a request for proposal, 
but if the Women of the Dawn do meet those conditions, they 
will certainly be eligible to be considered for future contract 
with Post-Secondary and Skills Training. 
 
Just to put this into context, Mr. Chair, one of the things that 
occurred with the transition of some of the Skills Training from 



2304 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

the federal government, Human Resources Development 
Canada, to the province, Post-Secondary Education and Skills 
Training, notice was given — goodness, this would be about 
two years ago — to the community-based organizations that 
what the province would be moving forward with is 
implementing a request for proposal process. 
 
So that we were using a process of open public tendering and 
objective evaluation, and also with the potential then to fund 
longer term contracts than the typical CBO (community-based 
organization) contract of one year and therefore provide two 
things, stability to CBOs as well as predictability to the 
community. 
 
And so the CBO community was given notice that we would be 
proceeding through this process and were given plenty of 
advance information about how it would work and be 
advertised and how they’d respond and how they would be 
evaluated. And then subsequently, for those who were 
successful in their response or request for proposal for career 
and employment services, meeting criteria that we’re looking 
for in meeting the needs of citizens in each of the areas, the five 
areas of the province, those who were successful would have 
contracts. 
 
Those who were not successful would meet with the department 
officials and learn specifically on what basis of objective 
evaluation was their application not considered to be the most 
successful. So they get the information about that. And 
subsequently as well, Mr. Chair, then they would be invited to 
be put on a list if they wished to be available for projects under 
$100,000. 
 
The request for proposal was on projects of $100,000 or more, 
so larger ongoing. And in that regard the Women of the Dawn 
was not successful. Here in Regina, it’s the Regina Open Door 
Society and the Regina Work Preparation Centre that had the 
successful bids in the request for proposal to provide the career 
and employment services. 
 
So the Women of the Dawn then, just following through that 
process, had a meeting with department officials. Ms. MacLean, 
you referred to, would have been involved in that process to 
learn then on what basis was their tender not accepted and then 
were also advised about expectations and they will be eligible 
to be put on a list if there are calls for bids for contracts under 
the value of $100,000. 
 
I should add as well, it was also a decision of the department 
given that Women of the Dawn had been operating for some 
time that when they were not successful in being the successful 
bidder on the request for proposal, then they were provided 
$30,000 in transitional funding to permit them to wind down 
their operations so that they were in a position to be able to be 
responsible to their own employees in their own organization. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand that your 
government has gone to an on-line bidding process. I believe 
it’s called MERX or some acronym such as that. And I 
understand that that has caused this organization some 
problems. They didn’t have the people with the technical 
expertise to put a proper request for proposal together. 
 

And I would suspect perhaps that that may be a problem for 
other community organizations, that bidding process. And I’m 
wondering if there was some way of solving that puzzle for 
groups such as Women of the Dawn who have great difficulty 
getting people with computer expertise and that sort of thing to 
put this proposal together and that sort of thing? Is there any 
way or is there any other method that groups can complete these 
requests for proposals other than on-line? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, maybe just to correct an 
incorrect assumption I think the hon. member is making. First 
of all the answer is, were they advertised on the MERX system 
on-line? The answer is yes, following the same system for open 
public tendering that SPMC (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) uses across the piece. 
 
So we were using the standard process and it was an 
educational process both for the department as well as for the 
CBOs. But the bidding itself, Mr. Chair, was not done on-line. 
It was provided in writing in person by everyone. There were 
advance meetings so that . . . and all of the CBOs who were 
providing services were invited to attend them. There were 
workshops held to advise them as to how to apply. 
 
Offers were made so that . . . The objective here was to make 
good, quality decisions in the best interest of those who needed 
services and making the best use of taxpayer dollars. It would 
be in nobody’s best interest to have a CBO not be successful 
because of its inexperience in doing the RFP (request for 
proposal) response. And so that was clearly the objective was to 
ensure that everyone had the opportunity to avail themselves of 
a workshop and advice to guide their proposals. 
 
The proposals were then submitted in writing and they were 
accepted and assessed then, after being received. And as I say 
there was feedback then provided to those who were not the 
successful bidders. 
 
We did have some excellent presentations that were made and it 
would certainly seem that in my judgment that the advice 
provided in the workshops seemed to be on balance, I think 
sufficient looking at the quality of proposals that came in — 
you can only judge by that. Feedback is provided to those who 
were not successful. They’re available to be on a list to . . . on 
smaller proposals in the future. 
 
And also one of the things, Mr. Chair, I would say is that this is 
the first time the department has been through this exercise. Are 
we committed to making decisions about CBOs providing 
current employment services through an open public tendering 
process? The answer’s a clear yes. Are we open to feedback 
about the process and how it might be able to be improved? The 
answer is also a clear yes. 
 
And we would welcome the advice. If the hon. member would 
like to make comments to me, I’d welcome that, or any . . . and 
we do welcome them from all the CBOs who were involved. 
And we would also welcome inquiries or advice from CBOs 
who may not have been involved in this round, but might be 
interested at some time in the future. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to now deal 
with SIAST. I have a few questions with regards to the 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2305 

 

operations at SIAST. 
 
I guess I need some clarification from the minister. The board 
of directors at SIAST, are they appointed by yourself, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — The board of directors are appointed by 
Executive Council upon the recommendation of the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 
 
Mr. Hart: — With regards to tuition fees at SIAST, will there 
be an increase in this upcoming academic year, and if so by 
how much? 
 
(22:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I expect the tuition increase to be 9 per 
cent this year, and for the subsequent three years. The reason I 
say that, Mr. Chair, is because there is a clear policy in place at 
SIAST. The objective that was decided a little over four years 
ago . . . we’re in the fifth year of an eight-year plan, so the 
objective when the plan was implemented — we would be 
going back to 1996 I believe — was that over the course of the 
eight years, there would be eight consecutive 9 per cent tuition 
increases. The intention was that at the end of that eight-year 
period, that the tuition would cover 20 per cent of the cost of 
operations at SIAST. So 20 percent would cover 20 per cent of 
the education. 
 
Currently SIAST, the average SIAST student, through his or her 
tuition, would be paying something in the neighbourhood of 
about 13 per cent of the cost of the education. And so it would 
seem to me that it’s not likely that after three more consecutive 
9 per cent increases that it will be to . . . the objective of 20 per 
cent of the cost. I’ve asked SIAST to consider their policy 
regarding tuition after that eight-year period has elapsed and to 
be giving that some thought and to be making its 
recommendation to me. However we’re still quite some time 
from coming to that point, and SIAST, to the best of my 
knowledge, has not yet deliberated on this point. 
 
But short answer to your question, 9 per cent increase next year 
and for the three years following. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that information. In 
this spring’s Provincial Auditor’s report, under chapter 5, 
dealing with your department, Mr. Minister, the auditor refers 
to a system of principles for performance reporting dealing with 
SIAST. In exhibit 1, the auditor outlines some principles for 
performance reporting, and I’m not going to go through each 
one of these and so on. 
 
But I would like to either draw your attention to the item no. 2, 
performance and information should be reliable and it goes on 
to say that it should be neutral and fair and all those sorts. So 
just basically outlining that SIAST should be . . . when they are 
talking about performance reporting, they should present fair 
and reliable and unbiased information. And I would hope that 
that is the policy at SIAST. Can you . . . I understand that 
SIAST is working on this whole performance reporting area. I 
wonder if you could just briefly explain what is happening in 
that area. 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, when he 
makes reference to the auditor’s report, he will also likely note 
in there that the auditor acknowledges that SIAST has been 
working on this objective. It is clearly their policy to fulfill the 
objectives as stated by the auditor. They have been making 
progress, and the auditor has noted that progress has been made. 
And I think the auditor, if I remember correctly, formally 
indicated that he’s been pleased with their efforts and the 
progress to date. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I agree with you, Mr. Minister, that the auditor 
did indicate that progress was being made. 
 
It has been brought to my attention, Mr. Minister, that there 
may be a bit of a problem in one of the courses offered at 
Wascana campus of SIAST; that’s the electronics 
communications technician course. 
 
I am looking at the program overview for 2001-2002. And 
under that course, and I’m not sure if your officials have this 
overview with them this evening, but it is on page 30. And it 
says that “this nationally accredited program gives students the 
practical and analytical approach to most phases of the 
electronic communications industry. The program is accredited 
at a technician level by the Canadian Technology Accreditation 
Board.” And further on down it indicates that there are four 
options under this particular program. 
 
And by reading the information that’s presented here and also 
in the calendar, it would give one the impression that all the 
options are nationally accredited. And in fact, Mr. Minister, that 
isn’t the case. I have a letter here from the Canadian 
Technology Accreditation Board, which indicates that only the 
radio communication and telecommunications are the only two 
options that are nationally accredited. 
 
And so there is a problem. There are students . . . I know there 
are students who have applied and started this course with the 
idea, thinking that all the options were accredited, and then 
partway down into their studies they were given information 
saying that in fact isn’t the case. I wonder, first of all, are you 
aware of this situation and if you are, what steps can be taken to 
remedy this situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I . . . we don’t have the 
document that the hon. member has in his hand here tonight to 
make reference to but this is not a circumstance with which I 
am personally familiar and I will want to . . . I’m glad the hon. 
member has put his remarks on record in Hansard which will 
assist as well and I will certainly want to look into the matter 
personally. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I have been told that that isn’t the 
only problem with this particular course. This is a 
competency-based learning course. It’s a course that students, if 
I take it from that, progress at their own speed and so on. 
 
And the course is indicated in the calendars that students should 
be able to complete the course within 65 weeks. I am also told 
that there are very few students that are actually able to 
complete the course within the allotted time. And those students 
that do complete the course do it by working in teams and 
therefore a number of students probably don’t get the hands-on 



2306 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

experience that is required for them once upon graduation to 
actually go out and repair electronic equipment and that sort of 
thing. 
 
The success rate in this course is low. You can buy . . . and 
some of this information comes out of SIAST studies and that 
sort of thing. And I guess I am asking you to look into the, into 
that course, and talk to SIAST and see if some of these 
problems can be rectified, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for 
bringing the question to my attention and I will ensure that the 
officials of the department will look into this expeditiously. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I guess a number of questions that 
I’d like to pose and I realize you probably won’t have the 
answer, but I would appreciate perhaps some . . . that you could 
provide me with the information at a later date. 
 
Again, dealing with this particular course. What is the 
percentage of students that enrol in the course; what percentage 
actually graduate? That would be one question, Mr. Minister, 
that I would appreciate an answer to. 
 
What is in fact the average length of time that the students do 
take to complete the course? That would be another question 
that I would have. 
 
And also, does SIAST have or your department have any 
indication as to the success of the graduates once they enter the 
workforce? Do the graduates actually . . . are they trained and 
do they meet the job requirements that they are supposedly 
being able to fill with their training? I understand there are 
some serious problems in that regard . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . of this particular course, of the electronic communication 
technician course. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. I appreciate the hon. 
member’s question and I commit to respond to him in writing 
on those questions. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I guess one other concern that I would raise, Mr. 
Minister, at this time, is that there’s some internal documents 
from SIAST that were dealing with this particular course. And 
when the faculty was asked about this particular course . . . the 
question, if I understand it correctly, the question was posed to 
faculty: would you recommend this course to students? 
 
And there was a number of answers given by faculty. And some 
of them ranged . . . some of them said that we would . . . the 
faculty would recommend the course to students if they wanted 
to keep their job. Those kind of statements were made. So I take 
it from some of those responses, Mr. Minister, that there may be 
some serious problems with this particular course and I’d 
appreciate your . . . I’ll be looking forward to your responses on 
some of these things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, as I’ve already committed to 
the member, I’d be happy to respond to him. And I think this is 
a matter that I can say with some confidence that SIAST would 
take very seriously. 
 

The reason I say that is because the track record of graduates of 
SIAST indicates a very high level of success, measured in terms 
of employment within six months of graduation. 
 
If I remember the numbers correctly, Mr. Chair, in the survey of 
grads from the year 2000, of those graduates seeking 
employment within six months of graduation, SIAST-wide, 
some 93 per cent were employed — 82 per cent, if I remember 
correctly, specifically in their field of training and 93 per cent of 
them employed right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
And if I remember as well, the rate of satisfaction of the 
schooling . . . of the school, I should say, I think it was 97 per 
cent of those students who responded —graduates who 
responded, indicated that they rated their training as good to 
excellent. And so the circumstances the hon. member paints 
here, that I take and will look at very seriously, are really quite 
out of sync with what would be typical of a SIAST program. 
And we’ll certainly want to look at that. And I commit to the 
member, I’ll respond to him expeditiously. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I would . . . there has 
been a problem, or at least some very serious concerns that were 
raised with me dealing with another course at SIAST. And 
that’s the media communications program which began in . . . I 
think it’s a fairly new course. And again it’s structured very 
similar. It’s a competency-based program . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It’s media communications. 
 
And I have a letter from a Ms. Sandi Niethercut outlining her 
problems with the course. According to her letter, in December 
’99 the program . . . I’m not . . . she was one of seven students 
in this program. In December of ’99 the program discontinued 
three of us, she says, three quit voluntarily and one met the 
alleged 80 per cent policy criteria, which allowed him the 
option of returning to finish. 
 
So it seems like there are, you know there are . . . this is another 
one where there may be some problems. And I would 
appreciate you, Mr. Minister, looking into this course also and 
seeing if there are some serious problems and making the 
necessary adjustments so that students can complete the 
courses, so that they know what they’re looking at when they 
go and apply for the course and they’re told upfront all the 
requirements of the course and those sorts of things. 
 
Because what happens to these students, they enter the course, 
the information . . . they’re given more information about the 
requirements of the course as the courses go on and they’ve 
invested a lot of time and a lot of money. And they don’t get 
any . . . they’re fail . . . they can’t complete the course and it 
creates some real hardships for the students. And again I would 
just implore you to look at these two, these two options. 
 
And there may be others out there. I would suggest perhaps 
SIAST maybe do a review of some of these courses because 
everything isn’t roses there, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — For the hon. member’s information, 
SIAST reviews its courses every five years as standard practice. 
And I am aware that SIAST did a review of the program and its 
procedures after Ms. Niethercut’s complaint was registered. 
And I do commit as well to the hon. member, Mr. Chair, that I 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2307 

 

will inquire about the effectiveness and the appropriateness of 
the course, as it currently exists. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe there was an 
order in council dealing with the Saskatchewan 
Communications Network in last fiscal year. I believe there was 
some 240,000 additional dollars allocated to that . . . to SCN 
(Saskatchewan Communications Network). I wonder if you 
could give me a reason why those additional dollars were 
required. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the figure that the hon. member 
refers to relates to the costs involved with a renewed contract 
for technical services where the contract, when it was renewed, 
ended up being for a larger amount than had originally been 
estimated. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to 
welcome the minister and his officials here this evening. I don’t 
know if the minister heard my questions that I was asking the 
Minister of Education. I hear the minister shake his head in the 
negative. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . excuse me . . . he used to be Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Minister, the questions I was asking the Minister of Education 
also relate to post-secondary education in dealing with special 
needs students, people with disabilities and handicaps. 
 
What’s required from them in attending university for the 
university . . . perhaps not so much for a university but certainly 
for a K to 12 system. For funding they need documentation that 
outlines their disability, what their mobility is, etc. etc., what 
they can do, what adaptive measures need to be taken. To do 
that they need to get documentation that outlines that for the 
courses they want for the institution that they’re attending. 
 
My question to the minister was why doesn’t the department 
coordinate that rather than simply having to do this over and 
over again? The parents, the student, and the doctors involved 
have to keep writing the same letter over and over again. 
 
Does your department coordinate those kind of documents or is 
it again an exercise in frustration for the people involved that 
every time they turn around they need to get another copy of the 
same letter again from the medical people involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, to the hon. member, in the 
post-secondary system the institutions are more independent of 
each other than would be what we would think of I guess in the 
system, the K to 12 system. Each of the institutions, the 
universities or SIAST, have their own individual policies, and 
so what is required of an individual would relate to their 
assessment about the necessary information in order to meet the 
needs in that particular institution. 
 
But the short answer to your question is that there therefore is 
no coordination that exists by the department or through the 
sector because the institutions are responsible for their own 
policies in this regard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: —Well, Mr. Minister, the Department of 
Education has no coordination either. Left hand doesn’t know 
what the right hand is doing there on this particular issue. And it 

seems it’s the same way with the post-secondary. 
 
For a Saskatchewan student there is no reason why the 
information, if gathered . . . and it isn’t being gathered today 
other than at the local level in the K to 12 system, but the 
minister indicated that he would take a very serious look at 
doing that within the K to 12 system — that a student who 
comes forward, provides their documentation, wouldn’t have to 
do this over and over and over again. 
 
If that department does gather that information, is there any 
reason why the Post-Secondary Education department couldn’t 
also access that information? That the only time there would be 
a need to update that would be when changes occurred, rather 
than in the case of the K to 12 system you provide it initially at 
the beginning of the year, then for grade 12s when you do 
departmentals, you have to provide that same letter over again, 
which is just a duplicate basically of the one that you had 
provided earlier, but you still have to go back to the medical 
professionals to get it. 
 
Why can’t this be done once and it saves a lot of frustration for 
everybody involved? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank the hon. 
member for his recommendation. It is consistent with the 
recommendation that I had previously received — I guess it’d 
be a little over a year ago — with the regional colleges’ review, 
where in that review it was being recommended that the 
students’ information should follow the student. I think that’s 
the point that the hon. member is making. 
 
We are working together with Health, Education, Social 
Services, and the . . . I do take the suggestion as a point 
legitimately made, and do commit to the member that it’s 
something we’ll follow up on. 
 
There are a couple of ways that the member may take some 
comfort in knowing that the information does, quote: “stay with 
the student.” If we have a student who is applying for 
employability assistance for persons with disability — the 
EAPD (employability assistance for people with disabilities) 
program — then that information once received stays with 
them. 
 
I think it may be true to some extent that what the hon. member 
wishes to see happen is occurring, but the hon. member I think 
legitimately makes the recommendation that this should be 
occurring to a larger extent and this has been recognized by 
others as well, and certainly I think would be perceived by 
people with disabilities as a sign of progress in order to achieve 
a greater consistency in that regard. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I note in 
the paper over the weekend talk about Saskatchewan’s 
disability action plan. I know that you’re supposed to be 
looking at things through a disability lens, but I think in a lot of 
cases your lens is pretty dirty — that it’s not working, Mr. 
Minister. And this is one of the examples of it not working. I 
have a letter here that states: 
 

Students identifying themselves to the university as having 
special needs and requiring adaptation related to their 



2308 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

disabilities are required to present documentation prepared 
by professionals qualified to assess the specific disability. 
 

Dated June 12. 
 
Now that information has all been provided in the case of my 
son — this is what the letter relates to — to the K to 12 system, 
not once, Mr. Minister, but a number of times, because he had 
to supply that just lately for his departmental exams. So the 
information is in the system, but your system doesn’t track it 
well enough to provide the service to disabled people. 
 
So if my son is experiencing this, every other person with a 
disability is experiencing the same thing. And it becomes very 
frustrating to have to go back to your doctors and to your 
physiotherapists and say, I need another letter because some 
bureaucrat some place . . . It is easier to simply ask for another 
letter than it is to get it out of the file system, Mr. Minister. So I 
think this is one of the areas with disabilities that the 
government is failing and it needs to be corrected. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I am advised by officials that 
the kind of circumstance the hon. member refers to, with a 
student moving from grade 12 to the post-secondary system, 
that if the student requests that that information be forwarded 
from the school to the post-secondary institution, that that can 
and will be done. 
 
However, Mr. Chair, I think that’s not precisely the point the 
hon. member raises. And I know he raises it not specifically in 
the context of his own son, who I know personally and for 
whom I have a great deal of admiration, but it’s a general issue 
that he raises. His knowledge is personal because of his own 
family circumstances. I acknowledge that. And I simply thank 
the hon. member for raising it and take his recommendation to 
heart. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, Mr. Minister, if it’s the case that 
you can transmit the documentation from the high school to the 
university, why doesn’t it say that in the letter? It simply says 
you have to go out and get a new letter. Now if you can use the 
information that was already provided to the high schools, then 
it should say that in the letter, that that documentation will be 
acceptable and please forward it to us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I thank the member for making that point 
and I will pass that word of advice along to the universities. 
 
Subvote (PE01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (PE02), (PE03), (PE04), (PE07), (PE05), (PE06) 
agreed to. 
 
Vote 37 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Vote 141 

 
Subvote (SA01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 141 agreed to. 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
Vote 37 

 
Subvotes (PE03), (PE05) agreed to. 
 
Vote 37 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, before moving to report 
progress, I want to say thank you to the members of the 
opposition for their prying, curious . . . one of the principles of 
education is that it is wise to respond when curious minds want 
to know. And curious minds have wanted to know and we hope 
that we’ve been able to respond appropriately to the questions 
asked. 
 
Quite seriously I do want to thank the opposition for their 
questions and for their commitment to Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training. And in particular the critic for 
. . . the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood and the work 
that he’s done in that regard. 
 
I’d also, Mr. Chair, like to say thank you to the officials who 
are with me here in the committee this evening and who have 
aided in answering the questions and also through them, Mr. 
Chair, to say thank you to all of the officials of the department. 
In the time that I have served in this portfolio I have come to 
hold an extremely high regard the professional commitment of 
the employees of the Department of Post-Secondary Education 
and Skills Training and express my appreciation to them and 
would ask that the members of the committee do so as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to thank the 
minister and his officials for answering our inquiring questions 
and providing us with the information. I certainly have found 
the minister and his staff very helpful in providing the 
information and working with them. And certainly I look 
forward to doing this again. Thank you. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:49. 
 
 


