















































Hansard: March 20, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1 
 March 20, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 2:30 p.m.  
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that I have 
received a communication from the private secretary to Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor stating that Her Honour will 
open the second session of the twenty-fourth legislature at 2:30 
p.m. today, the 20th day of March, 2001.  
 
Would you please rise for the arrival of Her Honour.  
 

2:32 p.m.  
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor was then pleased to open 
the session with the following speech as tabled:  
 
Speaker and Members of the Legislative Assembly 
 
It is my pleasure today to welcome you to the second session of 
the twenty-fourth Legislature of Saskatchewan. 
 
Welcome to all of the people of our province, and to those 
beyond who are observing these proceedings, whether in this 
House or in their own homes. 
 
It is also my pleasure to inform the Legislature that His Royal 
Highness, the Prince of Wales, will visit Saskatchewan from 
April 26th to April 28th. 
 
It is appropriate to begin today by recognizing the Honourable 
Lorne Calvert as the new Premier of this province. And we 
extend thanks to former Premier Roy Romanow for his many 
years of dedicated leadership and service. His leadership and 
service has enabled our province to grow in strength and 
prosperity, and has extended beyond our borders benefiting our 
entire nation. 
 
Ours is a province rich in natural beauty and filled with 
promise. 
 
The late Edward McCourt, an esteemed writer and professor of 
English literature at the University of Saskatchewan, had this to 
say about our beloved Saskatchewan: 
 
“Everywhere there are things to be seen and felt that exalt or 
soothe the sensitive spirit: crocuses spreading a mauve mist 
along railway embankments before the last patch of snow has 
melted; wheatfields merging into a wave-surfaced green or 
golden ocean, unbounded save for an incredibly remote horizon 
rim at times indistinguishable from the sky itself.” 
 
“Nowhere,” Professor McCourt wrote “is it possible for men 
and women to know better their littleness and greatness - that is, 
to know better themselves.” 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have always been tolerant, 
generous and hard working, and today we acknowledge our 
debt to those who have gone before us. The success that we 
enjoy rests on the dedication and courage of people who 
dreamed of creating a society where the future would be as 
limitless as the very skies themselves. 
 
We must build on that success to connect to the future. 

My government will listen closely to people, and is committed 
to being a partner with them in creating a prosperity that 
provides opportunities for all. 
 
During this session, my government will connect to the future 
by focusing on the following priorities: 
 
• A thriving economy; 
• Healthy citizens, families and communities; and 
• Responsive and effective government. 
 
A THRIVING ECONOMY 
 
The economy of our province is strong, and growing. 
 
• There were 485,000 people working in Saskatchewan in 

the year 2000. This is an increase of approximately 5,000 
over the previous record set in 1999. 
 

• Saskatchewan exports abroad were $12.5 billion last year, 
a 28 per cent increase over the previous year. 
 

• The year 2000 was a record year for potash producers in 
Saskatchewan with sales of over 14 million metric tonnes, 
an increase of 11 per cent over last year. 

 
• A new record was set for drilling natural gas wells. 
 
• Oil production reached a new high last year of 

approximately 151 million barrels. 
 

• In the past three years, wild rice producers in northern 
Saskatchewan have grown over 80% of Canada’s 
production. 

 
We will achieve even greater success . . . 
 
. . . in technology 
 
The information highway provides our people and communities 
with opportunities to succeed in the new global economy. 
 
My government will invest over $70 million over the next six 
years, to connect Saskatchewan communities, government 
offices, educational institutions and health facilities to 
high-speed Internet services. 
 
. . . in research and development 
 
The success of our economy is vitally dependent on research 
and development. 
 
My government will continue to support research and 
development, building on previous investments including the 
Synchrotron, the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, and 
the Innovation and Science Fund. 
 
. . . in community infrastructure 
 
My government will support communities through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Agreement, expending 
$170 million over five years and creating up to 6,000 seasonal 



2 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2001 

 

jobs in our municipalities. 
 
. . . in rural Saskatchewan 
 
The strength of Saskatchewan’s rural economy is crucial to our 
growth, sustainability, and lifestyle. 
 
My government has created a new Office of Rural 
Revitalization to support economic development in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
My government will increase expenditures on agricultural 
research and development. 
 
Other measures will be introduced during this session to assist 
farmers, including: 
 
• Programs designed to help farm families take advantage of 

new opportunities and to manage change in their present 
day operations; and 
 

• The Saskatchewan Conservation Cover Program, which 
will provide direct payment to farmers converting 
marginal agricultural lands to a perennial cover. 

 
Saskatchewan’s rural landscape is changing dramatically due to 
rail line abandonment and elevator closures. We are working 
with communities and grass root organizations throughout the 
province on options to retain branch lines, which if successful, 
will help preserve rural economies and help minimize road 
impacts. 
 
. . . in transportation 
 
Our roads and highways have been under extreme pressure for 
the last decade. The dramatic transfer of goods from rail to 
road, along with economic growth throughout the province, has 
created great challenges. 
 
Due to our strong economy, my government can now better 
address highway renewal. 
 
Spending on highways and roads will be at an all-time high in 
2001. 
 
This spending will mean substantial improvements to the 
highway system, including: 

 
• An accelerated twinning program to complete the 

four-laning of Highway No. 1 West by 2004. 
 

• Rebuilding rural highways that form strategic corridors to 
move Saskatchewan grown and manufactured goods. 
 

• Improving our primary and regional road system so that 
greater numbers of Saskatchewan’s highways are capable 
of handling heavy traffic. 

 
The Highways and Transportation Amendment Act will be 
introduced as part of a broader truck route management 
strategy. 
 
. . . in northern Saskatchewan 

My government will work with communities in northern 
Saskatchewan to connect them to the future. 
 
New initiatives in forestry will create 10,000 jobs by the year 
2005, and business opportunities will expand in this sector. For 
example: 
 
• An integrated forestry development plan will allow 

northern communities to participate fully in resource 
management ownership, in contracting and in employment 
opportunities. 

 
Increased geophysical survey work being undertaken in the 
North will encourage new mineral exploration, and increased 
exploration using new technologies will improve the potential 
for developing new mines in the North. 
 
. . . in tax reform 
 
Tax reform in our province has provided significant income tax 
cuts and attracted economic growth. 
 
As of January 2, 2001 the Saskatchewan Flat Tax, the High 
Income Surtax and the Debt Reduction Surtax are gone. 
 
Provincial income tax cuts in the years 2000 and 2001 will save 
Saskatchewan taxpayers nearly $317 million this year. By the 
end of 2003 the total impact of tax reform will result in savings 
of over $440 million per year, compared to 1999. 
 
. . . in economic planning 
 
More than ten thousand people have worked together to develop 
an economic blueprint for Saskatchewan. Their plan is set out in 
Partnership for Prosperity, a document my government intends 
to release early in this session. 
 
Globalization and technology are changing the way in which we 
work. Much can be gained through collaboration and 
co-operation. 
 
My government will, therefore, establish a labour-business 
roundtable providing a forum for complete and open dialogue 
between employees and employers. The intent is to reach 
consensus on a wide variety of labour issues to the benefit of all 
Saskatchewan workplaces. 
 
In summary, the Saskatchewan economy is strong and it is 
growing. My government will make strategic investments in 
people and infrastructure connecting to a prosperous future. 
 
HEALTHY CITIZENS, FAMILIES AND COMMUNITIES 
 
It is our responsibility to ensure that every person in 
Saskatchewan can enjoy the fruits of our prosperity. 
 
My government is working to help families and children, to 
support young people, to improve education and health care. It 
is working to keep our environment safe and wholesome. It is 
working to strengthen our unique Saskatchewan culture. 
 
Helping Families and Children 
 



March 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 3 

 

My government is removing barriers that prevent too many 
people from sharing the benefits and meeting the obligations of 
full citizenship. 
 
One of these barriers is poverty. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan took bold steps to reduce 
poverty and the effects of poverty among Saskatchewan 
families and children. The income security system has been 
redesigned. We began this work in 1997 and 1998 with the 
introduction of the “Building Independence” program. As a 
direct result of these initiatives: 
 
• 3,800 fewer families, including 8,100 fewer children, rely 

on social assistance today. 
 

• These programs, coupled with a strong provincial 
economy, have contributed to a record six consecutive 
years of declining social assistance caseloads. 
 

• A Report Card on Child Poverty, produced by a national 
group called Campaign 2000, shows a decline in 
Saskatchewan’s rate of child poverty for the second 
consecutive year. In the previous year’s report card, 
Saskatchewan was the only province in Canada to register 
such a decline. 

 
Children are our most precious resource, and we must continue 
to help in improving their lives. 
 
My government will devote approximately $73 million over the 
next five years toward Early Childhood Development programs 
aimed at children in high-risk communities. An important 
emphasis will be to prevent Fetal Alcohol Syndrome, which 
begins to limit the development of children before they are even 
born. 
 
My government will introduce amendments to The Labour 
Standards Act during this session, to increase maternity and 
parental leave provisions from the current level of 30 weeks to 
50 weeks. 
 
Improving Education 
 
The key to success for our young people in the 
knowledge-based economy is good education and work 
training, and these are priorities for this government. 
 
My government is: 
 
• Connecting students to educational opportunities through 

modern technology. 
 

• Renovating, expanding and building new schools in our 
K-to-12 and post-secondary systems. 
 

• Increasing the number of Community Schools and 
extending this program to secondary schools. 
 

• Providing additional schools in rural, urban and northern 
communities. 
 

• Developing a Centennial Summer Student Employment 

Program. Over five years this program will result in 
summer jobs for 10,000 high school and post-secondary 
students who plan to return to school. This innovative 
program allows young people to contribute to the cost of 
their education, and to gain valuable work experience here 
at home. It is an example of the priority my government 
places on youth. 

 
Connecting to Young People 
 
Connecting to young people means connecting to the future, for 
they will shape our future in this new century. 
 
As we prepare to celebrate our centenary in 2005, it is 
appropriate that we work side-by-side with the leaders of 
tomorrow. 
 
It is for these reasons that my government has created a new 
Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
Young people are the future of this province, and they are 
already demonstrating leadership and service. 
 
My government extends an invitation to the youth of our 
province to consider careers in public service. We need their 
ideas, talents and energy in a changing world where their 
familiarity with information technology will assist in 
transforming our efforts throughout government and in 
communities. 
 
Connecting to Aboriginal peoples 
 
Saskatchewan must be a prosperous, secure and tolerant 
society, where diversity is celebrated and seen as strength. 
 
My government recognizes the increasingly important role that 
Aboriginal people will play in the social and economic future of 
our province. This government is committed to working with 
Métis and First Nations people to secure that future. 
 
My government has recently appointed a Minister whose work 
will be dedicated entirely to Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
My government has announced a Métis and Off-Reserve First 
Nations People Strategy. 
 
My government is committed to increasing Aboriginal 
participation in management and professional positions in the 
public service. Through a new Aboriginal Internship and 
Management Development Program we will see significant 
improvements in the representative nature of our public service 
at all levels including management. 
 
During this session, my government will introduce The Métis 
Act, acknowledging the valuable contributions of Métis people 
to Saskatchewan. This legislation will improve our ability to 
work collaboratively in addressing important issues. 
 
Protecting our environment 
 
My government recognizes the links between the quality of our 
environment, the strength of our economy and the health of our 
people. 



4 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2001 

 

During this session, legislation will be introduced to ensure that 
oil and gas wells and related sites are properly decommissioned 
and reclaimed. 
 
My government will also undertake a comprehensive review of 
its major environmental protection legislation aimed at enabling 
more effective and flexible management and protection of the 
environment. 
 
My government will invest in wind power as a safe, renewable 
energy resource and we will develop programs aimed at energy 
conservation. 
 
Improving health care 
 
This province introduced medicare and will continue to provide 
health care that is a model for the rest of Canada. 
 
The issues we face are complex and they require innovative 
solutions. As our ability to prevent disease and to treat acute 
and chronic disease improves, the costs of delivering these 
services increases. 
 
It is time to renew health care in this province and my 
government is committed to putting in place the measures to do 
it. 
 
Last year, this government created a Commission on Medicare 
to work with Saskatchewan people in identifying pressing 
issues, and recommending action to ensure a system that is 
sustainable, stable, and effective. The Commission’s report will 
be delivered within the next several weeks. 
 
My government will give careful consideration to the report and 
its recommendations. We will listen to the feedback from 
communities and stakeholders and we will then make the 
changes necessary to achieve a health care system that works 
well for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This government will work to ensure that Saskatchewan’s 
health care interests are placed on the national agenda. 
 
During this session my government will also introduce The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act to provide Advanced 
Clinical Nurses with the authority to perform the services that 
they have been trained to deliver. 
 
Supporting a unique culture 
 
Saskatchewan is rich in its cultural diversity. Our strength is 
found in our people and our communities. 
 
My government knows that culture and recreation are central 
components of community life throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
As well, the development of film and other cultural industries 
have become important generators of jobs and economic 
activities in our communities. 
 
It is for these important reasons that my government has created 
a new Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation. 
 
RESPONSIBLE AND EFFECTIVE GOVERNMENT 

My government is dedicated to providing a responsible and 
effective administration. Our citizens expect and deserve no 
less. 
 
The opportunities provided by our coalition government create 
a unique opportunity for connecting to the future. The 
co-management team provides new perspectives to decision 
making and forges a collective wisdom in developing public 
policy and governing our province. 
 
My government will continue to: 
 
• Be open, competent and accountable; 
• Practice sound financial management; 
• Provide quality public services that meet the needs of 

Saskatchewan people; and 
• Provide leadership in a strong and united Canada. 
 
In this, too, we will build on the foundation of our success in 
the past. 
 
This government has carried out fundamental tax reform that 
will both put more money in the pockets of our citizens and 
create economic growth. 
 
Sound fiscal management in this province has resulted in our 
receiving three financial upgrades in the past year alone. 
 
During this session my government will propose amendments 
to the Provincial Auditor Act. These will strengthen the 
independence of the Provincial Auditor and enhance 
accountability through improved reporting. 
 
CONCLUSION 
 
Friends and neighbors, springtime in Saskatchewan is just 
around the corner. 
 
Indeed, as Edward McCourt has written: “Everywhere there are 
things to be seen and felt that exalt or soothe the sensitive 
spirit.” 
 
Soon the warming sunshine will be upon us. Our dreams are as 
limitless as our far horizons. 
 
We plan for a bright future for our children and ourselves. We 
hold that future in our hands, and it is there for us to make of it 
what we will. 
 
We have in our province the vision, the ideas and the people to 
connect us to that future. 
 
A vision of hope, prosperity, caring and sharing. 
 
Let us connect to that future beginning today. 
 
I leave you now to the business of the Session, with full 
confidence that the government will favorably discharge its 
duties and responsibilities. 
 
May Divine Providence continue to bless our province and 
guide this Legislature in all its deliberations. 
 



March 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 5 

 

Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 3 p.m. 
 
Prayers 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Pro Forma Bill 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that a 
Bill respecting the administration of oaths of office be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the Bill read a first time. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of New Clerk Assistant (Committees) 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to introduce to the members of 
the Assembly, Mr. Viktor Kaczkowski, who is our new Clerk 
Assistant (Committees). I am sure that he will be an asset to our 
Table and I ask members to join me in welcoming Viktor to the 
legislative service. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that the pages 
for this session will be Pamela Yungwirth, Lori Rosom, Nicole 
McNaughton, Amanda Lawson, and Loni Schick. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING THE SPEECH FROM THE THRONE 
 
The Speaker: — I wish to inform the Assembly that in order to 
prevent mistakes I have obtained a copy of the speech of Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor which I now lay on the Table. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Speech from the Throne 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Deputy Premier: 
 

That the speech of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor be 
taken into consideration on Wednesday, March 21, 2001. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Printing of Votes and Proceedings of the Assembly 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Deputy Premier: 
 

That the Votes and Proceedings of this Assembly be printed 
under the authority of the Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I move the House do 

now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before we adjourn, Mr. Premier, there are 
one or two items I would like to attend to. I’d like to first 
recognize the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At this time I ask 
for leave to make a statement regarding La Journée 
internationale de la francophonie. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

La Journée internationale de la francophonie 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Merci, Monsieur le Président. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I am pleased to announce that today, March 20, has been 
officially designated La Journée internationale de la 
francophonie in Saskatchewan. 
 
Ce jour constitue le sommet des célébrations annuelles 
pancanadiennes des réalisations et des aspirations des 
communautés francophones de notre pays, cet un signe de 
reconnaissance du fait français partout dans le monde. 
 
(Translation: This day is the centrepiece for annual celebrations 
across Canada of the achievements and aspirations of our 
country’s Francophone communities and a recognition of the 
French fact around the world.) 
 
The theme chosen for 2001 -- Toute la diversité du monde -- is 
particularly fitting for the Canadian reality. Our province's 
Francophones, the Fransaskois, are testimony to the heritage 
and enriching diversity of the French language and culture in 
Canada. 
 
Au nom de mes collègues de l'Assemblée législative, j'aimerais 
souhaiter à toutes les Fransaskoises et tous les Fransaskois: 
Bonne Journée internationale de la francophonie. 
 
(Translation: On behalf of my colleagues in the Legislative 
Assembly, I would like to wish all Fransaskois: Bonne Journée 
internationale de la francophonie.) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave to 
also make a statement on National Francophone Day. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to rise today on behalf of the official opposition to 
recognize La Journée internationale de la francophonie, in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
On this special day we recognize and celebrate all 
Francophones, especially those living in Saskatchewan. La 
communauté Fransaskois est très riche en tous ce qui concerne 
la langue et la culture. (Translation: The Fransaskois 
community is very rich in all that concerns the language and the 
culture.) 



6 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2001 

 

The Francophone community in Saskatchewan celebrates a rich 
culture and language. This culturally strong community brings 
to each and every person involved a fruitful and enriching 
experience. 
 
On behalf of my colleagues in the Saskatchewan Party, I wish 
an exciting week to all the Fransaskois and to every person who 
participates in this cultural experience. 
 
Merci. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now before putting the question on the 
adjournment motion I have a few announcements to make.  
 
I would like to thank all of the guests and members of the 
public for joining us here today.  
 
A special thank you to the grade 8 students from the Leader 
School and from St. Theresa’s School in Regina for attending 
today’s ceremony. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear!  
 
The Speaker: — I want to welcome the Miller Select Choir 
from Miller Comprehensive High School Choir here in Regina. 
I will be calling on them to sing for us in a few moments. 
 
I would like to thank the members of the Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police and the 38 Canadian Brigade Group consisting 
of reservists from Saskatchewan for participating in the 
ceremony on the arrival of the Lieutenant Governor for the 
opening, as well as the 10 Field Regiment, the reserve unit from 
Regina and Yorkton for the 15 gun salute. 
 
I also extend our thanks to Dr. Ed Lewis for playing the 
vice-regal salute during today’s ceremonies. 
 
I would like to invite everyone to join their Honours, the 
Premier, the Leader of the Opposition, and members of the 
Legislative Assembly at the Speaker’s tea which will take place 
immediately following the Chamber ceremony. The tea will be 
in two locations — room 218 in the west wing, and the 
Legislative Library Reading Room in the east wing. 
 
I would now like to welcome Miller Select Choir from Regina, 
under the direction of Jennifer Whitney Rottiers. The choir will 
sing two selections for us this afternoon — “The Garden of 
Music” and “Confitemini Domino”. Ladies and gentlemen, the 
Miller Select Choir. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(The choir sang.) 
 
The Speaker: — On behalf of all present, I would like to thank 
the choir and Jennifer Whitney Rottiers, for that very fine 
performance. 
 
It has been moved by the Premier that this House do now 
adjourn. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 3:15 p.m. 



 

 

 


