















































Hansard: June 06, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1597 
 June 6, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present today 
from people who are concerned about the EMS (emergency 
medical services) report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Spalding, 
Archerwill, and Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
from the citizens of North Battleford concerning our water 
situation. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
provincial and federal governments to provide immediate 
financial assistance to the city of North Battleford in order 
to facilitate necessary improvements to the North 
Battleford water treatment. 

 
And while I’m on my feet, I also present a petition from the 
good citizens of Battleford. The prayer of relief which reads as 
follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to designate the 
restoration of Territorial House in the Battlefords as a 
centennial project and to provide the necessary funds to 
complete the project prior to the 2005 centennial 
celebrations. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the condition of Highway 339, and 
the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest, Spring Valley, Moose Jaw, and Ogema. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
petitioners concerned about the availability of the appropriate 
hospital facilities in Swift Current, the regional centre for the 
southwest. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of this petition reads as 
follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the city of 
Swift Current; people from Waldeck, Saskatchewan; from Gull 
Lake, from Pennant, Tompkins, and Stewart Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Weyburn who are concerned with the 
lack of an in-patient treatment centre in the city of Weyburn and 
have put forth a proposal for such. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre in the city of 
Weyburn and provide funding for the same. 

 
And this petition is signed on behalf of citizens of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the EMS service. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance service. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people in the 
Redvers, Fertile, Antler, and Storthoaks areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people of 
Redvers, Fertile, Alida, Maryfield, Antler; Sinclair, Manitoba; 



1598 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

Bellegarde, and Storthoaks. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition from citizens calling for the immediate 
implementation of province-wide 911 emergency service. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to fulfill its 
promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
system province-wide. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by citizens from Leask and Mistawasis. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting a 
petition to do with the lack of funding to non-profit personal 
care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Runnymede, Kamsack, and Madge Lake. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here of citizens 
opposed to the possible reduction of services to Davidson and 
Craik health centres. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Davidson, Loreburn, Penzance, 
Bladworth, Regina, Girvin, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise in the 
Assembly to bring forth a petition from Shellbrook-Spiritwood 
constituency in regards to the health care system. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Chitek Lake, Mildred, Shell Lake, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks that are concerned about the high energy cost. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
substantial energy rate rebate to the Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Marsden, 
Neilburg, Lashburn, and Cut Knife. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from residents in rural Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about cellular telephone coverage or lack 
thereof. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service to all 
communities throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the citizens of 
Wood Mountain and Fir Mountain, where there is absolutely no 
cellular telephone coverage. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order, nine petitions filed yesterday 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received and they are tabled as addenda to previously 
tabled petitions. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
51 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health regarding hepatitis C claims: 
How many hepatitis C victims have been refused 
compensation because their infections occurred before 
1986 or after 1990; how many hepatitis C blood transfusion 
victims has the government compensated; what is the 
average compensation paid to the victims; what is the total 
compensation paid out; and finally, now that the Manitoba 
government has compensated all hepatitis C victims 
regardless of the date of infection because as their Minister 
of Health says it is, quote, “the right thing to do,” has the 
Saskatchewan government considered doing the 
honourable and humane thing and following Manitoba’s 
example in compensating all victims? 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1599 

 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: what are the exact terms of reference of Justice 
Wakeling’s investigation of SLGA officials? 

 
And while I’m on my feet I would also like to give notice that I 
shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority: what are the exact terms of reference of the 
Conflict of Interest Commissioner’s investigation of the 
former minister of Liquor and Gaming? 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 56 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Education: how much was collected in 
the education portion of property taxes in the year 2000, 
broken down between residences, business, farms, etc.? 

 
And I give notice that I shall on day no. 56 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: how much was 
collected in property taxes by municipalities in 2000, 
broken down between residences, businesses, and farms, 
etc.? 

 
I so submit. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 56 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much land did the 
Government of Saskatchewan purchase under the land bank 
program; and how much of this land does the government 
still own? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we know, 
today marks two very important occasions. One is the 
observance, annual, of D-Day; this year we observe the 57th 
anniversary of the D-Day Normandy landings. And this year 
has a special importance, in that we also celebrate the 75th 
anniversary of the Royal Canadian Legion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in your gallery are some very important 
guests here to help us observe and celebrate the D-Day landings 
and the 75th of the Royal Canadian Legion. 
 
I will not be introducing all of the guests in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, but I would like to identify, first of all, from the 
Regina branch of the Royal Canadian Legion, a branch formed 
in 1926, the first Legion branch formed in Canada, from the 
Regina branch of the Royal Canadian Legion, Sherry Burgess, 
president; Murray Carpenter, immediate past president; Sue 
Mitchell, vice-president; Muriel Kochanski, vice-president; The 
Rev. Ron Sutton, vice-president; and Marg LaFontaine, 
president of the ladies’ auxiliary. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And having played a significant part, 
Mr. Speaker, in the invasion beginning with D-Day, were the 
Regina Rifles. And with us today, from the active Regina 
Rifles: Lt. Col. Colin King, the commanding officer; Honorary 
Col Bob Cade; and CWO Ken Bourassa, regimental sergeant 
major. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, with great 
honour, I’m pleased to introduce three veterans of the Regina 
Rifles: Mr. Eric Ashton, veteran of the D-Day landing. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Jack Drummond and Mr. Fraser 
Hodgson, veterans of the Italian campaign and the Northwest 
European campaign. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
Government of Saskatchewan, I want to issue our 
congratulations again, as we did on the front steps in unveiling 
the Legion flag in the front of the Legislative Building. I want 
to extend our congratulations to the Royal Canadian Legion on 
the 75th anniversary, our good wishes to the current Regina 
Rifles, and our deep thanks to the veterans of the Regina Rifles. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This afternoon I 
want to join with the Premier in extending a warm welcome to 
the Legislative Assembly, of our very special guests. I had the 
opportunity with the Premier and other colleagues of the 
legislature to observe the flag-raising ceremony on the steps of 
the legislature a few minutes ago to honour the commemorating 
of the 75th anniversary of the Royal Canadian Legion and the 
57th anniversary of the D-Day Normandy landing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know all members of the House, and all visitors 
for that matter certainly appreciate the sacrifice and the 
tremendous effort that our veterans made on behalf of all of us 
that we could enjoy the freedom and the country that we live in 
today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t name all of the guests, but on behalf of the 
official opposition I too would like to welcome members from 
the Royal Canadian Legion, Branch No. 1 here in Regina, 
including Sherry Burgess, the president, and her executive. 
 
Also I would like to welcome members of the Royal Regina 
Rifles, including Lt. Col. Colin King and the other members of 
the regiment, and particularly note the Regina Rifles 
Association veterans who were just introduced, Eric Ashton, 
Jack Drummond, and Fraser Hodgson. We certainly appreciate 
each one of you being here. 
 
We wish you the very best and on behalf of the official 
opposition thank you very much for your contribution to our 
country and to our world. 



1600 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on 
behalf of the coalition government Liberal caucus it is my 
pleasure to stand today and acknowledge the representatives 
from the Royal Canadian Legion, the Royal Regina Rifles, and 
the Regina Rifles Association veterans group, who have joined 
us today to mark the 75th anniversary of the Royal Canadian 
Legion and the 57th anniversary of the D-Day Normandy 
landings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my father was a veteran of the Second World War, 
as were four of my uncles, including my uncle John Melenchuk, 
who died during the attack on Dieppe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are fortunate today that for most of us our only 
experience of war comes from the media, either on the news or 
through the movies. But media experiences cannot do justice, 
can never do justice to the sacrifices made by these men and 
women who have a proud history, not only as the Royal Regina 
Rifles, but as a force that helped to unite this province and 
provided this province with so much pride. 
 
Those of us elected to this Assembly serve the people of this 
province and country, but our service pales in comparison to 
that given by this unit and our veterans. They are truly heroes, 
Mr. Speaker, ordinary people who did extraordinary things 
under indescribable circumstances. 
 
Therefore, it is with a sense of humility and pride in the 
accomplishments of our veterans that, on behalf of the Liberal 
caucus, I salute those who have served and those who continue 
to serve our country and province with honour and distinction. 
 
To close, Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend our appreciation 
with the rallying cry of the Royal Regina Rifles, “Up the 
Johns.” Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you I’d like to introduce 19 students from the Bethune School, 
who travelled here with their teacher, Mike Spicer. I know on 
June 11 — June 11, sorry — January 11, myself and the 
previous Speaker had travelled to Bethune School and the 
Speaker did a presentation. Afterwards there was a question and 
answer period and I found the questions very informative and 
very good questions. 
 
And I want to congratulate Mike on a very good job of teaching 
and I’m very glad that he brought his students here today, 
which I think came about from that visit there on January 11. So 
again I’d like to introduce, and I know the members opposite 
here would like to welcome the students and Mike here to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
today to introduce to you and through you to the members of 
the Legislative Assembly a group of 35 grades 3 and 4 students 

from my old school — Kitchener Community School. 
 
They’re here today with their teachers, Mrs. Campbell, Mrs. 
Powell, Laurie Amyotte; and their chaperones, Val Nickel, Jane 
Heisted, Lucy Bugler, and Brad Buffalo. 
 
I look forward to meeting with you after question period and I 
certainly hope that you enjoy your time here today. 
 
Please join with me in giving them a very warm welcome to 
this place. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Seventy-Fifth Anniversary of Royal Canadian Legion 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am a Regina boy 
who was 18 years old in 1990. Had I been 18 or older on this 
day in 1944, 57 years ago, I would have very likely been a 
member of the Regina Rifles, one of the first infantry units to 
hit the beach at Normandy and the unit that penetrated the 
farthest inland of any unit on that fateful day. And at what a 
cost, Mr. Speaker, we can only imagine. 
 
Because of those young men and the hundreds of thousands of 
other young men and women who dedicated themselves to 
peace by serving in both wars, men and women of my 
generation have been allowed choices in life, which they 
sacrificed. 
 
We owe them literally our freedom, our country, and our way of 
life. And I am honoured to take part in this moment of 
recognition — a moment in which we remember D-Day. A 
moment in which we pay tribute to the 75th anniversary of the 
Royal Canadian Legion and pay particular homage to the Royal 
Regina Rifles whose history has just been published in the 
book, Look to Your Front, Regina Rifles by Gordon Brown and 
Terry Copp. 
 
The Royal Canadian Legion deserves recognition for its tireless 
work in peacetime to promote the welfare of veterans and to 
keep our nation aware of its history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was once said that those who served in the war 
had a defining moment in their lives — a moment of selfless 
public service which taught them the value of a democratic 
society by showing them that there are times when you’ve got 
to fight hard to keep it. 
 
We thank you for that sacrifice and for learning that lesson that 
we may go on today in a free and democratic society. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of Contribution of Royal Regina Rifles 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m also honoured as other members of the House have spoken 
about the 57th anniversary of the D-Day landings in Normandy, 
and to recognize the 75th anniversary of the Legion. It’s very 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1601 

 

special to me, Mr. Speaker, because being a 35-year Legion 
member and a past-president of branch 342, it gives me great 
honour to speak on this today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very special occasion for veteran 
members of the Regina Rifles. The Regina Rifles fought in the 
Normandy campaign and we understand that they were the first 
Canadian unit to successfully complete their mission on D-Day. 
It is because of them, Mr. Speaker, that we are able to enjoy the 
peace and freedom we have today. We owe much to those who 
fought so valiantly on our behalf. What we have had for the past 
50 years, other countries are still fighting to achieve. 
 
To all members of the Royal Canadian Legion and the Royal 
Regina Rifles and especially to those veterans who are still with 
us today, we humbly recognize the great service you have given 
to our country. We honour your dedication and commitment. 
 
I ask all members of the House to please recognize this very 
distinguished group of people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Show 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Put your ear to the 
ground and you’ll hear the sound of drilling throughout 
Saskatchewan. And today, Mr. Speaker, is the opening 
ceremonies for the Saskatchewan Oil and Gas Show in 
Weyburn. 
 
As we all know, Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas industry is a very 
significant part of Saskatchewan’s economy. I would like to 
take this time to mention just a few facts about Saskatchewan’s 
oil and gas industry. 
 
Last year the industry invested about 1.6 billion in new 
exploration and development in Saskatchewan. Slightly more 
than 20,000 people were employed by the upstream industry in 
the province last year. Government revenues from oil and gas 
exceeded $1 billion last year, an all-time record. Last year also 
saw new records established in the province for gas well 
drilling at 1,200 wells and oil production at 152.5 million 
barrels, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is an industry with great potential and I’m very excited 
about what the future has in store for it in this industry. This 
potential can and will be realized through effective partnership 
between the industry, the province, and local communities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Ray Frehlick and the Weyburn Oil 
Show Board, the city of Weyburn, and the many volunteers for 
organizing and hosting the ninth Saskatchewan Oil and Gas 
Show. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cancer Survivor Leads Relay for Life Team 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I proudly rise in the 

House today to update the members on a member’s statement 
that I made in the House a few weeks ago. At that time I spoke 
about the remarkable life of my next door neighbour, a 
10-year-old boy named Tristin Vincente, and his successful 
battle with cancer, followed by this boy’s fantastic work to raise 
money for cancer research. 
 
On June 1 and 2, the Relay for Life event for cancer research 
was held in Saskatoon with a total of 31 teams participating. 
The relay started at 7:00 p.m. Friday, on June 1, with all the 
cancer survivors completing a lap, followed by the main event 
that lasted 14 hours, ending at 9:00 a.m. Saturday. 
 
Tristin was a captain of his team nicknamed Tricky’s Troop, 
which raised approximately $4,000. Tristin himself won a 
trophy for raising the most money by an individual, by raising 
$2,000. 
 
Tristin’s team also won in the category of the best-decorated 
campsite, which added to the fun the kids were having that 
weekend. 
 
All totalled, the event raised about $65,000 for cancer research, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a remarkable achievement both for Tristin and the event 
itself. This event brought many people together for a common 
cause and fun was had by all, as there was various 
entertainment throughout the night; the event including several 
bands, numerous games, and activities for all. 
 
I would like to congratulate Tristin Vincente and his family for 
their inspired volunteer work, and further congratulate all those 
who attended this important fundraiser for cancer research. 
 
I would ask that all of the members join me in congratulating 
Tristin and his family, and the successful Relay for Life event 
in Saskatoon. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Opening of New Ranch Ehrlo Home 
Dalla-Vicenza House 

 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Ranch Ehrlo 
opened it’s latest home in Regina last Friday. The 10-youth 
capacity home is a beautiful legacy for Ranch Ehrlo’s past 
chairman, Mario Dalla-Vicenza. Current chairman, Del 
Robertson, President and CEO (chief executive officer) Geoff 
Pawson, and the board have much to be proud of. 
 
Dustin, one of the residents, proudly toured us through his new 
digs — all 10 bedrooms, the kitchen, living room, counselling 
office, storage rooms, every bathroom in the house, and even 
the crawl space, Mr. Speaker. He is enthusiastic. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whatever career choice Dustin makes I am sure he 
will do well, and I predict he’s going to be a legislator in this 
very building one day in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the young people are in Dalla-Vicenza House 
because there are problems in their lives. What helped me 
understand this best about these young residents is best 



1602 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

explained through the “If I had three wishes” papers that were 
posted on the wall at Dalla-Vicenza House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Craig, age 12 said, if I had three wishes I would 
wish for: one, to go home; two, to have a good family; three, to 
live a good life. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Federal New Democratic Party 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, never let it 
be said again that good ideas can’t come from Ontario or even 
from The Globe and Mail. While perusing The Globe and Mail 
this morning, I came across a story regarding a group of mainly 
Ontario-based people who are making it their life’s goal to once 
and for all dissolve the NDP (New Democratic Party). 
 
Now some might say there’s nothing new about this since the 
Saskatchewan Party is in the process of dissolving the NDP in 
this province right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — And the good people of BC (British Columbia) 
virtually wiped out the NDP Party in that province in their 
recent election. 
 
But the difference now, Mr. Speaker, is that the people now 
trying to perform a mercy killing on the federal NDP are none 
other than members of the NDP. Among those agitating to bring 
down the curtain on that party, on the party that received only a 
little more than 8 per cent of the vote in the last federal election, 
are well-known socialists like Judy Rebick, Murray Dobbin, 
and Svend Robinson, along with what appears to be virtually 
the entire union movement in Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me be the first in this Assembly to endorse this 
group’s mission and to wish them well. And we in the 
Saskatchewan Party will continue to work against the NDP at 
this provincial level while those people prepare to pull the plug 
nationally. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Foam Lake Student Wins National Science Fair Award 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
people have always been among the most innovative in Canada, 
and a grade 10 student from Foam Lake Composite School 
proves that our teenagers are no different from our adults. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Amber Lee Fay from Foam Lake won a silver 
medal at the National Science Fair in Kitchener, Ontario this 
May for a project that was innovative, forward-thinking, and 
practical. 
 
Amber Lee saw the problem her RM (rural municipality) was 
having with the expense of treating dust on gravel roads. To 
treat 1 mile of gravel road with calcium chloride cost $3,360. 
So Amber Lee came up with a way to suppress dust on gravel 

roads with an inexpensive and readily available material, Mr. 
Speaker — canola oil. 
 
She found that using canola oil on gravel roads worked far 
better than traditional methods. And besides being more 
cost-effective, using canola oil on gravel roads is more 
environmentally friendly. Her project is now in the hands of the 
Canola Council of Canada and she is working with the local 
RM to set up a test on the gravel roads in the area this summer. 
 
Besides winning the silver medal, Amber Lee received a $2,000 
scholarship to the University of Western Ontario. I want to 
mention that this was Amber Lee’s fourth trip to the National 
Science Fair. We should expect that she’ll be up for a fifth trip 
next year because of her innovative ideas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members would like to join with me 
in wishing success to this bright, talented young individual from 
Foam Lake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Impact of Job Action by Health Care Workers 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. One day after CUPE (Canadian Union of 
Public Employees) serves strike notice to the Saskatchewan 
Association of Health Organizations, the effects of pending job 
action are already being felt throughout the province. 
 
Health districts directly affected are cancelling elective surgery 
scheduled for this Friday, and the Regina Health District is 
taking other measures, such as closing 198 beds. This has a 
tremendous effect on other health districts, even though not 
directly involved in the CUPE action, because they won’t be 
able to send patients to Regina. 
 
We’re also getting calls from people in rural health districts 
who have relatives being moved to other health care centres in 
anticipation of the strike. And they are very concerned about 
how this effect will have on their elderly patients. 
 
Mr. Speaker, can the people of Saskatchewan be assured that 
access to necessary health care services will not be 
compromised should job action occur? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, what I want 
to report to members of the legislature and the public is that 
CUPE and SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) have agreed to resume bargaining tomorrow 
with the assistance of the conciliator. 
 
We’re extremely pleased that the parties will renew their efforts 
to achieve a collective agreement with the assistance of the 
conciliator. 
 
I’m advised that SAHO and CUPE are meeting to discuss 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1603 

 

essential services, and that meeting will occur tomorrow should 
job action occur; and that the health districts have contingency 
plans in place to ensure that people who require services on an 
urgent and emergent basis, should job action occur, will receive 
those services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one 
of the key issues of this contract dispute is workload, an issue 
we have spoken about time and time again in this House. 
 
Health professionals from across the province have been 
expressing grave concerns about the chronic staff shortages in 
the health care system, and all they get from this government is 
lip service. And you can’t blame these workers for wanting this 
issue addressed in these current union negotiations. You can’t 
blame SAHO because the health districts are competing 
worldwide for doctors, nurses, technicians, and other health 
care workers. 
 
But you can blame this government, in particular the minister 
who answered the questions in her role as past Health minister, 
for not doing enough to retain and recruit workers, for not doing 
more to expand the number of training positions at the 
university and at SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), and for generally mismanaging the 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government accept responsibility for the 
mess it’s created with the chronic shortages of staff across this 
entire province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We want to indicate very clearly that 
we value the hard work and dedication of health providers in 
this province. We want a collective agreement that recognizes 
that the workplace requires improvement, provides fair 
compensation, and also recognizes the province’s fiscal 
capacity. 
 
What I can say to the member is that the Government of 
Saskatchewan has provided over $400 million in additional 
funding in the past two years. That represents an increase well 
beyond the rate of inflation. 
 
And what I can say to the member, if I recall in the 1999 
campaign, The (new) Way Up, the Saskatchewan’s Party way 
up was to freeze — freeze — increases in health care. And I can 
say to the people of this province, had those people been elected 
in 1999 we’d be in far worse shape today with them in place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Potato Valley Corporation 
 
Mr. Brkich: — My question if for the minister for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). You know the NDP 
may not be able to deliver safe drinking water, reliable health 
care, or driveable highways, but man they sure know how to 
pour millions of taxpayers’ dollars into money-losing potato 
companies. 

Mr. Speaker, most of us thought the NDP had learned a lesson 
when they bankrupted SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) and lost $10 million in 1999. But 
apparently losing millions of taxpayers’ dollars is not 
something the NDP is worried about because last year the 
government decided to step up with a new potato company, the 
Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation. And then the NDP 
promptly lost another million dollars in just their first seven 
months of operation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell us how much the NDP has 
lost so far in 2001 in their latest failing business venture, 
Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the member knows, and as I’ve stated often in the House, we 
have significant irrigation infrastructure out in the area that the 
member speaks of, Mr. Speaker, some $120 million dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are committed to supporting the agricultural 
industry in ways that we are able to add value to the agricultural 
industry, Mr. Speaker. Part of that is in supporting the growers 
by growing potatoes, Mr. Speaker. If you speak to many of the 
growers out there, they are very appreciative of the support that 
the provincial government has provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we will continue to support that industry but, Mr. 
Speaker, and I add and I’ve said frequently in this House, we 
will also, when the time is right, and we are prepared to turn 
this back over to the private sector, Mr. Speaker, when we 
recover the costs that the corporation has invested, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we drove out to one of 
the NDP’s potato storage facilities at Broderick, and it turns out 
the NDP isn’t selling potatoes; they’re dumping them on the 
ground. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we speak, the Saskatchewan Valley Potato 
Corporation is loading up their trucks and dumping thousands 
of pounds of rotting potatoes out in the field behind their 
multi-million dollar storage shed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after spending two hours yesterday at the dump 
site, I can tell you this whole thing stinks. And I mean really 
stinks. You ask the people from Broderick when an east wind is 
blowing, how much this stinks. 
 
Will the minister explain why the Saskatchewan Valley Potato 
Corporation is dumping out thousands of pounds of potatoes? 
How much money is the NDP losing on its latest rotten potato 
deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what also stinks a 
bit is when the truth isn’t accurately reflected, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, this occurs every year. This occurs 
every year. The potatoes that were grown last year, simply 



1604 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

what’s happening right now is they’re being culled. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m advised . . . Mr. Speaker, I’m advised that the 
industry average, the industry average is some . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Minister of CIC, 40 
seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Too bad some of those members 
wouldn’t have eyes like potatoes instead of just . . . and would 
pay attention instead of . . . and listen as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not — this is not, I repeat — unusual, Mr. 
Speaker, for the Sask Valley Potato Corporation or for the 
industry, Mr. Speaker. The industry average, Mr. Speaker, 
would see something in the vicinity at this time of the year of 
culling between 5 to 25 per cent. Sask Valley Potato 
Corporation falls well within that. 
 
And I also want to advise the member and the members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker, that roughly half of the potatoes belong 
to the Sask Valley Potato Corporation; the other half belong to 
private growers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, it’s really 
an interesting place to visit, to the NDP’s rotten potato 
company. You know, the NDP spent millions of dollars 
building these massive state-of-the-art potato storage facilities. 
We visited them yesterday. 
 
But maybe the minister could help us out with the NDP’s 
business strategy. After having spent and lost millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars building these giant potato storage facilities 
at Broderick, why is the NDP storing potatoes on the ground in 
between their fancy and extremely expensive storage shed? 
Why is the NDP piling up thousands of pounds of potatoes on 
the ground to rot? And I will say, five rows, length of football 
fields, four feet high; I wouldn’t say it’s exactly culling between 
5 and 10 per cent. 
 
Instead of storing their potatoes inside their multi-million dollar 
sheds, why aren’t they selling them to recover their 
multi-million dollar losses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this shows that 
party’s priorities, Mr. Speaker. Two questions on health. Two 
questions on health, Mr. Speaker. The third question on 
potatoes, Mr. Speaker, today, already out of five questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll answer the question again. I’ll answer the 
question again if they want to listen, Mr. Speaker; I’ll answer 
the question again. 
 
Industry average this time of the year, this is not unusual, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m advised that the industry average culls roughly 5 
to 25 per cent, Mr. Speaker — at this time of the year, 5 to 25 
per cent. 
 
The Sask Valley Potato Corporation is currently culling, Mr. 
Speaker, from potatoes grown last year. This is not at all 

unusual. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister wants to 
talk about priorities. The town of Broderick right now is in a 
boil-water advisory. Right beside them, million dollars being 
lost. Where are their priorities, I want to ask the minister. 
 
The town of Broderick, the town of Broderick could fix their 
water facilities, could build brand-new water facilities for the 
money you’re wasting next door. 
 
The minister appears to be more willing to travel around to 
liquor stores and go fishing with the president of Bacardi rum 
company. So why isn’t he interested in the millions of dollars 
being lost in his government . . . government’s failing potato 
company? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Valley Potato company is a 
disaster. It’s using taxpayers’ money to compete with 
private-sector potato growers and to steal their customers 
besides. They’re losing millions in dollars. And worst of all the 
NDP is risking US (United States) trade sanctions that will be 
devastating to Saskatchewan potato industry. The NDP’s failing 
potato company is losing millions and it’s threatening the future 
of the whole industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how much more damage does the NDP plan to 
inflict before they stop competing with the private-sector 
growers and get out of the potato industry for good? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, it’s 4:2 now, Mr. Speaker — four 
for potatoes and two for health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I can’t do much more than repeat the answer I gave, Mr. 
Speaker. This is not at all unusual for the industry. The industry 
average, Mr. Speaker — not just in Saskatchewan but across the 
country at this time of the year — would see a culling of 
somewhere between 5 and 25 per cent, with potatoes that were 
grown last year. 
 
Sask Valley Potato Corporation falls well within that average, 
Mr. Speaker, well within that average. The potatoes that are 
being culled right now, I am advised, represent roughly 50 per 
cent of the potatoes belonging to the Sask Valley Potato 
Corporation. The other 50 per cent belong to private growers. 
 
Nothing at all unusual about this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Purchase of Natural Gas by SaskEnergy 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskEnergy. Mr. 
Speaker, natural gas prices continue to fall dramatically. This 
morning on the Alberta Natural Gas Exchange, it was $4.55 a 
gigajoule on the spot market and $5.33 for the upcoming gas 
year. 
 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1605 

 

Mr. Speaker, in light of the falling natural gas prices, isn’t it 
worth having a second look at the current recommendation 
that’s based on $6.57 a gigajoule? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
You know I want to refer to the Saskatoon StarPhoenix 
yesterday afternoon, and I quote. It says: 
 

“Why isn’t the government of Saskatchewan locking in at 
the price that they can today, at $5.56, which is 
significantly lower . . . than either the rate that’s been 
requested or the one that’s been recommended to cabinet?” 
Wall asked outside the House. 

 
(Ken) From said his company is waiting for the lowest 
price before it locks in its buying rates. 
 

And I continue the quote, as of yesterday: 
 

“Today we believe (that) the market may go down, which 
is why we have not locked anything in. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, guess what? Guess what? The price has 
dropped. You know what, Mr. Speaker? I’m advised, by over 
30 cents. Today, it’s down from 30 cents yesterday. That 
member, with all his due diligence, wanted us to buy yesterday, 
Mr. Speaker. Does anyone want to guess what they would have 
cost the people of Saskatchewan? $20 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — . . . due diligence. I say leave it to the 
experts . . . (inaudible) . . . that expert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, if the minister 
was interested in the whole truth, he would know that we made 
those remarks in response to the following question from the 
media, when the media confirmed that his officials said they 
expected gas prices to rise in the long term. 
 
We then said: if he expects gas prices to rise, why doesn’t he 
lock in at the lower price. That’s what we said. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Later, later, Mr. Speaker, later . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And then later, when 
the media asked Mr. From the same question, he then said: 
 

While we believe the gas prices to rise in the long term, we 
believe that they’ll drop in the short term. 

 
And he was right. As I said in my first question, this morning 
the price fell to 5.33 but that begs the following question. 

If SaskEnergy is confident they can lock in at . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m sorry, members, but I must be able to 
hear the question. The member will continue. 
 
Mr. Wall: — That begs the following question. If SaskEnergy 
is confident they can lock in at today’s price of 5.33 or lower — 
or lower — why is the NDP considering a rate hike based on 
$6.57 a gigajoule? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You know, Mr. Speaker, every time we 
listen to that member supposedly be an expert, he stands in here 
and makes points, then goes out into the . . . outside of the 
House and is proven wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to give that member some credit though, 
Mr. Speaker. You know what? Yesterday in the interview 
outside of the Chamber yesterday, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
quote, this is what he said: 
 

If he (and he’s referring to Mr. From) thinks the price 
should go lower, then we should let the experts do their job, 
said Wall. 

 
Mr. Speaker, and I want to go on. Here’s what else he said, Mr. 
Speaker. He said: 
 

I also understand Mr. From, and he is an expert in this, he 
knows more than I do clearly, or anybody (he goes on to 
say) in the opposition would know (Mr. Speaker). 

 
He acknowledges he’s not an expert. I give him credit for that. 
Let the experts in SaskEnergy make the investments, not those 
people or us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that’s entirely the point. If the 
experts are saying they could lock in at 5.33 or lower, then why 
is this government considering an increase based on $6.57? 
Why won’t they listen to their own experts? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning I received an e-mail from another 
expert, Richard Zarzeczny, he’s the president of Canadian 
Enerdata Ltd. That’s a prominent Canadian energy information 
services company, and he says and I quote: 
 

For the very short term, the downward pressure on gas 
price will continue. Gas buyers would be prudent to watch 
the market closely and be prepared to lock in one-year 
prices in the range of $5 to 5.50 a gigajoule over the next 
few weeks. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the price this morning was 5.33. Enerdata says the 
delivery charge from Alberta to TransGas is 22 cents a 
gigajoule. That would make the total cost $5.55 a gigajoule for 
SaskEnergy. If that’s the case and if it could go even lower, as 
SaskEnergy says, why is the government considering a rate hike 
based on $6.57 a gigajoule? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if that member is such an 
expert I don’t know why on earth he would be doing the job 
that he’s doing there today, Mr. Speaker, because he could 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

make significantly more money, Mr. Speaker, as an investor in 
the gas industry, Mr. Speaker. I am sure of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, somehow this member portrays the fact that a 
declining gas price is somehow bad for the people of 
Saskatchewan. Ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. And Mr. From, our 
vice-president, has indicated yesterday that any reduction in gas 
prices will be captured by SaskEnergy and will be passed on to 
SaskEnergy customers. This is a good thing, Mr. Speaker, a 
good thing. 
 
And that’s why they’ve not locked in their prices, Mr. Speaker, 
because exactly of what the member asked us to do yesterday 
was to buy at 5.56 when our experts knew significantly more 
than he did. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, one more time for my colleague, the 
minister. We simply indicated that if Mr. From’s original 
comments, which were that the price would increase over the 
next year, were true, that he should lock in at the lower rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since SaskEnergy made its original request the gas 
market has changed dramatically. That’s not meant as a 
criticism of SaskEnergy. They were working with the best 
information they had at the time. But that information has now 
changed. SaskEnergy’s original rate request was based on a 
natural gas cost of about $7 a gigajoule. Now the price is 5.33 a 
gigajoule and a leading energy analyst is saying SaskEnergy 
could and should lock in the price between 5 and 5.50. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in light of this dramatic drop . . . in light of this 
dramatic drop in the natural gas price, in light of this market 
analyst’s advice, will the NDP ask SaskEnergy to take a second 
look at this massive 38 per cent rate hike? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You know, Mr. Speaker, that member 
asks us to ask SaskEnergy to lock in today. Well that is 
ridiculous, Mr. Speaker. And he asks us to ask them to lock in 
at yesterday’s prices. 
 
If we had listened to that expert, Mr. Speaker, it would have 
cost SaskEnergy customers $20 million. That is absolutely 
ridiculous. Leave it to the experts. And he says in his own quote 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that SaskEnergy is the experts. They 
are not the experts — either he or members opposite in the 
opposition. I agree with him and I give him credit for 
acknowledging that point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Annual Report from the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Liquor and Gaming. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why hasn’t the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority tabled its 1999-2000 annual report yet? 
 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member opposite would know, part of the Liquor and Gaming 
annual report also includes the financial statements from the 
SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) reporting and 
the casino operations. When that was finalized by the SIGA 
board, we got that information and have incorporated it, and 
we’ll see that financial report and annual report very soon, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, under the NDP’s own Tabling of 
Documents Act, the SLGA’s (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority) 1999-2000 annual report was required by 
law to be tabled at the end of December 2000. It is now over 
five months late. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the minister breaking her own law by 
failing to table the SLGA annual report? Is it because of the 
ongoing investigation into SIGA? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 
the member opposite for the question. 
 
As I stated, there was a lot of work that had to be completed in 
conjunction with the SIGA board to understand the total 
financial statements subsequent to all of the work that was done 
within the SIGA organization. And then that goes through the 
auditing processes and is finalized then by that board of 
directors. Once we receive that information, it’s incorporated 
into our financial documents. 
 
We stated all along those reports would be late because there’s 
a lot of information that had to be accessed and then checked in 
to, and the receipts follow those kinds of things. 
 
Once we had the total picture and all of the information that 
was then approved by the SIGA board — it’s their document— 
it’s incorporated in ours, and we will see that out shortly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, of all the government agencies 
that require more accountability, Liquor and Gaming should be 
at the top of the list. They are already the subject of several 
investigations. 
 
We’ve had a special investigation by the Provincial Auditor; 
there’s an RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
investigation into SIGA; there’s a judge investigating Liquor 
and Gaming officials for accepting gifts; the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner is investigating the former minister; and now we 
have the NDP breaking its own law by failing to table its annual 
report on time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you’d think with all of these investigations, the 
Liquor and Gaming minister would want to ensure that at least 
she is following the law. Why is the minister breaking her own 
law by failing to table this annual report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

 

Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, we knew, when the 
Provincial Auditor had been part of the intensive, 
comprehensive auditing process, that there would be a number 
of items that would have to have intensive follow-up and follow 
through. 
 
We’ve given all the information all along on how we intended 
to do that. We would want to incorporate into the annual report 
the correct documentation and the correct figures. 
 
She’s right, we want to make certain that we have the full 
information that can be provided and available from the SIGA 
Board of Directors. 
 
It’s then passed and approved by that new board, who looked 
very carefully at all of the information to make certain it was 
the correct information. It’s given then to the Liquor and 
Gaming Authority to be incorporated in our documents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll get that to everyone as quickly as we can 
with the correct information and the complete picture included, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. There’s real concern in Saskatchewan that this 
cabinet may think they are above the law. And now we have 
another example of a minister who has not demanded a report 
on time, and the law is being broken. 
 
So my question to the Premier of Saskatchewan, the president 
of the Executive Council of Saskatchewan, why is his own 
cabinet ministers not demanding that the law of Saskatchewan 
be kept? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we have just listened — 
those who chose to listen — to the Minister of Liquor and 
Gaming explaining the circumstance around the filing of the 
annual report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I recall a time in this House, when those folks were in 
government, when I tell you reports would be not months but 
years late, Mr. Speaker. When Public Accounts wouldn’t be 
filed in this House. When in fact we didn’t even . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 
recognize the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it got so bad around here 
when they were in government, there was one year when we 
didn’t even have a budget in this House, never mind reports. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member pointed out, it was this 
government, this government who put in place this kind of 
legislation. And I’ll compare the track record of this 
government, Mr. Speaker, with any government of this 
province’s history, any government in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move that Bill No. 53, The Highways 
and Transportation Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 – The Education Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 
2001 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 54, 
The Education Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 55 – The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 55, 
The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory Reform) Act, 
2001 be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(14:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 35 — The Public Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in December of 1997, the Steering Committee on 
the Abuse of Adults in Vulnerable Circumstances, a group 
made up of representatives of community agencies and 
provincial government departments, presented its report and 
recommendations to the ministers of Justice, Health, Social 
Services, Labour, and Municipal Government. 
 
The recommendations of the committee followed extensive 
community consultations respecting the abuse of adults in 
vulnerable circumstances. 
 
In response to that Act, Mr. Speaker, this government amended 
The Saskatchewan Evidence Act in 1998 in order to facilitate 
the participation of vulnerable adults in the civil justice system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the steering committee also made a number of 
recommendations respecting adult guardianship and the 
financial abuse of vulnerable adults. 
 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

In response to those recommendations a legislation working 
committee was formed in May of 1998. The mandate of this 
committee is to produce draft legislation in the areas of adult 
guardianship and financial abuse. 
 
I’d like, Mr. Speaker, to read to you the list of community 
agencies represented on this committee along with the 
departments of Justice, Health, and Social Services. 
 
They are, Mr. Speaker: the Saskatchewan Association for 
Community Living; the Alzheimer Society of Saskatchewan; 
the Autism Resource Centre; the Schizophrenia Society of 
Saskatchewan; the Canadian Mental Health Association, 
Saskatchewan branch; a consumer of mental health services; the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres; the 
Saskatchewan Seniors Mechanism; Senior Power of Regina; the 
Seniors’ Education Centre in Regina; the Social Policy 
Working Group; Council of Canadians with Disabilities; 
Saskatchewan Voice of People with Disabilities; Office for 
Disability Issues; Native Counselling Services; Regina General 
Hospital; capacity assessment Department of Psychology at the 
University of Saskatchewan; Regina and district Personal Care 
Homes Association; Elmwood Residences in Saskatoon; family 
and friends of Cosmo and Elmwood in Saskatoon; 
Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations; 
system-wide admissions and discharge, Regina Health District; 
the long-term care, Regina Health District, the wills and estates 
section of the Canadian Bar Association, Saskatchewan branch; 
and the Law Reform Commission of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the legislation working committee completed 
stage one of its work last year when it recommended the 
introduction of The Adult Guardianship and 
Co-decision-making Act. The Act which displaces The 
Dependent Adults Act was passed in the 2000 session. 
 
The Adult Guardianship and Co-decision-making Act includes 
provision for the appointment of the personal or property 
co-decision-maker for an adult who requires assistance in 
decision making but doesn’t require full guardianship services. 
It also provides provision for the appointment of temporary 
personnel or property guardians in emergency situations. 
 
To protect against financial abuse, Mr. Speaker, the Act 
requires that co-decision-makers and guardians provide annual 
accounting to the Public Trustee. The Act also includes 
procedural protections for vulnerable adults who may be the 
subject of applications under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments to The Public Trustee Act that 
I’m introducing today represents stage two of the legislation 
work and the committee’s work. 
 
These amendments include the expansion of the Public 
Trustee’s role to include personal decision-making services 
where there’s no appropriate person to act as a personal 
co-decision-maker, personal guardian, or temporary personal 
guardian for a vulnerable adult. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Vulnerable Adult Steering Committee’s 
consultations indicated that this change is strongly supported by 
service providers and by advocates for seniors and persons with 
mental illnesses or intellectual disabilities. 

Some elderly persons living alone may have lost the ability to 
make decisions respecting their personal care or safety. Parents 
of intellectually or psychiatrically disabled adult sons or 
daughters may be concerned about who will care for their adult 
children after the parents’ death. There’s sometimes no family 
member or friend who can take on that guardianship role. 
 
In short, Mr. Speaker, these amendments will be welcomed in 
this community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the name of the Act will be changed to The Public 
Guardian and Trustee Act to reflect this new role, and a number 
of consequential amendments to other Acts will be made. The 
amendments will also include a new Public Guardian and 
Trustee powers to combat financial abuse. 
 
The Vulnerable Adults Steering Committee learned that 
financial abuse is the major type of abuse faced by adults in 
vulnerable circumstances. They recommended new Public 
Trustee powers deal with such abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those powers are included in the amendments 
before you today. They include the power to investigate 
financial abuse and preserve the vulnerable adult’s assets while 
the investigation is underway. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Act also includes amendments aimed at 
clarifying provisions in the Act and aimed at administrative 
improvements in the Public Guardian and Trustee’s operations. 
 
These amendments, Mr. Speaker, clarify that in most cases 
where a child has a legal custodian, Public Guardian and 
Trustee will not be involved in court applications relating to the 
child’s property interests. They also clarify that the Public 
Guardian and Trustee will not administer an estate where a 
property guardian has died but has in his or her will, named 
another person to take his or her place as the property guardian. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, these amendments allow the Public 
Guardian and Trustee to act as a co-decision-maker, guardian, 
temporary guardian, or litigation guardian in other provinces 
with respect to Saskatchewan clients who have assets in those 
provinces. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the amendments allow the Public 
Guardian and Trustee to deal with the dependent adult’s real 
property as appropriate, while ensuring that the adult’s wishes 
respecting the ultimate disposition of the property are respected. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I thank the legislation working committee for their 
dedication and commitment to vulnerable people in our 
province and congratulate them on a job well done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Public Trustee Act and to make consequential 
amendments to other Acts. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a very important document, a very important institution, 
the Public Trustee. The mandate of the Public Trustee is indeed 
to provide protection for those members of society who are 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

 

unable to provide it for themselves, particularly in the area of 
financial protection, that they are not being taken advantage of, 
Mr. Speaker . . . taken advantage of in very many different 
ways. It could be by an institution, it could be by family 
members, it could be by strangers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This particular Act deals, Mr. Speaker, with adults, but the 
Public Trustee also deals with the financial resources that might 
be available to children in the case of estates or insurance 
claims and those types of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important though that the Public Trustee, 
when there are family members or community members who 
have an interest in the individual that the Public Trustee is 
administering, that they be in contact and take into account, Mr. 
Speaker, the needs that might be identified by that individual 
for the person the Public Trustee is responsible for. 
 
I know, Mr. Speaker, at times I have received calls of 
complaints from individuals in a community that a person who 
is under the administration of the Public Trustee, their finances, 
need some financial support, but that it’s difficult to get that 
through the Public Trustee on a short basis, Mr. Speaker. That 
the Public Trustee’s office is more aligned with making the 
monthly rent payments or whatever it might be, but in the cases 
of necessity, of immediate necessity, it’s difficult sometimes for 
either friends or the institution the person may be in, whatever it 
may be, to access the funds quickly through the Public Trustee. 
 
And I think we need to take steps, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that 
those kind of emergency situations can be dealt with 
expeditiously, that the person receives the proper support. 
 
An example of which would be, Mr. Speaker, let’s say a person 
is in a long-term care facility of some kind and they have to 
come into Regina for — or Saskatoon, wherever it might be 
across the province — for medical attention. They can hire 
somebody to transport them in or they can get an ambulance — 
lots of cases are used, Mr. Speaker, to transport people in from 
health centres — but they have to be paid. 
 
And so how is that dealt with, Mr. Speaker? It seems to cause 
problems. I don’t know just what the hang-up is on it, Mr. 
Speaker, but it does seem to cause problems at different times. 
 
I’m interested, Mr. Speaker, in the comments that the minister 
made about investigative powers that the Public Trustee would 
have. I think when the Public Trustee is carrying on an 
investigation, and has taken into security the finances of a 
person to determine whether or not they, or some other member 
of their family, or somebody else in their community should be 
responsible for them, there needs to be a time frame in which 
those investigations are carried out, that the finances are not 
unavailable to the person involved. So that they can carry on 
with their life, as it should be allowed to be carried on, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Obviously there’s a need for the Public Trustee to protect the 
assets of that individual if they are, for some medical reason 
let’s say, spending inappropriately. But there needs to be an 
availability to the individual to access their own resources, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

This Bill is fairly comprehensive. It affects a large number of 
people across the province, Mr. Speaker. Families, individuals, 
and communities are all involved, therefore it’s important that 
they be consulted to determine what they believe is happening 
with this particular Act, how it’s going to affect those 
individuals that come under the purview of the Public Trustee, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore to give them time to ensure that this Bill is what is 
needed; that it affects the individuals in a proper manner; 
protects them as they need to be protected without being overly 
restrictive, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate 
to give them time to look at this. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Public Trustee Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 2001 apportant les 

modifications corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Public 
Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move 
second reading of The Public Trustee Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2001. Mr. Speaker, I’ve just introduced 
amendments to The Public Trustee Act, and these amendments 
include the expansion of the Public Trustee’s role to include 
personal decision-making services and the investigation of 
financial abuse of vulnerable adults. 
 
These amendments necessitate consequential amendments to a 
number of Acts, Mr. Speaker. Most of these consequential 
amendments have been included in the Act I’ve just introduced; 
however, there are four bilingual Acts requiring consequential 
amendments. These are the Acts dealt with in the present 
bilingual consequential amendments Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
make consequential amendments to certain Acts arising from 
the enactment of The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as I commented earlier on the Bill itself, The 
Public Trustee Act, the need to hold consultations all across the 
province for individuals, communities, families to have a look 
at the Bills. It also affects the consequential amendments in a 
like manner. 
 
As the minister indicated in his brief comments, the Bill itself is 
the meat of the subject. These are consequences arising from 
the implementation of this Bill. The people need the 
opportunity to look at the Bill, Mr. Speaker, before they can 
make a determination on how it affects any consequential Bills. 
Therefore I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 40 — The 
Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 2001, be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am pleased to stand today and address Bill No. 40, 
The Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
I am encouraged to see these amendments brought forward, but 
I have a question about the timing and the reasoning behind it. 
Are these amendments being addressed now because of the 
serious job action that was expressed by the province’s 
12,000-plus teachers last fall? And has the Minister of 
Education finally realized that there is and will continue to be a 
sharp decline in the available teachers in the province of 
Saskatchewan unless action is taken in order to recruit and 
retain these same services? 
 
Mr. Speaker, last spring, teachers, parents, and even students 
province-wide were expressing their concern and outrage over 
the government’s handling of the issues relating to the 
negotiations between the government and the teachers’ union. 
However it is unfortunate but not surprising that this Bill does 
not even begin to address the Education minister’s appalling 
lack of consideration and timing. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Education minister uses the term 
greater consistency, but I’m not sure that the minister’s 
definition of that term would be the same as mine. After all, 
how would this term be applied to the government’s history and 
track record with health care, highways, job growth, and 
population numbers? 
 
Greater consistency is not a term that can be applied to the 
current government and its handling of the very real and very 
serious everyday issues facing Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
Nonetheless, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the minister does use the 
term greater consistency when relating to the application of 
dental benefits to teachers in a small number of registered 
independent schools in this province. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Schools like Ranch Ehrlo in Regina and the Radius program in 
Saskatoon will see their teachers benefiting from a dental plan, 
as well as teachers working in historical high schools will 
benefit. 
 
I know that there are a few stipulations, such as a school must 
be registered or otherwise recognized by the Department of 
Education. And it must be in receipt of foundation operating 
grants. And also this would not apply if teachers in these 
schools belong to a trade union, as they would be able to 
negotiate their benefits through their own collective agreement. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, while the opposition applauds the 
government’s efforts to level the playing field, it was noted that 
this amendment would cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers 
$10,000. This is the amount that was quoted by the minister in 
his second reading. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m certain that the taxpayers of this 
province would sooner pick up the $10,000 price tag attached to 

Bill 40 than the $65,000 price tag that they have to cough up for 
the so-called Liberal caucus. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are encouraged to see these 
amendments come forward as they should aid in addressing the 
very real and serious issue of teacher recruitment and retention. 
However I do believe that the government still has to work . . . 
has work to do and there needs to be further consultation and 
discussion regarding this Bill. 
 
And with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 41 — The 
Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 
Amendment Act, 2001, be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to make a few comments on Bill 
No. 41, The Teachers Superannuation and Disability Benefits 
Act. 
 
After reviewing Hansard and looking at the comments of the 
minister, we recognize very quickly that this is . . . while the 
length of the Act is not very long in terms of number of pages; 
it is a very extensive Bill in that it deals with active teachers and 
certain conditions that active teachers will face. 
 
It affects retired teachers. It affects spouses of former teachers. 
It affects in fact students who have recently graduated that are 
still looking at entering the teaching force and haven’t been 
fortunate in signing their first contract. But most importantly, 
Mr. Speaker, it affects students and it affects the kind of 
education that I believe will be delivered in all parts of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know for the last decade that this government 
has ignored education. We know that cumulatively the amounts 
of cuts that this government has made to K to 12 education 
almost total $400 million. And it is time, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
for this government to put education first, to look at education 
as a high priority in this province, and to move forward on a 
number of issues facing students in this province. 
 
As the minister indicated and the comments made by my 
colleagues, there are four specific sections in this Act and I 
want to deal with all four of them, probably starting with the 
section of the Act that is probably the least controversial, and 
moving to some of the sections that have some very effect on 
people’s lives and the like, in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, section 2 deals with contributory service 
and its reflection as far as the two plans. 
 
Currently in the province of Saskatchewan there are two 
pension plans. One is controlled by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, and that is referred to as the STRP (Saskatchewan 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

 

Teachers Retirement Plan) plan, for those teachers that entered 
into the teaching profession after 1979, specifically July 1 of 
1980. And then there is the old plan as it is often referred to, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that deals with all of those other 
circumstances. 
 
Well there’s a number I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe 
that there are probably a number of people on this side of the 
House and maybe even on that side of the House who do belong 
to the old plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the contributory service is recognized in section 2. 
That indicates that while a person, a teacher in this case, an 
active teacher, is on disability benefits, that when that teacher 
returns to work that there will be indeed recognition for 
contributory service while that person has been on a disability 
plan. And I think that is a good change to the Act, one that has 
been supported. 
 
The part that is not necessarily confusing but is uncertain, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is section 46, and that’s the regulation section 
that this Bill makes reference to. Under the regs or under 
section 46 which is the regulation, there has to be a period of 
time determined for when this person returns to service before 
they will be eligible for indeed purchasing that year of 
contributory service. 
 
I note in Hansard that the minister has made reference that the 
regs may determine that there will be a 40-day period, but 
there’s no clear direction from the minister. And I believe that 
when indeed this Bill makes it to Committee of the Whole, 
that’s a response that I’m sure people will be looking for in 
determining whether or not 40 days is appropriate, and if the 
minister is indicating that 40 days is the correct amount, what 
did he use to determine that that is an appropriate length of 
time? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, section 43 now does not refer to the old 
plan, it refers specifically to the new Saskatchewan Teachers 
Retirement Plan. And it changes matching contributions and 
that has already been put in force for a number of situations in 
the STRP plan. And what it allows the government to do is to 
match for a year of contributory service for anyone in that plan. 
And I think that teachers across the province will take 
advantage of that and appreciate the changes being made to that 
section. 
 
Section 24, Mr. Deputy Speaker, refers to survivor benefits. 
And this is probably the one, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we’ve 
had the most feedback on from people across the province 
because what it deals with; it talks about the surviving spouse. 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this plan is now referencing the old 
teachers . . . the old superannuation plan and the people that are 
in that plan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of changes have taken place 
over the years and I think that there is a degree of confusion out 
there and in understanding in how this plan has fallen into 
place. We have had a number of phone calls from children of 
former teachers whose parents, in this case a teacher, and either 
the father or the mother, the spouse of that teacher have passed 
away and they have concerns about whether or not they are 
eligible for any of these benefits. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 1990, July 1 specifically, there was a 
change made that allowed a repayment or a refund of 
contributory service to anyone who had at least one year of 
teaching experience and had attained the age of 65. And that 
prompted a number of teachers in the province to make 
application to the superannuation commission to allow for that 
type of refund to take place. 
 
Then again, Mr. Speaker, last year at the conclusion of the 
negotiated contract that is currently in force with the teachers in 
the province of Saskatchewan, it was recognized that indeed 
there were teachers . . . there were spouses of former teachers 
that had become ineligible to receive the benefits that were left 
in the plan. 
 
So a change occurred, a change that was asked for by many 
spouses who — and I know right within my own office a 
gentleman has been asking for a number of years why he was 
excluded. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the unfortunate thing 
was that his spouse, who had been a teacher, had passed away 
just a few months before this plan had come into force on July 
1, 1990. And he was ineligible to receive the benefits that had 
been left there by his spouse. 
 
So when the changes were announced last year, they were, they 
were greeted very willingly and very gladly by those surviving 
spouses of former teachers. 
 
The confusing part now, Mr. Speaker, and I think the Minister 
of Education and the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission 
have to communicate with all the people, in that indeed it does 
not recognize the surviving children of the parents that have 
since passed away. 
 
It does provide for a very short period of time, in that when the 
contract came into force, which when it was signed was about 
January of 2001, it is retroactive to July 1. So if it happened that 
someone passed away in that period of time, in fact it is the 
executor that would make application for benefits to be paid to 
the estate of that teacher. 
 
Now that is, that is going to be taken, I think, very literally. I 
talked with the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission and they 
don’t believe that there are many people that will have fallen 
into that category where the spouse has passed away. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the final section deals with the repealing 
of two sections. It does not add anything to the Bill; it in fact 
deletes from the current Act. And those are sections . . . that is 
section 21(10) and (10.1). 
 
Mr. Speaker, for a number of years we have talked about 
potential teacher shortages; we’ve talked about whether or not 
there are opportunities for students who are graduating from our 
universities, both the University of Regina and the University of 
Saskatchewan; whether graduates of the Education colleges 
have opportunity to be able to have a job in Saskatchewan. 
 
So a couple of years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a change was 
made where retired teachers would be restricted in terms of the 
number of days that they could teach before there would be 
some adjustment to their pension plans. And that, Mr. Speaker, 
was that in the first year after retirement, a teacher could 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

accumulate 120 days of service without any penalty, and in any 
subsequent year after that first year it would be 60 days. 
 
There have been concerns expressed by both teachers, by school 
boards, and I think by parents and students, that in some parts 
of the province the availability of teachers — and I’ll refer to 
them I guess as active teachers who have not retired, who are 
maybe, you know, do not have a current, full-time, permanent 
position — that there are just not enough of them to meet the 
needs for school divisions. 
 
So both the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation and the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association passed resolutions 
that indicated that the government should not restrict the 
number of days that superannuated teachers could teach without 
having their pensions affected. 
 
The minister has also made reference to the fact that in the new 
plan there is some concern as to whether or not, in fact, this is 
legal. Whether or not a person’s pension could be affected by 
the mere fact that they have gained employment again. 
 
So while this is indeed a good change for those people that, you 
know, should not have their pensions affected, there is concern. 
And I have had a number of concerns from students, those 
people who have just graduated or maybe have graduated in the 
last two or three years who still have not obtained a teaching 
position. And while we recognize that in certain subject areas: 
the math, the sciences, French for instance, there is a potential 
for a teacher shortage, in many other areas there are not, and 
students have expressed the concern. 
 
And I think the minister will have to very clearly identify in 
Committee of the Whole how or what kind of restrictions there 
will be put in place by boards of education to ensure that — and 
I’ll use this example, Mr. Deputy Speaker — where a 
superannuated teacher is helping out a school division by being 
on the substitute list. And there are many of those in the 
province and they are making a great contribution to the 
education of our students in our province. 
 
However when a particular position now comes available, 
short-term contract, let’s say we have a maternity position that 
requires maternity leave to be filled for a period of four months. 
The concern by students is that now the director of education 
and the boards of education will suddenly say, well we do have 
a superannuated teacher already who’s been subbing for us. We 
no longer have to worry about the 120-day clause or the 60-day 
clause if that person is in their second or subsequent year, and 
that they actually do not pursue trying to find out if there is an 
employable active teacher in the province of Saskatchewan to 
fill that position — some young teacher who would like to start 
a teaching career and who would like to begin by at least 
obtaining that short-term contract. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So those are concerns, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think very real 
concerns that people have expressed why we need to have a 
balance. We need to ensure that the quality of education that the 
students are receiving is met by qualified teachers. And in 
certain areas we recognize that that may have to be assisted by 
teachers who are already retired. And indeed we do not want to 

see those teachers suffer by loss of pension just because they 
are helping out a school division meet the current needs on the 
short term. 
 
But on the other side, as I’ve indicated, we want to make sure 
that indeed this is not abused by school divisions and directors 
of education, to ensure that students have the opportunity to 
begin teaching careers. 
 
There are a number . . . as I’ve indicated there are a number of 
people who have contacted us on the various concerns — 
spouses; we’ve have students contact us; we’ve have had retired 
teachers contact us about certain concerns of the Bill. And 
while we continue to have those discussions, we believe that we 
want to take a little bit more time to ensure that we have had an 
opportunity to review every section of this Bill. And with that I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 28 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 28 — The 
Commercial Liens Act/Loi sur les privilèges à base 
commerciale, be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Bill 
No. 28, I think is a Bill that’s much needed, and there’s some 
good points to that. There’s also a number of areas where it falls 
quite short, and I’d like to deal with those this afternoon. 
 
A lien, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you probably know, is when 
some service has been provided, and in order to ensure that a 
payment is made, the person providing those services can put a 
lien against the property, so if and when that property’s sold, 
the individual can have the first chance of getting their money 
back out of that. 
 
Unfortunately, I would say that we have to have these kinds of 
documents and these kinds of laws and regulations in our 
country. It would be nice if everyone that had bills to pay would 
take the responsibility to make sure that you say, I owe that, I’ll 
pay it. Because at the other end is somebody who’s provided a 
service, expected to go ahead and make a living from providing 
that service, and then doesn’t receive the money. 
 
This particular Bill, Bill No. 28, essentially covers three areas 
— liens for repair work; liens for those who rent out space to 
other people to store their goods; and liens for movers who 
transport people’s properties. 
 
And so when they’ve done these sorts of things, what can they 
do, as I said, to ensure that they would get the payment for that, 
and that is to put a document against the property, and 
eventually, hopefully, get that money back. 
 
There is something though that isn’t included in this, and it 
probably should be, and it’s been left out of government laws 
and regulations, and that is a unique little gap that’s been left 
there. And it seems to fall in both the areas of the federal and 
provincial areas. And that is that . . . it’s interesting, but you 
can’t put a lien against a piece of government property, Mr. 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

 

Deputy Speaker. You can’t do that. 
 
Now here’s the problem that creates and one of these happened 
in my community last year. The Saskatchewan government had 
some work done and so they had one main contractor doing a 
particular job. Did the job and in doing the job had probably, I 
believe, six or seven local individuals supply services — 
whether that happened to be in the area of electricity, doing 
some wiring or happened to do some trenching or concrete 
work, supplying materials, whatever else. But there were 
probably about a half a dozen that had supplied some services 
to that. 
 
At the end of the day, Sask government paid out the contractor 
but all these other individuals who had some money owing are 
left out in the cold. And as of today — and this happened early 
in the spring, I believe, of the previous year — as of today, 
these people don’t have their money. 
 
Now the Crown — basically is what it was, it was a Crown 
corporation — did hold back some money, some money. And 
that money was held back from the contractor to ensure that all 
the subcontracts were paid out. Now unfortunately, the amount 
held back was not enough to cover off all the subcontracts. 
 
So these people who did the subcontracting now are not going 
to end up being paid and that is strictly because government 
doesn’t allow a lien to be put against its property. And so we 
have a major, a major gap in the whole lien situation that exists 
in this particular province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As we know, because of the 50 years of NDP government in 
this province, we have Crowns all over the place. Wherever you 
look, there happens to be a Crown pop up because these people 
are convinced the Crown can do a better job than anyone else. 
Now that’s a philosophical argument and they’ll have to take 
responsibility for that at some time. However, it is also a fact in 
this province. 
 
So one of the major carriers-on of business and enterprise are 
the Crowns. However, you have the largest doer of business 
then — I believe something close to 60 per cent — cannot have 
lien put against their property. 
 
So all those individuals who provide goods and services in 
repair work or building or whatever else, they’re taking a major 
risk. Not because the Crowns aren’t paying their bills — want 
to make sure that’s understood; the Crowns in those cases are 
paying their bills — but because the property belongs to the 
Crown. That is the only thing that these subcontractors can go 
ahead and really put anything against and say, that’s what I’m 
going to secure to make sure that I get paid for the work that I 
do. It can’t be done. I wasn’t aware of that, Mr. Speaker, but I 
am because it was brought to my attention by numerous 
contractors in my community. 
 
In my constituency, one of the first things that came to my 
attention when I was elected about seven, eight years ago, an 
individual came and called me up. I went to see him. And he 
had supplied some goods in this case — not services, but some 
goods — for a construction project for a federal building or a 
federal site. 
 

Basically it happened to be at the major historic site that’s just 
across the river from my constituency. Had supplied basically 
tens of thousands of dollars of goods for a project that was 
going on out there. And when they weren’t being paid by what 
ended up being the contractor that was in between the federal 
government and this supplier of goods, the money wasn’t there. 
 
Now the interesting thing that happened in this particular case is 
the provincial government had been the one that had supplied 
the funds for construction on what is basically a federal site. It 
left the supplier of goods with no option, no means to address 
this cost that they had incurred — as I said, tens of thousands of 
dollars. The only way they got their money back eventually was 
by addressing . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Estevan on 
her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — With leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I thank the member 
for Rosthern for allowing me to interfere in his speech. I’m sure 
everyone’s very saddened by that. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to you and through you to all 
members of this Assembly, I’d like to introduce some people 
that are very special in my life, and they are sitting in the 
Speaker’s gallery. And that is my son Terry, his wife Marnell, 
and my little grandson Shelby. And Shelby will turn three this 
Friday. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming them. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Commercial Liens Act/Loi sur les 
privilèges à base commerciale 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Heppner: — It’s always good to have our children and our 
grandchildren come and see the important work that we do. 
 
As I was saying, what course of redress did this supplier of 
goods have? And when we looked at all the legal aspects, again 
it was a government piece of property; he couldn’t put a lien 
against it — well it happens to be a historic site — so what 
avenue did they have? 
 
It was also said, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the funds for that 
project for that project were supplied by this particular 
government. So what eventually had to happen is that 
fortunately a number of the individuals in the area knew some 
individuals in the government side who were involved in 
granting the contracts and basically just put some very personal 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

pressure on there. And then these individuals put pressure on 
that particular group of people, the organization that was doing 
the building, and said, we’re going to stop giving you any more 
funds if you don’t pay your bills. The bills were paid. 
 
But that’s not the way the process should take place. What 
would have happened if that particular supplier of goods hadn’t 
had that contact on the front bench of government? They would 
have been left out. Those tens of thousands of dollars would 
have shown up on their bottom line, probably been in the red 
that particular year. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are issues that are very important 
throughout our province, much more important I think than we 
realize when we drive down a highway or street in town, we see 
something happening and say, hey that’s great; someone’s 
getting some work done; someone has some work doing it; and 
everyone’s happy. Not always the case. 
 
Under this particular Bill, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the value of a 
lien is restricted to the actual value of the outstanding amount 
owing to the company or person in question. Now I’d like to 
read the second point that also relates to this because I think 
those two are tied fairly closely, one to the other. 
 
The Bill also puts in place a method for a person facing a lien 
being placed against him or herself to challenge the lien in 
court. As we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we do have 
individuals in every society that love nothing better than to go 
ahead and just throw a lot of court cases around and drag 
everyone into court they possibly can. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you’ve read the book, The 
Crucible, and in there you’ll remember that there are a number 
of individuals who pretty well make a livelihood of, you know, 
trying to drag everyone into court for all sorts of defamation of 
character or the fact that his cow walked across the cornfield 
and those sorts of things. Unfortunately we also have those 
people in our society. 
 
This Bill has a good aspect to it in that it gives the person who 
has a lien put against them a course of action to challenge that. 
And the other thing that I also mentioned is, it ensures that 
whatever the amount of that lien is, cannot be more than the 
outstanding amount of the money that’s owed. So that 
essentially if someone has . . . is being owed let’s say $50,000 
for some work, they can’t just slap on a lien for $100,000 and 
say, well I want to fix this individual. It has to be for the 
amount that they have owing. 
 
And the other part, as I said, ensures that you don’t have a lot of 
people just making a nuisance of themselves — and I think 
that’s probably the best term, just making a nuisance of 
themselves — slapping liens on all sorts of people and 
individuals just because they’re mean-spirited. 
 
The Bill also makes it possible to enforce liens when the subject 
of lien leaves the province — also very good. And I think we 
always have that concern. What happens if someone leaves the 
province and they find themselves in other jurisdictions? 
 
We had an unfortunate family situation that occurred in Alberta 
a couple of weeks ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and where the 

situation says, well this happened in this province, therefore it 
doesn’t apply in that province and someone else can’t rule. 
Very unfortunate. 
 
This Bill makes sure that you can enforce those liens even when 
the subject of the lien leaves the province. And so there are a 
number of excellent things in this particular Bill. And I think 
we need to underline those to say that it has some good points 
in it. 
 
We’ve done some consultations on this particular Bill, and as I 
said, those three points in particular do make good sense. But 
because these things happen more often than they should, and 
that’s unfortunate, we have to make sure that all areas and 
avenues are addressed and we don’t leave some gaps in the law. 
 
And I mentioned some of those gaps that are there. And I’m not 
sure if this government would be prepared to say, well yes, 
there are certain situations in which government property, 
particularly that owned by the Crowns, you should be able to 
put a lien against those. 
 
It does make a certain amount of sense to bring the rules for 
various liens under one Bill instead of the various provisions 
that are currently in place under what’s commonly called The 
Garage Keepers Act. I think that’s the one we’re most familiar 
with, where an individual gets his car fixed and basically can’t 
take it out or there’s a lien put against the vehicle to make sure 
that the person doing the work gets paid for it. And I think The 
Garage Keepers Act is the one that we’ve probably all heard 
about the most. And the other one’s called The Hotel Keepers 
Act and those Acts. 
 
So at present, someone wanting to find some redress under the 
law for bills owed would have to very carefully go through a 
whole series of Acts and try to find out which one they fit into. 
That just puts an unusual and unnecessary amount of stress, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, on the individual who is trying to get his 
money back for services offered. So this Bill, by putting it all 
under one Act, I think is a very fair change that’s taking place. 
 
The Bill also puts in place a number of exceptions as far as 
priorities of liens. And we do want to delve into those into a 
little greater detail and look at what those changes are in the 
current status. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now that essentially means, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that over time 
you might have a piece of property that has four or five liens 
against it. Now which one of those take priority? If that piece of 
property is sold and the liens need to be cleared up before the 
selling . . . the seller gets his money, what’s the priority? And I 
think that’s an area that is very important, an area that we need 
to look at in greater detail. 
 
What about the other area I mentioned? It says that . . . there’s a 
part in there that ensures that there won’t be a lot of frivolous 
liens being put on a piece of property, and we need to look at 
that very closely. What kind of protection is there against those 
individuals who want to put a lien on a piece of property 
wrongly, and for those who do not pay their bills for a 
service-provider because of a legitimate dispute over the 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

 

quality? 
 
And we talked earlier on about The Garage Keeper’s Act, and 
that that’s the one we’re most common with because it applies 
to our vehicles when we get some work done on it. But what do 
you do when the work that is done and is billed is of a shoddy 
quality? Surely you’re not going to have a lien put against the 
vehicle when the vehicle hasn’t been fixed properly. There 
needs to be a different course of action taken. 
 
So those are some of the things that we need to look at. We also 
have quite a number of questions regarding the scope and 
breadth of regulatory control contained in this Bill, which we 
have often seen gives cabinet a whole lot of power. 
 
Probably about a week or so ago I spoke in this House, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and you may recall that I lifted up a heavy 
volume of documents. I think if we look at all the regulations 
that exist in this province, it’ll make a very long list. 
 
And it’s always a little frightening to know that government can 
pass a law and it’s debated, and the people can see it being 
debated on television; they can read it in the magazines; it 
might show up in the newspaper from time to time. But then 
after that’s all over with and cabinet sits down and works out 
the details, and we know that the trouble is always in the 
details. 
 
And the frightening thing is that someone may actually check 
through after a new piece of legislation is passed and find out 
what the regulations are, believe they understand what’s going 
on, but don’t really understand that month after month cabinet 
can come back to that piece of legislation and change the 
regulations on it. So that over time how the thing is being put 
into force — the values and the fines and all those sorts of 
things, the fees — are being constantly changed to the end that, 
over time, that piece of legislation may not even be 
recognizable any longer. 
 
In his opening statement the minister told us this Bill has been 
well received by a number of groups, and they’ve talked to 
groups and consulted with groups such as CFIB (Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business), trucking association, 
automotive repair association — ones that probably deal with 
this more often than anything else. 
 
But I think there’s some other individuals that need to be 
questioned and interviewed and asked what their situation are. 
Now I mentioned a few of those in the example that I set up for 
you at the start of my discussion of this piece of legislation, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we’ll have many questions for the minister when we get to 
committee at a later stage this year. But I think at this particular 
time we need to have some more input into this. And I think we 
have some other members that will want to discuss this. And so 
at this particular time, I move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 32 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 32 — The 
Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 2001 
modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a 
privilege to stand today and speak on Bill No. 32, The Queen’s 
Bench Amendment Act. This is one of the more important 
pieces of legislation that has come before this session and 
involves children who find themselves in potentially very bad 
situations which are not of their own making. 
 
And it’s unfortunate in today’s world that many of our families 
. . . and we know colleagues and families and friends are 
touched by divorce and family breakup. And this seems to be a 
fact of life in our society. Really the family unit is fundamental 
to our society and the stronger the family also helps the strength 
of the community and the province and the country that we live 
in. 
 
But unfortunately in today’s world that is not quite the case. In 
past generations, families held together for a number of, various 
number of reasons. And in the past families, there were two or 
three more generations living if not in the same house, in the 
same community. And the grandparents and great-grandparents 
would take the family under their wing and look out for the 
family, and in many cases that prevented a number of family 
breakdowns that we have seen in recent years. 
 
And also in past days the community was a much closer-knit 
community that really looked out for the families and the 
children in their community. And as we know today, this is not 
quite the case. Nowadays many families, young families that 
have children, live in communities and their parents and 
grandparents live in other, even not only other communities, 
other provinces. 
 
And with today’s technological advances, much more is based 
on what is going on on the television and many of the children 
in families of today get the wrong impression what life, married 
life is all about, and the family unit. 
 
And unfortunately, as I had mentioned before, there are a 
number of family breakdowns and what we have to take into 
consideration, if a family does break down, we have to take into 
consideration the children of that family. And unfortunately too 
many families that end up in divorce or family breakdown use 
their children as a weapon in a divorce proceedings or in a 
breakup. And not only they argue about the financial aspects of 
a breakdown, the splitting up of property and maintenance, but 
they also unfortunately in some cases use children as a weapon 
in a divorce. 
 
And it’s very painful to see children nowadays that have to go 
through that situation. They’re in the middle of a pair of 
divorcing parents and they see them bitter and angry all the 
time, and that has a dramatic effect on the children of divorced 
parents in many cases. And unfortunately these people do not or 
cannot come to the conclusion that they need to put their 
childrens’ best interests first over their own. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this Bill speaks to some of those concerns 
about trying to help divorced parents or parents that are entering 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

that divorce stage in the laws, or family breakdown, to try to 
help them work through their problems and hopefully benefit 
the children through that situation. I . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Excuse me. Why is the member from 
Cumberland on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I’d like leave to introduce some visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I would like to thank the member. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, I’m very, very pleased to introduce to 
the House some special visitors from Southend. And Southend 
in Cree is called Padigochiwunoohk. And, Mr. Speaker, this is 
quite a long, long ways from here. It’s about at least a 
seven-hour drive to La Ronge and then a further three hours, 
you know, north of there to go to Southend, depending on 
conditions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people that are up there in the west gallery are 
William Dumais and also he’s with the grandsons — Wilson, 
Tyrone, and Billy — and also a stepson, Wilfred Thomas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to as well say Ta wow to them and 
say . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I told them it is a pleasure for me to see them 
and for them to come and watch the proceedings of the House. 
I’ll probably see them in a bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll ask all members to please welcome our special visitors. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment 
Act, 2001/Loi de 2001 modifiant la Loi de 1998 

sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would 
welcome the visitors in the gallery this afternoon. I hope they 
enjoy their stay, and stay for the afternoon and watch the 
proceedings. 
 
As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, this Bill is setting up two pilot 
projects, one in Yorkton and one in Saskatoon. And it seems to 
be a very good first step to try to help in the situation of a 
family breakup and get the two warring factors together and try 
to work out some ground rules — if not ground rules, some 
sanity in their discussions and in their concerns, and really try 
to come to a resolution concerning their problems without 
having to go to court for starters, and help to work out their 
differences and not have the children brought into the dispute. 

Mr. Speaker, I believe after these pilot projects are finished, I 
would hope that the government would look at the pilot project 
and see how effective they were. And if they are effective, I 
hope they would try to build on those projects. But if they are 
not effective, I would also encourage the government to look at 
other alternatives and not give up on this issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we know, we can’t force people to do 
things in this society. Individuals have rights and also in cases 
of where parents are really bitter and fighting, trying to force 
them into a situation where they have to be basically in the 
same room and have to thrash out their problems may be more 
harmful than good in some circumstances. And I see that there 
is some discretion in the Bill to release parents from these 
classes. 
 
And also, I hope the courts will look at these cases on a 
case-by-case basis. As we know, one blanket policy will not do, 
as every situation, every divorcing couple, every child is 
different and we need that flexibility in the system to do what’s 
right in these particular circumstances. 
 
Not only some couples may not necessarily need to take part in 
the project because they will not overcome the differences, but 
in many cases . . . And I hope in many cases that couples are 
able to work out their differences even though they may be 
going through a divorce, work out their differences for the 
benefit of their children and not bring the children into that 
warring situation. 
 
I’d like to also speak somewhat too, concerning this Bill, but 
also before people get married, many churches give 
pre-marriage classes. And again we can’t force people to do 
things. Some churches are very stringent in their rules, before 
they will marry couples that they take pre-marriage classes. 
And I would think that that’s something that’s very important 
that we take preventive measures as a society. 
 
And I wonder if the government has a slight role in there to 
encourage pre-marriage classes. I know the churches are doing 
the best job . . . a very good job. And if we had more resources 
put towards at the front end of the marriage, hopefully we 
would have less people in marriage breakups and having to go 
through divorce and the traumatic experience that it is for 
everyone concerned. 
 
Of course, Mr. Speaker, a number of reasons go into why there 
are divorces and marriage breakdowns. Of course financial 
problems are one of the . . . probably the most common one that 
causes stress in families. And in this province, we need to take 
steps and measures that give opportunities to all people in this 
province, but in particular young people to have well-paying 
jobs and a future in this province. And in many cases, I believe 
if the financial aspects are looked after, that goes a long ways 
towards keeping families together and happy in their 
communities. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions that we have 
as the official opposition. We’ve had a number of phone calls 
and concerns to our offices. And one item that is of some 
concern, as my colleague spoke about the previous Bill, is the 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

 

regulations concerning Bills in general and this one in 
particular. 
 
It seems that most of the important information has been left out 
on this Bill and it will be placed through regulation at a later 
date. And of course when it’s done that way, the Legislative 
Assembly does not have an opportunity to look at the 
regulations; it’s done through cabinet. And I always worry that 
there’s not enough work done and not enough foresight taken to 
look at the regulations. 
 
And I would encourage the government to, in two cases, after 
the pilot projects are done and . . . to bring the results of those 
pilot projects back to the legislature, and also have the 
legislature look at the regulations that are in place. 
 
And again ask the citizens of this province — the churches and 
individual citizens and constituents — how they feel the next 
step should take place. 
 
Now the number of questions that have been asked that we 
don’t really have answers to are, number one, what will these 
classes consist of? I mean is this just a counselling session to 
get the people back together again, or is it a . . . are the classes 
directed towards how to break up the family unit or help them 
in . . . once they’ve made that decision to be divorced, how to 
help them through that process to offset any trauma to the 
children? And also what does the government hope to 
accomplish through these types of classes, which really speaks 
to the previous question. 
 
And I wonder if the government has looked into any of the 
other jurisdictions in Canada and seen what has been done in 
other provinces, in this province, concerning this issue and 
possibly learn from their mistakes before we go ahead on this 
particular piece of legislation. 
 
Now I think we all agree that anything we can do to cut down 
on the terrible circumstances that arise too often when a couple 
is parting ways and the children become a pawn in their 
tug-of-war, I believe that we all would agree that that’s very 
important. But this is certainly a very interesting idea. 
 
But before moving this Bill on, we would certainly want to 
study the Bill closer and talk to a number of our people that 
have asked us questions and try to get their comments on which 
direction the government should go after the pilot projects have 
been completed. 
 
Now this is slightly . . . this is also related, but we also hear 
from a number of the stakeholders, not only about the children 
aspect — which is very important; it should be the most 
important aspect — but also how to come about with an 
agreement concerning maintenance enforcement, and the office 
that looks after that. I know in a number of cases that is a huge 
issue that, even after agreements are made, the money is not 
paid, and the problems of maintenance enforcement is very real 
and it drastically affects the family after the family unit is 
broken down. 
 
And also the continuing problems of non-custodial access. And 
I believe that’s a very important aspect of what is going on. 
Again, parents continue to use the children as weapons, by not 

allowing the other parent access to the children or making it 
very difficult to make arrangements to allow this access to 
continue. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take all those various options into 
consideration. And we’d like to go back to the stakeholders and 
discuss this issue in much more detail. And at this time, I’d like 
to move for an adjournment. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 2 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 2 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2001, be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to speak to Bill No. 2 and in regards to 
Bill No. 2 and discussions surrounding the intent of the Bill 
which is to amend the original legislation to allow for a 
permanent registration system for those salespeople involved in 
securities trading. Rather than having them register every 12 
months, they would be registered permanently. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I wholeheartedly concur with the comments 
of my colleague from Rosthern who spoke to this amendment 
on May 2. The need to cut down on red tape in this province is 
long overdue, because the NDP government in the past has 
thrived on imposing unnecessary regulatory burden on business 
people and others in this province. And that virtually creates a 
nightmare for those business people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, excessive regulatory red tape is, without a doubt, a 
major, major deterrent to creating a friendly business 
environment, and so I’m pleased to see that finally some 
initiative is being taken by the government in addressing this 
issue. 
 
I wonder though, Mr. Speaker, as do all members on this side of 
the House, how the NDP does intend to prohibit anyone with 
the intent of making a trade to make statements that contain 
untruths, as is slated in one of the clauses of this Act. 
 
The member from Rosthern has stated that he envisions the 
NDP hiring hundreds of bureaucrats to be truth police, thus 
really that would defeat the purpose of cutting down on the 
bureaucracy. And it seems, Mr. Speaker, that the Big Brother 
attitude of the NDP could very well be locked in perpetuity in 
this province. Thank you. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party has some concerns and 
questions for the government on this Bill and we look forward 
to further discussion on the Bill in Committee of the Whole. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 19 — The 
Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, land titles are a very important part of Saskatchewan’s 
history. After all, it relates to every landowner, every building 
owner, every property owner, in every way, shape, or form, Mr. 
Speaker. Their titles have to be registered in some fashion and 
recorded for posterity so that as the titles change, we can track 
who the owners are. 
 
And in things like the commercial liens, Mr. Speaker, there are 
liens placed against real property and those need to be 
accounted for, Mr. Speaker. And the Land Titles Office tracks 
all those things like caveats and mortgages that are registered 
against the piece of property. 
 
What the government is doing, Mr. Speaker, is making a 
number of changes here that deal with the process of the 
registrations of properties, the land titles, and how that is dealt 
with. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, what the government has done is 
created another Crown corporation to deal with land titles. I 
might add, Mr. Speaker, that it’s another money-losing Crown 
corporation, just like their potato Crown corporations and all of 
the other ones that they get involved in like IQ&A and NST 
cable down in the US that lost $16 million. 
 
This one, Mr. Speaker, has only lost — I say the word only, Mr. 
Speaker — $11 million which roughly represented 15 to 20 per 
cent of their assets, the total value of the company or the total 
value that the government has put into this project. I’m not sure 
what you would classify the value of a money-losing 
corporation as, Mr. Speaker, because that’s certainly what this 
one is. 
 
While we need, Mr. Speaker, to computerize our Land Titles 
Office, it seems that in this province it’s virtually impossible for 
this government to get it done. We’re the very last, Mr. 
Speaker, in moving in this direction, in moving towards a 
computerized land titles system, Mr. Speaker. If we’re not the 
last, we’re almost there, which is the way most things are in 
Saskatchewan in comparison to the rest of the provinces in 
Canada. 
 
Although I must admit, Mr. Speaker, there are times when 
we’re in number one or number two place, such as paying taxes. 
We’re either number one or number two when it comes to 
paying taxes in this province. 
 
We’re also number one or number two when it comes to losing 
people out of this province, Mr. Speaker, when people move to 
other jurisdictions. We’re number one or number two at the 
bottom, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to job creation. 
 
This government’s very proud of their being number ones and 
number two, but are generally on a negative sense, just like the 
balance sheet is with the government’s new land title 
corporation, the Information Services Corporation, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

In this province it takes on average, Mr. Speaker, about four 
weeks to register a title — about four weeks. Mr. Speaker, in 
Ontario, in British Columbia, in Alberta, it takes one day — one 
day, Mr. Speaker. But as the Minister of Finance says, that’s 
progress, Mr. Speaker, that’s progress, because we used to have 
to do it almost by pony express at one time. And so I guess you 
might say that doing it in two to four weeks is progress. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, down in my corner of the province at 
Arcola we even still have a building called the Land Titles 
Office. It’s not utilized for that any more, Mr. Speaker, but 
when you had a horse and buggy it would take you a couple of 
days to get there — I’m not sure how long you had to wait 
around in a hotel to register your property — and a couple of 
days to turn around and ride home again. 
 
But I suspect, Mr. Speaker, even back at the turn of the century 
when that Land Titles Office was operating — 1910, 1920s — 
that it was faster to register a piece of property in Saskatchewan 
at that time than it is today because of this government’s 
incompetence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, it was very interesting, the person that 
was in charge of STC (Saskatchewan Transportation 
Corporation) and their computer system, Mr. Speaker, that 
wasn’t working right. The fact is they failed to bill for a million 
dollars worth of bills, Mr. Speaker. It came to the point where 
that individual in charge totally shut down the computer system 
— said that’s it; throw it out, we’re going back to doing it by 
hand. 
 
That person received a promotion, Mr. Speaker. At one point in 
time, he was put in charge of the Information Services 
Corporation. No longer there, but they put the guy who shut the 
computers down in charge of building the computer system for 
the Land Titles Office. That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has spent roughly $60 million in 
trying to get this corporation up and running. As I said earlier it 
lost $11 million last year. And now the government wants to 
turn around and sell this idea, this process, this concept around 
the world. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they did get one taker. Ukraine decided to 
take a look at it, and cost . . . they paid $150,000 to take a look 
at our system. Well I’m not sure that they ever implemented it 
or not. They probably can’t afford to lose $11 million like the 
Government of Saskatchewan did with this corporation last 
time. 
 
And I know the members opposite really don’t want to hear the 
facts, Mr. Speaker. The facts bother them a lot. You know, if 
you have facts, you have to accept responsibility. And this 
government, Mr. Speaker, since 1991, has failed to accept any 
responsibility for their actions. 
 
They’re the most irresponsible government I’ve ever seen, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s talk about some of their irresponsibility. Well in 
question period today, my colleague from Arm River raised the 
issue of potatoes. Well they lost a lot of money on potatoes 
under SPUDCO, Mr. Speaker. They lost a lot of money in 
Channel Lake. Initially it was $5 million but then there was still 
outstanding gas contracts so nobody knows for sure, Mr. 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1619 

 

Speaker. 
 
But the Land Titles Office, it’s another money-losing operation, 
Mr. Speaker — the same as all the other ones. There are lots of 
connections when it comes to losing money with this 
government, Mr. Speaker, and Information Services is only one 
of them. NST (NST Network Services of Chicago) lost $16 
million. Clickabid lost a couple or three million dollars. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the history of this government when it comes 
to enterprise is to lose money. If they run a monopoly situation, 
Mr. Speaker, if they run a monopoly, they can manage to make 
a profit on a monopoly where nobody else is allowed to come 
and play in the field and they can set whatever rate they want. 
 
The government has figured that out. They manage to make a 
profit under those circumstances. It’s sometimes difficult for 
them to do so, but they still manage it. 
 
But in those areas where there is actual competition, Mr. 
Speaker, they seem to have a great deal of difficulty in building 
up the expertise to be able to make a profit under a competitive 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and it’s not just us that believes that the 
Information Services Corporation is off on the wrong track. 
Indeed the former minister of CIC, the member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld, in a memo that we gained access to, Mr. Speaker — 
one of the infamous little brown envelopes — was opposed to 
what was happening at Information Services and believing that 
they were off on the wrong track, Mr. Speaker. And it seems 
she tried to at least correct it. 
 
Now that doesn’t seem to be . . . didn’t seem to have any effect, 
because she was only in that portfolio for a very short period of 
time, Mr. Speaker, and it carries on today without the oversight 
of someone like the member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. 
 
One of the concerns that have been raised to us, Mr. Speaker, 
when it comes to the land titles system being on computer and 
accessible, is what kind of security do people have to ensure 
that those titles remain in their name; that those titles are not 
mixed up in some way, shape, or form; that people are simply 
not hacking the system and changing the owners, the ownership 
of a piece of property. 
 
We haven’t heard of any of those kind of security systems, Mr. 
Speaker. We haven’t heard from the government whether they 
can guarantee that that kind of intervention by outside forces 
would not be happening or that they have the system in place to 
prevent that from happening. 
 
I mean if you can hack, Mr. Speaker, into the US Department of 
Defense, why should we assume that you can’t hack into this 
government’s Information Services. 
 
The information, Mr. Speaker, that the software that’s going to 
be used to track this land titles system and to make it work, has 
been in the development stages now for a considerable period 
of time. It hasn’t been working up till now. 
 

Mr. Speaker, how long is it going to take to get it working 
properly? And if it does start working at some point in time, 
what kind of changes and upgrades are going to need to be 
made to the system to make sure it remains viable into the 
future, Mr. Speaker? And when that happens, how much is that 
going to cost and is it going to be tendered out, Mr. Speaker? 
After all we’ve already spent over $60 million on a system that 
isn’t really up and running yet. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are still lots of questions to be asked 
about this particular corporation. The government has not yet 
supplied the answers. People continue to be concerned about 
how long the access time is, who is going to be able to access 
the system, what kind of services are they going to provide. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, to try and gather that information and 
gain those answers, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 20 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 20 — The 
Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 20 is sort 
of a cousin Bill to the one that we just discussed a minute or so 
ago. And there’s two things we have to clarify as I get into my 
discussion of Bill No. 20. 
 
First of all the direction of this particular Bill is good, Mr. 
Speaker. Let’s make sure we know that right upfront. Both land 
survey groups and the legal community, their consultations and 
their input has been into the direction of this Bill. We support 
that. 
 
However I want to spend my time, Mr. Speaker, in discussing 
how this government carries out its directions and its purposes. 
And I think that’s where the problem comes in. There’s not 
always a question with what they want to accomplish, because 
I’ll give this much credit to the people opposite — they 
sometimes do actually want to do something good for the 
province, Mr. Speaker. And I can see they’re already saying 
thank you, because I know we don’t always hand out those sorts 
of compliments. 
 
However just having good intentions isn’t necessarily going to 
get you anywhere. There’s a famous phrase that says, the road 
to Hades is paved with good intentions. And so we know where 
this government is taking the province. But they do have good 
intentions, but it’s not going to slow the pace down. 
 
So let’s look at some of the things that are involved in The Land 
Surveys Amendment Act, and how this government carries it 
out. We’ve seen in many cases where this government, thinking 
they can accomplish something, that they can do it better than 
anyone else. In this particular one, Mr. Speaker, I believe 
they’ve overspent by about three or four times their original 
estimate. 
 
And again as we said, their intentions may be good. They 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

intended to accomplish all of this — land surveys amendment 
— they intended to accomplish all that for I believe it was 
around 18 million at one point. But they rounded it off to about 
20 in case they needed some more. And then it was just on a 
regular basis about 5 or 10 million was added to this, till, as my 
colleague just mentioned in his part of the Bill he was 
addressing, it’s at 60 million. That’s a far cry from 20 million. 
 
I think we all expect some cost overruns. We’re not surprised. 
So when they started off at 18 and sort of rounded it off to 20, 
that should have covered cost overruns, because that probably 
gives you a percentage of about 5, 10 per cent of an overrun, 
and that should just take care of it just nicely. 
 
But no, that wasn’t adequate — 5, 10 per cent cost overrun for a 
socialist is not enough. They have to go ahead and just grind 
this province down as much as they possibly can. So they round 
it up to about 60 million. We’re not talking 60,000 or 600,000 
here, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking $60 million — approximately 
$42 million of a cost overrun. 
 
You recall question period earlier on today, Mr. Speaker, in 
question period where we discussed potatoes. And in that 
particular discussion this government is the one that thought 
they could do a whole lot better job of raising . . . or growing 
potatoes than anyone else could. And now why are they doing 
it? Rows as long as a football field, one after another; 5, 6, 7 
feet high of rotting potatoes. That’s the way they run the 
system. 
 
And that is exactly what happened when they set up, Mr. 
Speaker, The Land Surveys Amendment Act, Bill No. 20. They 
have absolutely no idea, Mr. Speaker, on how to organize 
something, how to get it running the way it should. We’ve seen 
that time after time. 
 
Not long ago, Mr. Speaker, we had the AgDealer.com. And that 
wasn’t very long ago. That was within weeks. And I think we 
need to discuss that, Mr. Speaker, as we look at this Bill 
because we can see the way this government operates. And the 
way they operate is consistent, unfortunately. Because they’re 
doing in The Land Surveys Amendment Act exactly what they 
did in the Ag Dealer one, where again they thought they could 
do it better than anyone else. 
 
So they got into this Ag Dealer thing where people were 
supposed to be able to get on site and, you know, buy some 
farm equipment. Clickabid was somewhat similar; IQ&A. 
 
And so what you have happening there, Mr. Speaker, is they get 
into this operation and then they find, lo and behold, it already 
exists in the province. Now what do we do? Well then either 
one of the other two things — either have to buy them out or 
just say no, it doesn’t happen, it doesn’t happen. Unfortunately, 
as they’re saying, they can’t walk away. They can’t hold it. 
They just lost it all. They just lost it all. 
 
And they do this time and time again. This particular venture, 
getting into the land surveys, was one of those key things where 
this government lost it all. They had an idea. They went out for 
a venture. 
 
And why, Mr. Speaker, somewheres down the line, they don’t 

get some good consultants in there to say, what is this going to 
cost. Because there’s not a doubt in my mind, Mr. Speaker, that 
throughout the world we’ve had this sort of thing happening. 
It’s happened almost all the way across Canada. We’re one of 
the last ones, one of the last ones in this dominion to go ahead 
and get involved in this kind of a system. 
 
So surely all they would have to do is get Ma Bell to go ahead 
and ring up a premier or a minister or deputy minister in 
another province and say okay, this is how you’re doing it; how 
did you do it; what’s the best way to do it; how can we save 
some money; how can we have the best system? 
 
But not this group of people, Mr. Speaker. This group of people 
says, well surely we can do it better. 
 
Well I think a classic example, Mr. Speaker, occurred when 
their cousins in British Columbia decided they could have a 
better ferry going from Vancouver Island over to Vancouver. 
They thought they could have a better ferry. So they built it. 
They didn’t bother checking out with the people who ordinarily 
build ferries. They just said, on their own, surely we can do it 
better. Now first of all, we need a light one, so let’s get an 
aluminum one. And let’s just have the thing, you know, go real 
fast and real quick. 
 
And here you had all the environmentalists of which they want 
to be, some of them. And I see one sitting over there smiling 
because he’s listening, he’s paying attention, Mr. Speaker. They 
find out they’ve got these big, fast ferries — or they did, 
because they’re gone now — and they can’t use them because 
the wake that they create is environmentally disastrous. 
 
That just gives you, in a different realm, how the socialist mind 
works. They had the one track — we’re going to have this 
aluminum ferry; it’s going to be the fastest thing in the world. 
They build it. They spend the money. And then they can’t use 
it. 
 
Right here, we have another example. Do the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, have any idea if the system is 
going to work? It isn’t working yet. At this point in time, it’s 
not working. We have no idea. 
 
Now had they gone to another province and said, what are you 
doing; how did you do it; can we, you know, learn from you; 
we might have had a system that worked. Right now we don’t 
know. Bill No. 20, Land Surveys Amendment Act, no idea 
whether it’s going to work or not. 
 
It’s frightening, Mr. Speaker. It’s frightening when this 
government has good intentions, good intentions. The land 
surveys group, the legal community were consulted. They said, 
this is what we need. The people of this province understood 
this is what we needed. The government understood this is what 
we needed. But it’s how they do it. That’s where the debate 
needs to centre around The Land Surveys Amendment Act, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Government has said that their newest Crown — that’s this 
particular one — lost 11 million last year. It lost that amount 
while expected spending is going to increase to 60 million for 
its Land Titles Automated Development Project. Basically the 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

 

acronym LAND (Land Titles Automated Network 
Development Project) is the one that’s being used for that. So 
their LAND project cost is overrun up to 60 million, losing 11 
million a year. 
 
Now why didn’t they also look at the other concept. If we’re 
going to go with this land surveys — every piece of property 
basically in the whole continent of North America has been 
surveyed — why didn’t they spend some time to say, can’t we 
look at this? What’s the possibility of selling our technology to 
some other place? 
 
But that’s not going to work, Mr. Speaker. The reason that it’s 
not going to work, Mr. Speaker, is because we’re the last ones 
on. We’re the last ones on. Had we been the first ones in this 
racket, Mr. Speaker, we could have probably sold our 
technology to other provinces. But we’re the last one on, so we 
have no one else to sell this to. We have no one else to sell this 
to — not in Canada, not in the US, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It reminds us, as I’ve said, of the other ventures into IT 
(Information Technology) industry concepts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP calls this the cost of doing business. Well 
when the cost of doing business is losing money, that’s not a 
cost of doing business. That’s just being wrong-sighted. It’s not 
being hindsighted, foresighted, left-sighted, right-sighted — 
they’re just wrong. They got it all wrong. They got it all wrong. 
 
(16:00) 
 
And as you can hear, Mr. Speaker, they’re chirping from their 
seats. They don’t like to be told they’re doing things wrong. 
This is probably the best example. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
many people in the province don’t know what a disaster this 
was. But by the time we get around to voting on this Bill, I am 
sure we will have convinced the people of this province that this 
particular government doesn’t know how to step into a new 
venture. 
 
This was a new venture because, as my colleague said in the 
previous discussion of another Bill, that at one time land titles 
was taken care of in small offices, in small communities — it 
was all there. It was working well. It needed to work better. It 
needed to work faster. The changes are necessary. But they 
worked that system out well; this one’s been a disaster. 
 
So this Bill certainly clarifies and streamlines some of the 
operations surrounding The Land Surveys Act, it doesn’t 
address issues of poor planning and poor spending habits of this 
government. Those issues need to be debated in great length. 
We will be doing that, Mr. Speaker, and in order to allow that 
discussion to take place, I move to adjourn debate at this time. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 7 — The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Amendment 
Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to talk a few minutes on the superannuation amendment 
Act. When we’re talking about pension plans, we do have to 
take a great deal of care with these to make sure they’re in the 
best interests of the people who depend on these plans to see 
them through their retirement years. 
 
And we’ve seen some effects of plans recently, Mr. Speaker, 
with the price of natural gas going up and the effect that has on 
pensioners that are on a fixed income with no inflationary 
clause in their pensions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this has happened on numerous occasions in 
the last few years, and so pension plans have been eroded 
considerably by the costs of utilities in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amendment talks about providing widows or 
widowers of the plan . . . who are members of people of the 
plan who happen to pass away, who give the widow or 
widowers maximum benefits under the plan. This has not 
always been the case because before you had to opt into that 
particular option. 
 
I think this should be a welcome change to the plan for 
members, though we’ll be endeavouring to find out if that is 
indeed the case of this amendment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that executives of the Government 
Employee Superannuates Association have been lobbying the 
minister, the Finance minister, for some changes to the pension 
plan of workers in the public employees plan prior to 1977. And 
this goes along with what I was mentioning earlier about 
pension plans that are not indexed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’ve been lobbying for improvements to 
the plan, including the cost of living increase which they do not 
have now, and how much effect this has on the pensions that are 
not governed by cost of living increases. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, these employees are very concerned about 
drug plans. And we know, under this government, the price of 
drugs that have gone up, and as people have retired and getting 
into the senior years, their usage of prescription and 
non-prescription drugs does increase. And so they’re very, very 
concerned about these incremental costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that this has been an issue for the 
government for some time — changes to this drug plan. And I’d 
really like to know where this is going in the future. Because if 
you look at people that had retired prior to 1977, in calculating 
the costs of this, I don’t believe that the small number of people 
that this would affect, that the cost is very onerous. 
 
Also in this amendment, Mr. Speaker, there are several 
administrative and legal changes that are necessary to comply 
with the federal tax guidelines. It is vital changes like these that 
have to be made in order that we ensure that these pension plans 
do not lose their registration. 
 
One provision that does cause concern is the plans will be able 
to charge fees to its member for certain services rendered. And I 
think that’s a concern for most people when you can 
indiscriminately charge fees to the plan. 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

Now even if these are small, I think we would need assurances 
from the minister that these would be very small, and also that 
the minister would have to lay out a very good case to justify 
another fee to be imposed on pensioners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have many more questions that we would like 
to ask with respect to this amendment, but we’ll raise them in 
the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The last time we dealt with these 
estimates was on May 18. I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And today I 
have with me, Dr. Craig Dotson, deputy minister, immediately 
to my right. Mr. Ken Horsman, right behind me, associate 
deputy minister of education. Dr. Michael Littlewood, 
executive director, legislation and school administration, 
directly to my left. 
 
John McLaughlin, at the back of the room, executive director, 
Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. And Don Sangster, 
over on my right here, executive director of school finance. Cal 
Kirby at the back of the room, director, facilities planning. Ms. 
Frances Bast, director, finance and administration, corporate 
services, right behind me. And Gerry Sin Chin, grants manager, 
school finance, again to my right. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials, welcome. We have a number of 
issues that we want to discuss today. 
 
And I think to start with, last time we had the opportunity to 
meet I asked the first question about the global questions and I 
received a 20-minute dissertation on what the department was 
doing. So I’ll ask the same question this time and just ask you if 
it can be a brief answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well certainly to the member 
opposite, Mr. Chair, the global questions question will be given 
a brief answer today. The global questions have been prepared 
by the department and have been submitted to the Government 
House Leader. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Oh, thank you very much. So I’ll just . . . I 
don’t have the opportunity to ask the Government House 
Leader where the global questions are, so maybe I’ll just ask 
you to ask him if he’ll bring them over because I really would 
appreciate them. There’ll be many answers in there I’ll be 
interested in having. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the last couple of days one of the big questions 

that was brought up not in question period but during the 
emergency debate was the SaskEnergy rate increase. And I 
never had the opportunity to speak myself, but a number of my 
colleagues talked about the concern that schools and school 
divisions would have with this tremendous increase. 
 
We know that there was an increase in the budget last year to 
Education. A big percentage of it went to teachers’ salary, and 
there was about 1.7 million, I believe, that was more than what 
we had paid last year, what they received last year after we took 
out the increase in teachers’ salaries. 
 
But I have been told that there is, with the change or the 
increase in SaskEnergy rates, this is going to be more than 
gobbled up. 
 
Can you give me an idea of what your department feels the 
increase will be to school divisions with the SaskEnergy rate 
increase that was announced today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, we haven’t as of yet 
received any information from school divisions with regard to a 
potential impact from the increase on natural gas. What I have 
seen is that the School Trustees Association, Gary Shaddock, 
the president, has indicated that the impact, depending on the 
size of the increase, would be anywhere from 2 to $5 million in 
terms of increased costs for natural gas for the schools in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
To put that in context, we certainly recognize that this 
provincial government has provided the largest increase in 15 
years to the foundation operating grant, and on a calendar year 
basis, this was close to $33 million. 
 
We also recognize that this was a year of reassessment; that 
global assessments did increase across the province of 
Saskatchewan on average about 10.8 per cent. In some 
jurisdictions, considerably higher than that. For example, in 
Saskatoon it was closer to 21 per cent. 
 
There was a corresponding decrease on their mill rates, but I 
understand that we’re also seeing some increase in revenues 
derived from that local tax base to school divisions. And some 
of their calculations did anticipate an increase in natural gas. 
 
So we believe that with the large increase in the foundation 
operating grant, which is an equalization formula, and certainly 
the promise that we have received from various school divisions 
in terms of their response to our budget, in many circumstances, 
in fact in most circumstances, they were extremely positive. 
 
The School Trustees Association stated the budget will help 
children, and gave it an A. The Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation said this is a great budget for the educators in 
Saskatchewan, and especially for students, and gave it an A. 
 
And certainly the correspondence in terms of letters that I’ve 
received from school divisions, individuals throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan have been very positive on this 
budget indeed, Mr. Chair. 
 
(16:15) 
 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I heard you 
say before you went into how wonderful the budget was again, 
that you expected . . . the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) was expecting there was going to be between 2 
and $5 million increase because of natural gas rates increase. I 
talked to them this morning and they’re thinking that it will be 
around the $5 million mark. And I’m sure the minister is aware 
that there are many school divisions that are tapped to their 
limit right now. 
 
I phoned three of the school divisions in my area yesterday and 
they both . . . all three of them told me that the increase would 
be about $20,000 for their school division. They don’t have 
extra cash sitting in their accounts right now. The budgets are 
already set, the tax rate is set, and $20,000 makes a huge 
impact. 
 
I think one of the city school divisions that I talked to said they 
are going to have a $190,000 increase and that was just if you 
take it at 35 per cent — and I guess I understand today it’s 24 
per cent but whatever the rate is — and if it’s a larger school 
division or a larger user, the impact is going to be higher than 
whatever the announcement is because part of it figures in the 
transition amount. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is going to be a lot of school divisions 
that are hurting big time because of this. Has your department 
looked at this? And are you considering going any further 
towards relieving the problems that they have because of this 
increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, we recognize 
that . . . all of the stakeholders and partners in the education 
system have recognized that the contribution from the 
provincial government these past two years on the operating 
grants, which is about a 16 per cent increase, is a substantial 
amount. 
 
With this regard to the specific issue on natural gas, we 
recognize that obviously that when you are planning your 
budgets and into your budget cycle, if natural gas increases 
occur outside of the normal planning cycle, that you cannot 
obviously have an answer for that in that every time frame. 
 
But we recognize that many school divisions have anticipated 
that their costs would go up. I don’t think it was any surprise to 
anyone that we have seen increases in natural gas throughout 
North America that have come on in the past six months to a 
year; in fact longer in some circumstances. 
 
We also recognize that they do have the opportunity to plan for 
these things because they are the final, the final body. Local 
school divisions do make these decisions on their expenditures. 
They look at their revenues. They recognize the cost due 
increase and they make provision for that by setting their local 
mill rates. And it’s my understanding that many of the school 
divisions have anticipated an increase in natural gas. 
 
And certainly we also recognize that when we’re budgeting for 
our budgets. We provide . . . in many areas the vast majority of 
our grant increase was unconditional this year on the per 
student — in fact the largest increase in over 20 years on the per 
student allocation which is the unconditional part of the grant. 

And so the school divisions and students across this province 
have benefited from the budget this year. And we also 
recognize that we respect the autonomy of school boards and 
school divisions to make those decisions on service delivery. 
 
And by and large, the business managers in the school divisions 
and the school boards themselves have done very well in 
managing the dollars that have been provided to them and 
accept that responsibility very well. 
 
We also recognize that with regard to natural gas, that this 
provincial government through SaskEnergy has been selling gas 
for this past winter at substantially less than what they should 
have been charging. The fact of the matter is that the gas 
variance account, the gas cost variance account, had run up a 
deficit of $80 million. And technically that should have been 
paid for by consumers because there is no gouging on gas costs. 
 
Gas costs, it’s a requirement that the utility provide that gas to 
the customer at the price it pays. And it has been providing that 
to schools and businesses and families throughout 
Saskatchewan for the past winter at less than what it costs them. 
 
And now we’re saying is that they have had some benefit from 
that. We expect that gas prices may go down in the future, and 
we probably would not be going to those school divisions to ask 
for that money back, Mr. Chair. 
 
The fact of the matter is that these things do occur and we try to 
make allowances, and school divisions by and large have done a 
tremendous job in managing the dollars that have been allocated 
to them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure that your official is 
going to be getting this answer ready for you because you just 
said you’re not going to go back to the school division and ask 
for this money back. What money were you even considering 
asking back for? 
 
Before you answer the question though, I do want you to know 
that there isn’t going to be one school board in Saskatchewan 
that’s going to sit around and say, my, the gas variance account 
has taken a little bit of a beating and I’m sure pleased that we 
can pay some more money here and make the government feel 
better. 
 
Mr. Minister, what they’re doing is trying to pay their own bills. 
The government’s job is to make sure that this operation is 
working and make sure that there’s money to educate the 
children in this province. 
 
They set their budgets. They had no idea that there was going to 
be 40 per cent gas increase, and they had no idea that gas was 
going to go, for their vehicles and their school buses, was going 
to go from 62 cents to 84 cents. That’s going to make a huge 
impact. In one school division alone, it’s going to cost $9,000 a 
month more for the gas. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, maybe we should . . . maybe first of all you 
could answer the question about . . . you could respond to the 
comment you made that you were not going to go to school 
divisions and ask for some money back. 
 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, obviously the 
member opposite hasn’t been listening. We’re talking 
specifically about natural gas and the fluctuations on the 
market. We are in a deregulated environment. We have been 
deregulated with regard to major industries in this province for 
over 15 years. We have been deregulated on the residential side 
for over two years. 
 
The fact of the matter is that the commodity price of gas has 
been fluctuating dramatically since deregulation has occurred. 
And the point that I was obviously making to the member 
opposite is that if a gas increase occurs and the cost is that cost 
on the open market, then of course school boards will be paying 
that price. 
 
The government provides its budget as a foundation operating 
grant, as an equalization formula, and that is the amount, the 
grant dollars that are provided to school divisions. 
 
Now if we were to follow the member opposite’s logic, then if 
every time there was an increase in natural gas, and the school 
divisions would come and ask the provincial government to 
cover those costs, well then obviously the opposite would be in 
effect as well. Well why wouldn’t the government, if there was 
a massive decrease in natural gas costs, go to these school 
divisions and say, well why don’t you pay it back because 
we’ve given you more than was obviously allocated. 
 
Well it makes no sense. So that’s why we have a process in this 
province where we have a budgeting cycle and we look at the 
grants that have been provided, and it’s a 16 per cent increase in 
the past two years. 
 
And we have targeted grants. We have grants for transportation, 
we have grants for isolated schools, we have grants for special 
education, we have grants with regard to special needs and 
other areas like learning disabled, and we have disabilities 
grants. And these grants are provided to school divisions. 
 
The school divisions look at their bottom line. They then make 
the adjustment with regard to their global assessment and their 
mill rate, and they pay for their expenditures. And they have 
done a very good job at that over the years, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and to the minister, are you 
aware of how many school divisions contract with CEG for 
their natural gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, that’s not information that 
the department generally keeps. 
 
In terms of school divisions, they basically have the opportunity 
to contract for their natural gas supply with other marketers 
throughout the province, just as any individual or corporation or 
business or industry in this province. So the fact of the matter is 
this is not something that we would compile on an ongoing 
basis. 
 
I couldn’t tell you if Tiger Lily School Division or schools 
within that division have a special arrangement with a gas 
supplier other than SaskEnergy. Basically they have the 
autonomy to make those decisions; they have the autonomy to 
determine what is in the best interests of their students. And 

they make those decisions, and they have done very well in 
making those decisions in the past. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I have a question on the small 
schools factor. I believe this year it’s called the isolated schools 
factor, but last year it was the small schools factor. How much 
money last year was allocated for the small schools factor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the numbers for last year 
when we had the small schools factor was 20 million in the 
allocation. 
 
This year the isolated schools factor is 17.3 million, but we’ve 
increased the number with regard to rural transportation. And 
the actual number of dollars going into support of rural students 
is considerably higher than it has been in previous years. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, when I read through the budget 
and the information that the school boards received, I 
understand that there was some grandfathering clauses that were 
considered this year, but next year that those clauses will be 
removed. 
 
Can you give me an idea of how much money will be allocated 
next year with the removal of the grandfathering part of the 
clause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I assume that the member was 
talking about the small schools factor. There is a phase-down of 
that factor over the next two years to full implementation. But 
in terms of the actual dollars, we won’t know until we see the 
global grant pool for next year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair, Crystal Lakes 
School Division last year received $179,000 for what was the 
small schools factor at that time. This year they’re going to 
receive 143,378, and next year it’s anticipated that they’ll 
receive $108,000 — 108,640. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is a huge difference and is going to make a 
great impact on the school’s ability or the school division’s 
ability to provide the information to the students and all the 
essentials for educating the children. 
 
I heard you say that there was going to be other monies put 
forward. But this school division is faced with this decrease in 
funding and I’m wondering if this is something that you’re 
expecting to be happening to school divisions right across the 
board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, certainly with the 
very specific question with regard to Crystal Lake, now it’s my 
understanding that last year their grant in total . . . And you can 
talk about specifics of that grant structure. And of course when 
you look at the actual grant allocation, each school division is 
provided with that information on budget day, and any 
particular line item, you may find some have gone up, some 
have gone down. 
 
But if you look at the global bottom line for Crystal Lake, last 
year it received $3.7 million in grant. This year it’s $4.3 million 
in grant, an increase of 13.6 per cent, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

 

(16:30) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, that wasn’t the question; 
I’m sure the minister was aware of that. And we also know 
what the increase is in the teachers’ salary and support staff and 
the other increases that . . . this doesn’t really answer the 
question that I had asked. 
 
I know that there will be more than one school division that will 
be contacting my office and giving me the same numbers 
because this isolated school factors, if I remember correctly, is 
something that you talked about the last time we were in 
estimates, saying how it was going to be benefiting rural 
Saskatchewan and how it was going to make it possible to keep 
some schools open. 
 
So irregardless of the overall picture, I wanted to know how 
many school divisions are going to see a decrease in the grant 
that they received in this aspect of the formula — the isolated 
school factor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we can compile 
that information with regard to every school division and send 
that to her. But I would remind the member opposite that as we 
phase out the small school factor and move into the isolated 
factor, we also recognize that the costs of providing services in 
rural Saskatchewan are higher and that this government does 
recognize that and does provide a premium on its grant 
structure. 
 
So when you’re looking at small schools factor, isolated schools 
factor, sparsity factor, rural transportation factors, per capital 
grant with regard to pupils — all of these things are taken into 
consideration and there is a benefit that does recognize that the 
costs of providing services in rural Saskatchewan are higher 
than the costs with regard to urban Saskatchewan. And so we 
have made these adjustments. 
 
And the base philosophy for the Department of Education and 
certainly for this government is that we want to provide an 
equitable opportunity for students throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan with regard to their learning opportunities. 
 
And certainly the focus of this past budget with regard to the 
largest increase on the foundation operating grant in 15 years, 
the targeted program with regard to technology in 
CommunityNet, and of course all of the targeted programs with 
regard to enhancement for special education recognizes the 
diverse needs of the students throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan and specifically the needs with regard to rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure that we will go back to 
this issue again. I haven’t received the global answers that I’ve 
asked for. But in the meantime, I’m wondering if you can tell 
me how many school divisions actually receive less funding this 
year than last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ll just 
. . . wanted to make one point with regard to the member’s 
previous question. I have the copy of the external reference 
committee’s report of February 2001 which is a committee 
made up of all the significant stakeholders and partners with 

regard to education in the province of Saskatchewan. And I’ll 
quote: 
 

The committee reaffirmed its conclusion of last year — the 
small schools factor should be replaced with funding 
arrangements through the grant formula that more 
appropriately support schools that are unavoidably isolated. 
 
It was noted that the department had conveyed in writing in 
March 2000, its intention to pursue such a course. And the 
committee noted that any changes along these lines 
implemented in 2001 should be phased in and should entail 
increased support for truly isolated schools. 
 

Now with regard to the last question, there were 34 school 
divisions out of 99 that received less grant. But we also have to 
recognize that the foundation operating grant is an equalization 
formula and it’s very sensitive to enrolment and assessment. 
There was a 4,000 student decrease in enrolment. There was a 
large assessment increase provincially overall of 10.8 per cent 
which correspondingly would result in lower grants to school 
boards that had higher assessments. And we also eliminated the 
cap this year. 
 
So in essence what happened was that poorer school divisions 
— in other words school divisions with less capability of 
generating local revenue — benefited substantially by this 
budget. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, how many school divisions are 
zero grant status right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the 99 
school divisions, there . . . on a calendar year basis, there are 
four school divisions that would be considered zero grant or 
negative grant school divisions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. A number of the 
school boards that have contacted my office are concerned 
because of the increase in taxes this year. Even though the mill 
rates may have gone down, as we discussed last time because of 
reassessment, they actually will be bringing in more money 
through the property taxes. 
 
And of course this is something that is hitting many of the 
centres, the cities especially. The city of Saskatoon is very 
concerned because of the reassessment and the effect that it had 
on their property tax owners. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the questions that a number of school 
boards have had is the issue around funding and the fact that 
they never know until the fourth month of the year or third 
month of the year what their funding is actually going to be, and 
it makes it absolutely impossible to do any long-range planning. 
 
School divisions have asked if there is going to be some time 
when your government is looking at some type of a long-range 
planning, a five-year plan, so that they can actually make some 
decisions and provide the kind of educational opportunities that 
they would like to do for the students in their area. So is your 
department looking at long-range planning to allow school 
divisions . . . to enable them to do their job? 
 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, I can 
understand the intent of her question, and I must say that we 
have made some significant improvements by going to a change 
in our year, our fiscal year. So now that school boards actually 
. . . when they receive their budgets, not only are they getting 
the budget for the balance of the calendar year, but they are also 
receiving their budget information for the first quarter of the 
subsequent year. 
 
So in essence they are much better positioned through the new 
arrangement in having statutorily gone to a March 31 year-end. 
We are now in a situation where school divisions can say that 
they have much better planning tools. 
 
In terms of long-range planning, I think that there . . . it’s 
certainly a good idea in terms of . . . and I certainly would 
welcome further information from the opposition if they’d like 
to see how this would roll out in terms of a plan, but we also 
recognize that the ability of government under its current 
balanced budget legislation depends substantially on current 
revenues and revenue projections. 
 
So it’s easy to say we’d like to have longer planning cycles for 
school divisions — in fact any agency that benefits from 
government grants or government payments — but we also 
recognize that the revenues that the government derives in 
providing those dollars are sensitive to market forces, and 
sometimes it’s not as easy to predict a year and a half or two or 
three years down the road. 
 
So I would suspect that it’s the changes that have been made, 
have been received positively by school boards, and it’s my 
understanding that just by having changed the way grants are 
provided that school divisions have benefit to the tune of 
somewhere between 1 and $2 million in not having to carry 
those interest charges that they previously carried. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, the short 
answer then is no, you’re not going to have a long-term plan. I 
know that you’ve added three months to it, and that helps a little 
bit, but it’s not going to help the school divisions that are 
dealing with their enrolment problems, and a lot of it is the 
capital funding problems as well. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was interested in hearing you talk about interest 
payments, because one of the issues that I’m sure you know 
about and you’ve read about it in the paper lately is the 
Silversprings school and the fact that the announcement of this 
school and the building of this school before the funding is 
actually there is going to cost the school division around 
$300,000. This is a huge concern. 
 
And the school boards, of course, were very grateful for the fact 
that they’ve finally received the school that they’ve been asking 
for . . . for I believe it was eight years. But now they are going 
to have to take $301,000 out of their operating money or . . . to 
actually get this school built. 
 
Is your department dealing with this? Is this a concern that has 
arisen before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, the 
capital allocations in terms of funding of new projects like new 

schools is very transparent. The policies and procedures that 
have been itemized with regard to how those capital projects are 
funded and financed, generally we look at a two, three, and 
sometimes four-year cycle in providing. Normally we put up 
funds that would cover the planning stage in the first year, with 
a substantial bulk of the funds provided in the second and third 
years. 
 
In this case, because there was a perceived need by both of the 
school divisions in Saskatoon to have the Silversprings 
elementary school and also Mother Teresa provided, that the 
information was given to these school divisions which they 
fully concurred with, recognizing that they would be provided 
their grants in such a way that would require them to carry 
increased interest costs. 
 
But we also recognize that from the original negotiation that did 
occur that we have actually increased the amount of dollars that 
have been provided to the Saskatoon Public with regard to 
Silverspring. And this year alone, 2001-2002, we will be 
providing $1.34 million of our total funding of 3.5 million 
which is actually greater than what was initially negotiated. 
 
So the fact of the matter is that there was no wool pulled over 
anyone’s eyes here. This was an agreement that was made, and 
the purpose of the agreement that was made, and how the funds 
were allocated to that school board was to allow for a fairly 
rapid completion. 
 
And I can recall having this conversation with the former board 
Chair, Lindsey Fast, who basically wanted to see us proceed 
and provide the approval for the building of that school in an 
accelerated fashion. And so the department accommodated that 
request to allow for that school to be completed and to be open 
this fall. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I agree with you. The ratepayers 
and the citizens of that part of Saskatoon were delighted to get 
their school built. They’d been asking for it for a number of 
years. And when the pictures were taken and the big 
announcement was made that the school was going to be built, 
everyone was joyful. But the school board themselves, they’re 
the ones that knew that this was going to cost extra money. 
 
I’m sure that if the school ratepayers knew that this $301,000 
was going to come out of their budget, they wouldn’t be quite 
as happy to know that the minister’s there getting his picture 
taken and it’s going to cost ratepayers a pile of money. 
 
So again, Mr. Minister, I think this goes back to the fact that the 
long-term planning, especially on the capital end, is badly 
needed. 
 
I know that capital funding has been frozen at about $26 
million. And I know that the minister will say that there’s been 
an extra $5 million to the Centenary Capital Fund in the last 
few years. But most of the buildings, most of the school 
buildings here in Saskatchewan are over 30 years old. 
 
I’m wondering if you can give me an idea of how many dollars 
are on the list for capital funding projects? And if you had, if 



June 6, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

 

you have any intention of increasing the amount of money 
that’s going into capital funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, when 
we look at how capital allocations are provided to school 
divisions, they have capital requests; we have facility planners. 
We priorize capital requests based on, number one, health and 
safety issues; number two, critical shortage issues; and then 
other issues. So we also provide about a 10 per cent premium 
for how joint-use projects are priorized. 
 
If we look at the old way of providing funding for capital 
projects — and this government changed to accrual accounting 
on this matter in 1994 — we recognize that prior to that time a 
large proportion of the new capital that went into constructing 
schools in the 1980s and early 1990s was borrowed money. 
And if we look at the capital allocation lists from those years, 
the budget items, the line items, they look like substantial 
dollars — 80, $90 million. But the vast majority of those dollars 
were interest payments. 
 
Currently, when we put a line item out of $26 million in a 
capital line item, well over 24 million of that is actual real 
dollars, new dollars, going into capital construction. And with 
the 5 million Centenary Capital Fund it’s close to 30 million 
overall, and that is actual dollars. 
 
Now with regard to the number of new schools since 1997, 
despite declining enrolments in many areas, we have Jack 
MacKenzie Elementary in southeast Regina; St. Gabriel 
Elementary in southeast Regina; there’s Brunskill; there’s new 
Westview Elementary in P.A. (Prince Albert); there’s the new 
high school in Lloydminster; there’s the new elementary school 
in Pinehouse; the new high school in Meadow Lake; 
Silverspring Elementary, as mentioned, and Mother Teresa. 
 
So there have been a lot of new capital constructions. Now if 
we look at the overall number with regard to what the 
government contribution is for all requests from school 
divisions for capital projects in the province of Saskatchewan 
right now, it’s roughly $200 million. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, is that number up or down in the 
last couple of years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s my 
understanding that that number was well over 300 million a few 
years ago and it’s down to that 200. So it is down substantially. 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, if there was nothing else 
added on the list of wants by school divisions, which of course 
will not happen, it would still take 10 years at the current rate to 
get the construction and maintenance under control. And we do 
know that the school divisions are . . . most of the schools are 
over 30 years old and that the repairs needed are mounting. And 
it’s one of the big concerns that . . . as I’ve met with school 
divisions around the province — and I’m sure you’ve done the 
same thing — it’s one of the concerns that you hear. 
 
I’ve had a question from a number of school boards saying that 
if there’s going to be a one-time payout to different 
departments, why doesn’t the Department of Education ever get 
a payout — a one-time allocation of money so they can put it 

towards capital funding? Is that something that your department 
is pushing for? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, certainly 
the suggestion from the member opposite is something that we 
could look at obviously. 
 
The reality is though, that when you look at all of the capital 
requests and the government contribution of 200 million, we 
recognize that the way that those capital requests are priorized 
are primarily for health and safety issues. So in terms of the 
structures that require urgent repairs, there is no major lag time. 
I mean these requests are priorized right at the top of the list. 
 
And when we look at the Centenary Capital Fund, well indeed 
this is a contribution of one-time money and it obviously is 
helping because the total overall requests have dropped from 
over 300 million from several years ago down to 200 million 
today. And I would anticipate, as we continue to put in that 
close to $30 million over the next little while as the provincial 
government contribution, that that global number will continue 
to fall. 
 
Certainly requests are requests. We make sure that health and 
safety issues are covered off as the top priority. Critical space 
shortages are covered off next. 
 
We also recognize that more needs to be done and currently we 
are, as a department, having discussions with the School 
Trustees Association and others with regard to some changes 
we may look at in terms of our capital allocation, specially with 
regard to a new restoration plan. 
 
So in fact, Mr. Deputy Chair, we are doing more that is having 
an impact. And that positive impact is having an impact on the 
learning experiences of students throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan, and also having a positive impact on the 
working environment for the classroom professionals in this 
province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I imagine it must be somewhat of an embarrassment when you 
know that the decisions on who’s going to get capital funding 
revolves around health and safety issues. The number of school 
divisions that have contacted me say, you know it’s very sad 
when you know that the only way you can get money is if it’s 
such an extreme problem that it’s going to be an irritant to the 
health of the children in the school, or to the safety of the 
children in the school. So I believe that this is one of the issues 
that must be addressed by your department. 
 
Mr. Minister, the issue of bussing in the city is something that is 
a concern to the school boards as well. I understand that 
elementary school children receive bussing but the collegiates 
do not. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, the 
member is correct. There is no provincial grant support for 
bussing with regard to secondary students, except for 
special-needs bussing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, is this brought up as a concern to 
you by the school divisions that are dealing with the issues in 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard June 6, 2001 

 

our larger centres? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, we 
recognize that school divisions are in the best position to make 
those local decisions. 
 
We also recognize that, for example, in a city like Saskatoon 
there are open boundaries. So what happens is if a secondary 
student wishes to attend a collegiate that is on the other side of 
the city, that’s a choice they can make. 
 
So what the department has decided is that it is best for those 
local school divisions to make those decisions, and that is why 
the vast majority of grant dollars is provided on an 
unconditional basis. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:01. 
 
 
 


