















































Hansard: April 27, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 761 
 April 27, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of people surrounding the 
Cudworth area who are concerned about the loss of 
community-based ambulance services. And the petition reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Cudworth, Prud’homme, Vonda, St. Benedict, 
and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition regarding two of the government’s Crown 
corporations — SaskPower and SaskEnergy. Both recently 
announced significant rate increases for residential and business 
customers. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from 
Beechy, Lucky Lake, Dinsmore, Birsay, and the fine city of 
Saskatoon; and I’m pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition today 
regarding EMS (emergency medical services) report and the 
effect it may have on ambulance services in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley 
and Archerwill. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present 
petitions. Reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan, and southwest Manitoba and beyond. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good people of 
Maryfield, Redvers, Wauchope, and Antler. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
more of the 5,000-plus people who are concerned about the 
state of the Swift Current hospital. And, Mr. Speaker, the prayer 
of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition today, this morning, is signed by 
people from Wymark, Stewart Valley, from Regina, from 
Herbert, and of course from the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy constituency who are concerned about the EMS 
development project and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Radville, Lake Alma, 
McTaggart, Ceylon, Tribune, and Minton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present a 
petition today on behalf of citizens of the province. The 
petition’s prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance service. 
 
As in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by a number of people in the Redvers, 
Bellegarde, and Parkman areas. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a new 
petition to present as a result of a chamber of commerce 
meeting on Fyke in Redvers this week. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan, and southwest Manitoba and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens of the Hafford community and 
area. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Hafford 
Hospital remains open. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Richard, Saskatchewan. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, our petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan concerned about the high rates SaskEnergy and 
SaskPower are charging: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition is signed by the good citizens from Davidson, 
Bladworth, Saskatoon, Imperial. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned constituents. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 

implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
And the signatures to this petition come from Wynyard, Mozart, 
and Fishing Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
rise in the Assembly to bring forth a petition from citizens 
concerned about the high energy rates: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Saskatoon, Spiritwood, Shellbrook, Rabbit Lake, and Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of the citizens of 
Assiniboia, Saskatchewan and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of service and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed from people from 
Assiniboia, Mossbank, and Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise with a petition to stop further cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer 
Lodge and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of service and care are maintained at Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signators on this are from Assiniboia, 
Crane Valley, Regina, Wood Mountain, Lafleche, Gravelbourg, 
Viceroy, and Limerick. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

 

received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province that are 
addendums to previous sessional papers no. 3, no. 4, no. 5, no. 
58, and no. 65. 
 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 

SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills, I present the 
third report of the said committee, which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petition for private Bills and finds that the provisions of 
rule 64, 65, and 68 have been fully complied with: 

 
Of the International Bible College of Moose Jaw in the 
province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend its 
Act of incorporation; 

 
Of Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to continue Our Lady of 
the Prairies Foundation; 

 
Of the Providence Hospital, Moose Jaw, in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to dissolve Providence 
Hospital; 

 
Of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
in the province of Saskatchewan praying for an Act to 
amend its Act of incorporation; 

 
Of the St. Anthony’s Home, Moose Jaw, in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to dissolve St. Anthony’s 
Home; 

 
Of St. Thomas More College, Saskatoon, in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to continue the St. 
Thomas More College. 

 
I move this, seconded by the member from Humboldt: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 30 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Rural Revitalization: (1) 
what are the adaptation programs established that will help 
farmers establish alternative operations or retrain for 
alternative occupations; (2) how much money has been 
allotted for each of these programs; and (3) where can 
information be found if someone would like to apply to one 
of these programs? 

Mr. Hillson: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on 
day 30 I will ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: regarding the proposed land 
system: (1) how many positions in the Land Titles Office 
will be displaced; (2) how much retraining will be required 
of present employees to work in the new system; (3) how 
much will the retraining cost be; (4) is consideration being 
given to an early retirement package for existing senior 
employees as opposed to requiring extensive retraining for 
employees now near retirement; (5) when will the land 
system come into operation? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, 17 adult students seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re here from SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) English as a Second 
Language program and accompanied by teachers Ron Mang and 
Ruth Quiring 
 
They’ll be present in the gallery all through question period and 
I’m sure they’ll take a great deal of interest in the proceedings. 
And I’ll be looking forward to meeting with them later on to 
answer their questions and have a refreshment in room 218. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to warmly welcome our guests 
from the English as a Second Language program at SIAST. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you my son who is with us this morning, my son, 
John, in your gallery. John is an RN (registered nurse) at Allan 
Blair clinic here in Regina. He has not gone off to Alberta to 
work. 
 
He is compassionate, thoughtful, loyal, and quiet — in short, he 
takes after his mother. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition I would like to join with the member opposite in 
welcoming our students, the students from SIAST. I certainly 
hope that they enjoy their visit today to the legislature and I 
wish them every success in their studies. 
 
And so I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Day of Mourning 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today flags on the Legislative Building and the provincial 
government buildings are flying at half-mast as we 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

commemorate Saskatchewan workers injured and killed on the 
job. 
 
Back in 1988 I was approached by Nadine Hunt who was then 
the president of the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour to ask 
if I would introduce a Private Member’s Bill to make April 28 a 
statutory day of mourning for workers killed and injured on the 
job. 
 
I was very proud of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, when that Bill 
passed unanimously, making Saskatchewan the first jurisdiction 
in all of Canada to legislate the day of mourning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, April 28 is the day chosen because it was on that 
day back in 1914 that Canada’s first Workers’ Compensation 
Board Act was passed in the province of Ontario. This is the 
day to share the grief of workers injured on the job and to 
families who have lost a family member on the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unfortunately young people and first-time workers 
are more likely to be injured in the workplace. More than 8,000 
young workers age 15 to 24 are injured each year. Since last 
April 28, 33 people have died on the job in Saskatchewan. Two 
of them under the age of 24. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for ourselves as legislators, this is a day to 
recommit ourselves to legislation and action in support of good 
occupational health and safety practices and programs. We do 
this for those who make up the backbone of the Saskatchewan 
economy — Saskatchewan workers; for them and for their 
families. 
 
Thanks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I also rise today to speak on the National 
Day of Mourning — a day set aside to remember those workers 
killed or injured on the job. Mr. Speaker, it’s a tragedy that 
more than 30 people lost their lives in work-related accidents in 
Saskatchewan last year and thousands more were injured. 
 
Tomorrow, April 28, is the day we set aside to remember those 
who are no longer with us. Across Canada 1,000 people die 
from workplace accidents annually and a million more are 
injured nationally. This means that a work-related accident 
injures someone every seven seconds of each working day; 
every two hours of each working day a life is lost. These 
statistics speak volumes about the importance of ensuring 
workplace safety. 
 
A safe work environment is not just the responsibility of 
employers or employees, it is a commitment that all of us must 
make. The toll that workplace accidents take on families, 
friends, and the communities is without end. Over time pain and 
grief may fade, but memories do not. 
 
Tomorrow, April 28, is a day for remembering. And while we 
have reserved April 28 to respect this solemn occasion, we must 
also remember that the responsibility of workplace safety is not 
limited to just one day. 
 

On behalf of the official opposition, our sincerest condolences 
to those who lost loved ones this past year and our best wishes 
to those who are recovering from their injuries. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cancer Month 
 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, this is a solemn occasion 
today and as we approach the end of this month, it is important 
to remember that April is also Cancer Month, the month during 
which we pay tribute to the health workers, families, and 
friends who are in the struggle against this dreadful disease. We 
remember those who have suffered and too often died too soon 
from cancer. 
 
April is also a month, though, in which 10,000 Saskatchewan 
volunteers redouble their efforts to raise money for research and 
for prevention programs. In Saskatchewan we can ask with 
pride: where else? Where else can you find our combination of 
volunteerism, of co-operation, and of determination to work 
together for the public good? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motto for this year’s fundraising campaign is 
“Let’s Make Cancer History.” And we will, in both meanings of 
the phrase. Nevertheless, this year in Canada there will still be 
134,000 new cases of cancer. 
 
We are making progress but we want a declaration of total 
victory. The $4 million the Saskatchewan branch plans to raise 
will take us closer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as someone who lost her husband to cancer, I 
recognize and praise the work of all those involved in cancer 
research and treatment and I urge us all to help the Cancer 
Society to reach its financial target. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Meeting on Fyke Report in Redvers 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on an 
issue of care and health. Redvers Chamber of Commerce last 
Wednesday night held a meeting, Mr. Speaker, in the rink in 
Redvers in which people from across southeastern 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba participated. 
 
Over 500 people were in attendance, Mr. Speaker, to hear and 
discuss the Fyke report. The chairman of the health board made 
a good presentation and explanation on what was in the Fyke 
report, along with a doctor who had a commentary on it. And it 
was very interesting, Mr. Speaker, that just as the doctor got up 
to go and give his presentation, his cell phone rings for some 
health consultations from the hospital. 
 
I was also a part of that, Mr. Speaker. The people of the area 
were expressing their concerns about the potential loss of their 
acute care services, ambulance services, lab and X-ray services, 
long-term care, and home care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There was one general consensus at the meeting, Mr. Speaker, 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

 

and that was that this government needs to listen and needs to 
act on the health care concerns of people across Saskatchewan 
and that they asked that I speak out on their behalf and continue 
the struggle to maintain health care services in the Cannington 
constituency. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Balgonie Tumbleweed Community Theatre 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to tell you about a very special event held this last weekend by 
the good people of Balgonie. 
 
Close to a hundred volunteers gathered over the weekend to put 
on the Tumbleweed Community Theatre’s presentation of 
Looking Back and Stepping Forward. I had the pleasure of 
attending Sunday’s show, Mr. Speaker, and I’m delighted to 
share with the Assembly a little more about this event. 
 
As many people know, we in Saskatchewan take two things 
very seriously — our politics and our heritage. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the people of Balgonie are no exception. These 
volunteers put on a show that illustrated the long and rich 
history of Balgonie and area; one that was full of homesteading 
stories, tales of success and hardship, and folklore that truly 
represent the pioneering spirit we in Saskatchewan are so 
famous for. 
 
Young members of the cast portrayed stories of computer chips, 
the Internet, and music titles from bands that many of us in the 
audience had never heard of before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the diversity of the two eras was well represented. 
The oldest actor in the cast was 70; the youngest was 5. The 
proceeds of this event, Mr. Speaker, are going towards the 
Balgonie swimming pool. 
 
Congratulations go out to directors, Wendy Mokelki and 
Heather Entner; music director, Lisa Ermel; master of 
ceremonies, Darcy McKeown; the central character’s 
grandmother, Rosemary Devers; and her granddaughter, Justine 
Melnychuk; cast, crew and the people of Balgonie on a job well 
done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Holocaust Memorial Day 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on April 
10 I spoke in this Assembly in support of a private member’s 
Bill to commemorate Holocaust Memorial Day. 
 
While the other members of this Assembly clearly understood 
my unqualified support of the Bill and my absolute abhorrence 
of all human atrocities of this nature, I did receive an e-mail 
from a Saskatchewan resident seeking further clarification of 
some of my remarks. 
 
Specifically, Mr. Speaker, I was asked to clarify why I believe 
the Jewish victims of the Holocaust and the Rwandans and 

Bosnians victimized in more recent atrocities were killed. In 
each case these innocent people were slaughtered by an evil 
regime with wanton disregard for human life and for God’s 
universal law that each and every one of us is created equal. 
 
My remarks were intended as a reminder that the human race 
must be ever vigilant against the religious and racial 
discrimination that has led to the senseless deaths of millions of 
innocent people at various times throughout history. 
 
For these reasons I strongly supported the remembrance of 
Holocaust Memorial Day in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Drug Plan Additions 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan 
residents enjoy an excellent health care system but we are 
always looking for ways to improve upon everything from 
patient care to 911 services. And health care has once again 
been improved in Saskatchewan by the addition of 26 new 
drugs to the Saskatchewan Drug Plan; a drug plan that already 
covers more than 3,500 products. 
 
Among these new 26 drugs is Exelon. It has been covered by 
the Saskatchewan Drug Plan since April 1, after the provincial 
government accepted the Saskatchewan Formulary 
Committee’s recommendation to cover Exelon. Exelon is used 
to treat patients with mild to moderate forms of Alzheimer 
disease. This drug has been shown to be beneficial to new 
patients or to those who cannot tolerate Aricept, another drug 
used to treat Alzheimer disease that was added to the 
Saskatchewan Drug Plan last year. 
 
By adding Exelon, we can hope to provide a better quality of 
life for those suffering from Alzheimer disease, and for their 
loved ones. 
 
Other drugs that were added to the Saskatchewan Drug Plan are 
Monocor, a medication for congestive heart failure; Avelox, a 
new antibiotic; and Actos, a new oral alternative treatment for 
diabetes. In addition, many lower cost generic drugs are being 
added in order to provide alternatives to existing products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, health care in Saskatchewan continues to improve. 
With the addition of Exelon, along with 25 more new drugs, 
Saskatchewan residents can be assured that they will be 
provided with the best drug choices possible in order to 
continue to live a fulfilling and healthy life. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Sex Offender Registry 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. Last week Christopher’s 
Law, which is legislation creating a mandatory provincial sex 
offender registry, came into effect in Ontario. In March, the 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

NDP (New Democratic Party) government in British Columbia 
announced they too would establish a registry to monitor 
convicted sex offenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one year ago, I asked the Minister of Justice to 
bring forward legislation that would set up such a registry in 
Saskatchewan. But his answer at the time was that the existing 
CPIC (Canadian Police Information Centre) system was all we 
needed. 
 
Then in September the minister changed his tune and urged his 
federal, provincial, and territorial colleagues to reconsider a 
national registry. But, Mr. Speaker, there is no real indication 
that the federal government is going to take this initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today I stand to say that I will reintroduce 
legislation that will establish a provincial sex offender registry 
in Saskatchewan. Will the minister support this legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, first of all let me 
recognize the member’s continued commitment to addressing 
the needs of children who are faced with the potential of being 
offended by pedophiles, and her concern is shared by all 
members of the House. I know that. 
 
The important thing is to try to do what will work. And in the 
process of discussing this matter with the member and with 
others, I did then proceed to raise the issue with the ministers of 
Justice at the last provincial/territorial/federal ministers of 
Justice meeting and we agreed to proceed to investigate the 
efficacy of a national sex offender registry. 
 
Work is continuing in that regard and in February officials met 
to see how we could implement a national sex offender registry. 
The matter was raised in the House of Commons, as the 
member knows, and Alliance members pointed at the 
importance of a national sex offender registry. We continue to 
work at that level. 
 
But the member should be assured that if progress does not 
proceed at that level, then we will look very seriously at 
implementing something similar here in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, this situation just simply cannot wait 
for the federal government. We have waited long enough, Mr. 
Speaker, because just yesterday a violent sex offender who is 
considered an extremely high risk to reoffend was released from 
the Regional Psychiatric Centre in Saskatoon. 
 
The police issued a public warning, and while they expect that 
Garry Nelson Bunn will head for Manitoba, he will not be 
under any probationary or community supervision and he is 
under no obligation to tell the police where he was going. So in 
short this man may very well be in Saskatchewan and the police 
say he may be a very real threat to the general public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a mandatory sex offender registry would require 
this man to report his whereabouts, and police would at least 
have some legal method of knowing where he is. Mr. Speaker, 

why won’t the minister be a leader instead of a follower and 
support a provincial sex offender registry? Why does he insist 
on waiting for the federal government to get around to it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I share the member’s urgency about this too. But we 
have to make sure that we do something that will actually work, 
which will actually improve the lives, the chances of children to 
be free from this kind of heinous activity. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that the very case of Mr. Bunn being in 
Saskatchewan, having committed crimes in Manitoba, expected 
to go back to Manitoba, actually proves the case for a national 
sex offender registry, Mr. Speaker. And even the member’s 
friends in Ontario have argued that a national sex offender 
registry would be preferable. 
 
But as the member says, if we don’t get action from the federal 
action, we will consider quick action here in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that each province 
show and demonstrate their willingness to do their part first so 
that, nationally, we can have a sex offender registry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government could take years to decide 
if a national sex offender registry is worth establishing. But 
other provinces have already decided how important it is and 
have implemented their programs. 
 
If we, as a province, don’t act on this issue, in essence we are 
telling people and, in a lot of cases, children that their lives are 
not worth enough to take this one ounce of prevention. Victims 
of crime and police services support the establishment of a sex 
offender registry. 
 
What is wrong with establishing a provincial program now, and 
if the federal government eventually starts a national program, 
our data and our registry can then become a part of it? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is it too much to ask this provincial 
government to take initiative for once and to set up a sex 
offender registry for the protection of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, just last month, officials 
were discussing the possibility of a national registry. Those 
discussions will come to ministers of Justice in the fall. That, I 
think, is a wise step to take, if we can persuade the federal 
government to act, then this will become a more much 
meaningful registry as people move across the province and we 
can keep track of everyone across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a matter of urgency, but we want to make 
sure that we get this right. And the member will know that, in 
fact, Ontario is having significant difficulty with its 
implementation. We watch the way in which they proceed. 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

 

There are significant difficulties within this legislation. We 
want to do the right thing. We want to do it as effectively as we 
possibly can. 
 
The member should also realize, Mr. Speaker, that we have 
many other provisions which assist us in ensuring that sex 
offenders do not prey on children in this province, across the 
country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Review of Workers’ Compensation Board 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Labour. Tomorrow is an official day of mourning for 
working people who have been injured or killed on the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also a day when we, as legislators, recommit 
ourselves to taking every possible step to ensure safe 
workplaces and fair treatment of injured workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, almost two years ago, the NDP hired James 
Dorsey to review the operations of the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. Mr. Dorsey submitted his report to the Minister of 
Labour more than seven months ago and yet the NDP is 
refusing to release it to the public or the injured workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what’s the holdup? What is the NDP trying to 
hide? Will the minister release the Dorsey report today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I’ve 
repeatedly stated, the Dorsey report was commissioned by this 
government. We received the Dorsey report. I have been now 
the minister responsible for the Department of Labour for some 
. . . about 10 weeks. In that time I’ve brought myself up to 
speed, read the Dorsey report, and a number of other issues that 
we have to deal with. 
 
I’m delighted to repeat for the — I don’t know how many times 
— we’re not trying to withhold or hide the Dorsey report. It is a 
very, very good report and it will become a public document 
sooner rather than later. I expect, Mr. Speaker, we’re not talking 
months. I’ve said I’m hoping it’s weeks. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, James Dorsey submitted his 
review of the WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) to the 
NDP government seven months ago but all we get from the 
minister are excuses about why he continues to sit on the report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the holdup? Well according to the minister 
himself he hasn’t gotten around to read the Dorsey report fully 
lately, because he’s been preoccupied with the NDP leadership 
contest and then two by-election campaigns. 
 
Obviously the Minister of Labour has decided to put the 
political interests of the NDP ahead of the interests of the 
injured workers. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Labour has been 
sitting on the Dorsey report for more than seven months. 
Instead of making empty statements about how he’s squeezing 

support for injured workers in-between NDP by-election 
campaigns, why doesn’t the minister actually do something 
about it? 
 
Will the minister table the Dorsey report on the Workers’ 
Compensation Board in the legislature today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the member opposite 
for his question around the Dorsey report and around Workers’ 
Compensation because workers’ compensation is a very serious 
matter. It’s a very important part of my portfolio and I know 
that our government takes it very seriously. That’s why we 
commissioned the Dorsey report in the first place. 
 
In the interim there have been improvements going on at the 
Workers’ Compensation Board and we look forward to 
continuing those improvements, not simply up to the Dorsey 
report but subsequent to the Dorsey report, and indeed as long 
as we’re in government we’ll always be looking for ways to 
improve the operation and the results of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the other 
day the SaskTel minister finally admitted that cabinet did 
approve SaskTel’s decision to get into the health data business 
through a company called IQ&A which went on to lose about 
$2 million without a single sale. 
 
He said that cabinet approved that decision, despite the fact that 
no provincial health department, including Saskatchewan 
Health, was willing to provide the health data IQ&A needed to 
do the business. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, this begs the question. Why didn’t the then 
minister of Health say something? Apparently the minister for 
SaskTel came to cabinet with a scheme to risk taxpayers’ 
money to sell health information. The Health minister knew his 
department didn’t want to sell health information. Why 
wouldn’t he say, oh by the way, we’re not going to sell health 
information? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Deputy Premier, who 
was the Health minister of the day. How did he let this get by 
cabinet? Why didn’t he tell SaskTel this data was not for sale 
before they lost $2 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as the 
member is aware, the reports around IQ&A, the annual reports, 
were tabled almost a year ago, Mr. Speaker, with all of the 
information largely around the investment. 
 
To answer the question specifically — and this is public 
information made available the other day as well — the 
investment that IQ&A made or was planning to make as far as I 
have been informed, Mr. Speaker, over 95 per cent of that 
investment was not reliant on information from Saskatchewan 
Health. 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That may be the case, 
but the point is if Saskatchewan Health wasn’t prepared to sell 
the information, chances are pretty good they couldn’t get it 
from any other jurisdiction either and it might send up a few red 
flags before they spent — wasted — $2 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other day in the House, in this Assembly, the 
current Minister of Health said proudly that Saskatchewan 
Health data is not for sale. Well maybe someone should have 
mentioned that three years ago before SaskTel went into the 
health data business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is minding the store over there? How on earth 
did this get by cabinet? How did it get by the Deputy Premier 
who was then the minister of Health? 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day the minister for CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) gets up and talks 
about due diligence. That would have been a good start to the 
due diligence process at that time. 
 
I’ll ask the Deputy Premier again, who was the then minister of 
Health: why didn’t he say something at the cabinet table and 
stop the wasting of 2 million tax dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve pointed out a 
number of times, Mr. Speaker, we will have Crown . . . our 
Crown corporations will make investments in Saskatchewan 
and outside of Saskatchewan. In those investments, Mr. 
Speaker, they will do their utmost to perform a complete and 
full due diligence. And obviously, Mr. Speaker, investments are 
never made with the intent of losing money. 
 
History will show, Mr. Speaker, that our Crown corporations 
and their subsidiaries will return profits to the people of 
Saskatchewan many more times than they will lose, Mr. 
Speaker. And I know it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And again, public information, Mr. Speaker, that there were 
four other telephone companies who also invested in this . . . 
who made an investment in IQ&A, Mr. Speaker — MTS 
(Manitoba Telephone System), MT&T (Maritime Telephone 
and Telegraph), MB (Manitoba) Tel, BC TEL, Mr. Speaker — 
four other companies who did due diligence as well, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So if the member is suggesting that SaskTel is the only 
company who made a mistake here, Mr. Speaker, he’s wrong. 
But, Mr. Speaker, we will make investments many more times 
that are profitable. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the difference of course is that the 
other partners in this got out when the gitting was good. This 
government stayed in and lost an additional million-or-so 
dollars of taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know what’s more troubling — the NDP’s 

gross negligence or their flippant attitude that we’ve seen over 
this loss of $2 million. Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that 
$2 million is equivalent to the taxes paid by 500 Saskatchewan 
families. Those are the kind of numbers that we’re talking about 
here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not long ago in this Assembly, the minister also 
indicated that he was prepared to bet his job on the fact that his 
government would lose more money in the future. That’s what 
he said in the Assembly. 
 
Well in this particular case, that government had the chance to 
stop the bleeding. The then minister of Health, the Deputy 
Premier had the chance to say no, the information’s not for sale. 
I ask again, why didn’t he say that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am not prepared to 
take advice from those members about when we should get in 
and out of investments, Mr. Speaker. They were the ones who 
advised us, Mr. Speaker, to sell Cameco shares and when they 
were down around what? Seventeen dollars a share? They were 
sold in excess of 60, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They were the ones who told us to get out of the Husky 
Upgrader, Mr. Speaker, on 7 cents on the dollar, Mr. Speaker 
— 7 cents on the dollar. Incredible advice from those members 
opposite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will note, Mr. Speaker, LCL (Leicester 
Communications Limited) Cable, they made — of SaskTel, a 
subsidiary — made over a hundred million dollars for the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Saturn/Austar made 37 
million, Mr. Speaker. There are many, many, many more 
investments that our Crown corporations have made for the 
people of Saskatchewan to diversify risks and to provide 
services in constituencies that they represent, Mr. Speaker. 
Services in constituencies that they represent — that’s why they 
make those investments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Conversion of Management Positions to In Scope 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Labour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks ago we learned that the 
government had arbitrarily moved over 600 management 
positions into SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General 
Employees’ Union) without even conducting a vote. The vast 
majority of these managers are opposed to being unionized but 
they were given no say in the matter. 
 
It was a flat out political payoff from the NDP to its union 
leader friends in SGEU. Now we learn the cost of this payoff — 
$2.3 million. $2.3 million taxpayers’ dollars to unionize 
hundreds of people who don’t want to be unionized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP wasting $2.3 million unionizing 
hundreds of workers against their will? 
 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It might be 
helpful to have a little bit of background on this issue. 
 
During the previous government an extraordinary number of 
people were moved out of scope, more than the percentage in 
any other government in Canada. And during subsequent 
rounds of collective bargaining, an agreement was made to do a 
scope review. 
 
That agreement and the scope review went before the Labours 
Relations Board. The Labour Relations Board . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would just like to be able to 
hear the questions fully and the answers fully. The minister will 
continue for 30 seconds. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — As I say, Mr. Speaker, this scope 
review was the result of a collectively bargained agreement. 
And what we have now is a situation where the Labour 
Relations Board has ruled on it. And certainly this is the way 
that scope is normally established in government positions. 
 
The Labour Relations Board feels it to be appropriate. And 
certainly employees that aren’t happy with it have access to 
appeal procedures. And I would just say to the member that 
everybody is doing everything, as they should. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, here’s an idea. How about letting 
them have a vote? Maybe you should ask these people if they 
actually want to join the union. It’s fair, it’s democratic, and 
you’ll probably save $2.3 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will you conduct a vote on 
whether or not these government managers want to join SGEU? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I have never heard such a complete 
lack of the most basic understanding of what it means to be part 
of a unionized workplace. Is the member suggesting that 
teachers who become part of the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation) should not be part of the STF union? Is he 
suggesting that health care workers that become part of a 
unionized health care workplace should not be in the union? 
 
What the member is suggesting, Mr. Speaker, is patent 
nonsense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Revenue Sharing 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. In a budget which provides 
double-digit increases for nearly everyone else, the Department 
of Municipal Affairs sticks out like a sore thumb. The NDP has 
never been able to get along with municipal leaders in this 
province, and the Department of Municipal Affairs again 
confirmed its position as the unloved child of this government. 
 

Zero increase for urban revenue sharing. Zero increase for rural 
revenue sharing. Zero increase for northern revenue sharing. 
Zero increase for assistance for transit for the disabled. Zero 
increase for urban parkways. Revenue sharing remains frozen at 
level one-half the NDP’s first budget 10 years ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Why were 
municipalities frozen out of this year’s budget? Was it to 
destroy the Liberal Party member’s credibility in his 
government by showing they are ignored? Or was it to show 
how little respect he has for municipal government in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member will 
know that there are budget deliberations that lots of people 
participate in. I want to remind once again the House the 
commitment that this government has had to the municipal 
sector and that member opposite should know very definitely. 
 
When the $10 million provincial funding into the provincial 
infrastructure program was announced, Mr. Speaker, that was as 
a result of consultation with those municipalities that it seems to 
me almost as if the member is actually attacking. And I don’t 
quite understand that. 
 
There have been consultations. And I want to refer to 
particularly consultations and a comment from the people 
seeking some relief in education tax specifically, and business 
tax. There were 2 per cent reductions in those business taxes, 
Mr. Speaker. There was an increase as a result of representation 
from three local governments who met with the Finance 
minister and reminded him of the need for property taxpayers in 
the upcoming budget for education tax relief, Mr. Speaker. And 
there was a great deal of . . . $1.1 billion — the biggest 
education budget ever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, if the hon. minister is suggesting 
I had some hand in this budget, I ask him to please not give me 
any of the credit. I think everyone knows, if I was Municipal 
Affairs minister, I would not end up as the only person around 
the table to get nothing. Even, even Culture and Youth . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, do I take it that the invitation to 
come back is off? 
 
Mr. Speaker, even Culture and Recreation, which was taken 
away from Municipal Affairs, got a big jump up. Municipal 
Affairs was left with nothing. This has destroyed the credibility 
of the officials and the ministers when they meet with groups 
like SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) 
and SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). 
 
Is this part of the Premier’s strategy to destroy the credibility of 
that department and that minister when dealing with the 
municipal leaders of this province who have no faith in this 
government? 
 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 
whether my response should contain sympathy or condolences 
to the member opposite. 
 
I’m going to go back to this news release that he would have 
been aware of — or should have been aware of — that the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities, SARM for 
the member opposite; the Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association, SSTA; and the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, SUMA, joined forces and I quote, 
“to meet with Cline.” Their concern? We need some relief on 
education taxes, $1.1 billion dollars. This is dated January 24, 
2001. 
 
Guess what happened in response to their plea? Look at the 
budget, the education tax relief that was contained in that 
budget — it was there. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know what else I need to do, 
maybe send some copies of this information over, that he 
should already be aware of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Roy Romanow used 
to like to tell the story about the southern governor who at his 
inauguration told of his plans: for those of you who work hard 
to get me elected, I promise you a big piece of the pie. For those 
of you who did not work for me but didn’t work against me, I 
promise you a small piece of the pie. For those of you who 
worked against me, I promise you good government. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the municipal leaders of this province got 
the Premier’s version of good government. The only problem is 
now municipal property taxes, among the highest in the country 
already, are rising everywhere in the province. 
 
What does the Premier have to say to property taxpayers in this 
province who just got a swift kick in the wallet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we have 
witnessed, we have witnessed in the House today the most 
desperate case of amnesia that I think I’ve ever, I’ve ever seen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Battleford says we have a little 
difficulty with municipal government. Well we may have had a 
spot of trouble a few months ago under a former minister but 
that is no longer the case, Mr. Speaker. And wonder if the then 
minister was going out quoting American politicians, little 
wonder we were having a spot of trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member was fully part of the budget 
deliberations and he knows it. Mr. Speaker, part of those budget 
deliberations. Budget deliberations, Mr. Speaker, was meeting 
with SARM, SUMA, and the municipal leaders who came in 
number and said to this government if you’ve got money in this 
budget, put it into education. Put it into education. Where did 
we put it, Mr. Speaker — into education. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 205 — The Sex Offender Registry Act 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I move first 
reading of Bill No. 205, The Sex Offender Registry Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
rise to ask leave of the Assembly to make a statement of 
importance to workers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Day of Mourning 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I thank you. And I thank all 
hon. members of the legislature for granting leave. 
 
As my colleagues, the member for Moose Jaw North and the 
member for Redberry Lake have reminded us, tomorrow is 
April 28, a day of mourning for workers who have been killed 
and injured on the job in Saskatchewan. 
 
April 28 is a day to mourn, but it’s also a time to act. We know 
that workplace accidents can be prevented, and a day of 
mourning provides us with an opportunity to reflect on the past 
year and to reaffirm our commitment to prevent these needless 
tragedies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 33 people died in Saskatchewan over the past 12 
months and thousands more have been injured in the workplace. 
Co-workers, employers, communities, and families of workers 
killed on the job all suffer. All pay a high price, but no one 
more so than the workers giving everything they have to a job. 
 
Our deepest sympathy goes to all those who have experienced a 
workplace tragedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all hon. members to rise and I will read into 
the record, the names of the 33 people who died in 
Saskatchewan workplaces in the past year, and I request a 
moment of silence after that. 
 
The Speaker: — Would you all please rise. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — William Watson, Cyril Marion, Eugene 
Chamberlain, Charles Freeman, Scott Fletcher, Les Robert, 
Brian Wanner, Stanley Knowles, Gordon Cherney, Blaine 
Drew, Kelly Conlon, Ian Lupasko, Larry Mathews, Leslie 
Travis, Harold Benroth, Greg Sander, Theodore VanLoosen, 
Kelly Vaudry, Eugene Osze, Gerald Crotenko, Andrew 
Shyngera, Regina Gyore, Barry Kew, Rodger Holtskog, 
Hughey Foster, Marvin Hewitt, Michael O’Hara, Morely 
Penney, Rodney Teale, Dale Frinsko, Donald Smith, Robert 
MacDonell, Donald Bowker. 
 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 771 

 

The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like leave to reply to the 
minister’s statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d just like to speak 
shortly again on, on the National Day of Mourning that is set 
aside to remember those workers killed or injured on the job. 
And as was mentioned, tomorrow, April 28 is the day set aside 
to remember those who are no longer with us. 
 
As was mentioned before by the members, a safe work 
environment is not just the responsibility of employers and 
employees, but everyone in society. And again, our sincerest 
condolences to those who have lost loved ones in the past year 
and best wishes to those workers who are recovering. 
 
Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to table 
responses to questions 100 through 111, Mr. Speaker. The 
members opposite are reaching for a new milestone of questions 
in a single year. 
 
The Speaker: — The responses to questions 100 to 111 are 
tabled. 
 
(11:00) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Chair: — Before we get underway, I would invite the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation, if she would please 
introduce her officials with us in the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To my left is 
Ron Styles, the deputy minister for the department. 
Immediately behind Mr. Styles is Carl Neggers, who is the 
assistant deputy minister in charge of policy and planning 
division. Directly behind me . . . Can you hear me? 
 
An Hon. Member: — No. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, we’ll start again. 
 
Thank you. To my left is Ron Styles, the deputy minister for 
our department. Behind Mr. Styles is Carl Neggers, who is an 
assistant deputy minister in charge of policy and planning 
division in the department. Behind me is Don Wincherauk, the 

assistant deputy minister in charge of corporate services; and to 
my right is Barry Martin, the assistant deputy minister of 
operations. 
 
The Chair: — Madam Minister, your microphone, it has come 
to my attention, is not working, so I’m wondering if you could 
maybe change places with Mr. Styles or with Mr. Martin. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And thank you to 
the minister and her officials from the Department of Highways 
and Transportation for coming to the estimates session this 
morning. We’re, I think we’re loaded with questions actually. 
We came fairly well prepared and we have quite a range of 
topics we want to cover today and I think that we will find this 
session quite informative. So I appreciate this opportunity. 
 
I want to begin by referring to the Throne Speech of the . . . 
earlier this session, handed down late March 2001. And as part 
of the Throne Speech there was a section, a paragraph, I guess, 
under rural Saskatchewan that caught my attention. 
 
Because as we all know as important as the highway 
infrastructure is in this province, there is a continuing concern 
about the rail infrastructure in this province and maybe a 
growing concern. I know that I hear about it frequently from my 
own constituents and I’m sure other MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) that are facing rail line abandonment and 
issues pertaining to rail transportation have had that matter 
raised many times with them as well. 
 
If I may I’d like to just read this paragraph from the Throne 
Speech that says: 
 

Saskatchewan’s rural landscape is changing dramatically 
due to rail line abandonment and elevator closures. We are 
working with communities and grass root organizations 
throughout the province on options to retain branch lines, 
which if successful, will help preserve rural economies and 
help minimize road impacts. 

 
For the record, I would ask the minister if she could detail for 
us what specific initiatives her department is undertaking right 
now in this particular area. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, I can report to the member 
that our government supports short-line developments through 
our short-line advisory unit that provides the following services 
to community groups, local governments, and existing short 
lines. We administer The Railway Act, including safety 
inspections and dispute resolution. We provide technical advice 
on operations and maintenance. We assist in negotiations, 
develop short lines, with submissions to the CTA (Canadian 
Transportation Agency) to determine that salvage value and to 
lodge complaints. There has been financial assistance for the 
purchase of track, feasibility studies, and legal advice. 
 
I can report to the member that there are currently seven short 
lines in our province that operate 1,255 kilometres of the 
provincial rail network, and that amounts to about 13 per cent. 
The short-line railway financial program was developed to 
provide interest-free loans to short lines for rail line purchases. 
And the program provides loans up to 16 per cent of the cost or 
the net salvage value of rail lines, and it has to be repaid within 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

a 15-year period. 
 
And one of the existing short lines has been funded under the 
program, and another two groups that are developing short-line 
operations are expected to apply in the coming year. 
 
Earlier this year, another 25 kilometres was added to the 
short-line network, and if you read rural newspapers — which I 
do everyday — groups are thanking the department for its 
assistance. The short-line advisory unit provided assistance to 
the Arborfield and Cudworth local governments and community 
groups like the Golden Prairie Short Line Rail Co-operative as 
they are working towards the development of short lines. 
 
As well our unit has provided assistance to the Arborfield and 
Cudworth lines during the CTA process, and we’ve just had a 
decision on that. The short-line advisory unit is also providing 
the Cudworth group with assistance as they petition the federal 
government to vary the CTA decision on rehabilitated assets 
and appeal the CTA decision on the reclamation bylaw. 
 
As well, our unit is also providing technical support to the 
following local governments and communities on the matters of 
other short lines: local governments on the Lewvan and 
Northgate subdivisions as they work with CN (Canadian 
National) to restore operations on their line; the RM (rural 
municipality) of Excel, in their case to uphold in the Amulet 
subdivision their reclamation bylaw; the village of Stenen as 
they petition the Governor General-in-Council to have the CTA 
level of service decision altered; and the Wood Mountain Road 
& Rail, which is the Wood Mountain subdivision. They also 
petitioned the Governor General-in-Council to overturn a CTA 
decision authorizing the discontinuance of the track. Our 
province has provided a letter of support. 
 
As well our province has made it very clear to the CTA that we 
support competition on track in the province of Saskatchewan 
and that we support the least-cost option for farmers as they try 
and save their rail lines. 
 
I can also report to the member that we had a very good 
meeting with Paul Tellier, who is presently the CEO (chief 
executive officer) of CN. And Mr. Tellier has announced a 
moratorium on further branch line abandonment in the province 
and he wants to work with the provincial government, as well 
as other stakeholders, to see how we might be able to have a 
more integrated approach to road and rail and grain handling in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman. Thank you, Madam Minister. I 
think that’s a fairly extensive and detailed response. 
 
It sounds to me, given the information you’ve provided, that the 
issue of short-line rails and abandonment issues are of even 
greater concern I think as time goes by. And I appreciate 
anything that the department can do to advance that cause. 
 
You mentioned something that is going to take me off track just 
a little bit. But you did mention that in your CTA submission 
you have supported the concept of competition. Would you 
elaborate on the level of competition that your department is 
referring? 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member, and I’m 
not sure if the member has received a copy of our first 
submission to the CTA that talked about competitive rail issues, 
and we submitted it to the CTA on October 20. 
 
As well, we made a further submission in April on the second 
phase of some of the difficulties around the weaknesses in the 
CTA that required balance . . . or adjustments to ensure that 
privately owned transportation loads and the demands of 
shippers and consumers were taken into consideration when the 
CTA review panel reports in June or July. 
 
What I can tell the member is that we support competition on 
our branch lines, but we want to make sure that we have viable 
railroad operations and grain-handling operations. 
 
One of the things that I learned in Winnipeg when I attended a, 
I guess it was a think tank that was put on around the whole 
issue of the CTA review panel and the many myriad of issues 
that they’re dealing with, is the need to ensure that we do have a 
viable rail industry not only in this country but when it comes to 
short lines. 
 
So we wanted to make sure that when we’re talking about 
competitive access, that we’re not putting our rail industries, 
whether they’re provincial industries or national industries, into 
a position where there are competitive issues that force a myriad 
of rail interests to not be viable in the long term. 
 
So we have to be very careful when we’re dealing with 
competitive access in order to ensure the long-term viability of 
the rail industry not only in this province but in this country. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you and to the minister. The issue of viability is 
something I want to talk about later, but if you had to describe 
your department’s leaning right now, would you say on the 
issue of running rights that you are leaning more toward open 
access, open running rights or commercially dictated joint 
running-right agreements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — At present, under the submission that 
we gave under the phase I submission to the CTA, we indicated 
very clearly that we supported joint running rights, that we 
supported reverse onus, and that we supported final offer 
arbitration. And that is an interim measure but we think we 
need to be very, very careful because we do not want to put any 
. . . the viability of operations at risk. 
 
And if you’re talking about, you know, open competition where 
they just go out and compete with each other, we need to 
understand whether in the long term whether or not various 
companies, short lines or other companies, can survive. So we 
have to be very, very careful. But we do support competition on 
our branch lines. But we want to make sure in the long term that 
there is viability of the rail industry; not only in this province 
but in this country. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, since you’ve 
raised the issue of viability a couple of times, maybe we better 
go to that particular part of our discussion today. 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

 

What are you suggesting, as a minister, as a department, in 
terms of determining viability? What kinds of criteria will be 
you seeking to assure yourselves of viability; and to what extent 
will applications be accepted or rejected when viability seems 
to be the deciding factor? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, for the information of the 
member, the province of Saskatchewan does not determine 
joint-running rights. That is determined by the federal 
government through the CTA. 
 
What I can say, in our submission under phase 1, we talked 
about three principles that we thought were important. We 
thought competition was important, co-operation was 
important, and commitment was important. 
 
What the member, I know, knows is that some of these branch 
lines are low-density branch lines. They have low volumes. 
 
What we want to make sure is the long-term viability of the 
branch line. And, if you have competition to such an extent that 
no one can survive, then those branch lines won’t survive into 
the long term. And so that’s why we want to be very careful 
how we position the province on this matter, because our long 
term goal is to ensure that those branch lines are viable in the 
long term in order to get the traffic off of our roads, on to some 
of those branch lines. 
 
And we know that in order for them to be viable in the long 
term, the short lines or who’s ever going down those tracks has 
to be able to be in a position where they can either return money 
to their shareholders which could be farmers, or return money 
to their shareholders which could be a private interest of some 
kind. 
 
So we just want to make sure that the people who are operating 
those branch lines are viable in the long term so those branch 
lines last into the long term and take the volumes off of our 
already stressed highway system. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, I think I can understand the need 
for careful analysis of viability when it comes to low-volume 
lines and competition. 
 
How stringent will the viability requirements be, however, for a 
new branch line operator to get approval? Are you going to 
demand certain financial standards before you would even grant 
a short-line operator, a new operator the opportunity to take 
over a branch line that is subject . . . or potentially subject to 
abandonment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay, what I can tell the member is 
that if CN or CP (Canadian Pacific) wants to sell a branch line 
to a short line, and if that short line is only operating within the 
province of Saskatchewan, it comes under provincial 
jurisdiction. If that short line wants to operate into Manitoba or 
into Alberta, then it would be covered by federal legislation. 
 
What I can tell you is that the Department of Highways and 
Transportation is involved, inside the province of 
Saskatchewan’s borders, with the whole acquisition issue 
between the CN and the short line, if that short line is only 

going to operate within Saskatchewan. The department . . . or 
the Highway Traffic Board, under our legislation, deals with 
accessibility and the marketing plan and the safety. The 
day-to-day operations of that short line within provincial 
borders is handled by the Department of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Do 
you have benchmarks though, for viability? I guess the reason 
I’m asking this question, frankly, is that I understand your 
department is in the process of rewriting the legislation that 
pertains to railways operating in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And somebody, at some point, has made me aware of the fact 
that they have some concerns about the draft legislation. I 
understand that provisions for coming into existence as a new 
short-line operator are quite onerous. And I’m wondering if the 
viability element of those requirements is what they’re finding 
most onerous about the proposed new legislation. 
 
So I’d like to know from you, if you can give me some 
specifics, what kind of benchmarks are you requiring of new 
applicants in terms of financial resources, in terms of funding, 
and those types of viability-related questions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can report to the member is that 
we have not yet determined whether or not the railway Act is 
going to go ahead in this session of the legislature. But we are 
consulting with various stakeholder groups on a number of 
drafts. There have been several — I think two or three drafts — 
that have been sent out to stakeholder groups. 
 
So I have not yet received a report from my department on 
those latest discussions. But I can tell the member is that when a 
proponent for a short line goes to the Highway Traffic Board, 
what they have to do is they have to submit a business plan 
which demonstrates viability, because we’re talking about 
lower volume branch lines. So they have to demonstrate that 
they are viable in terms of the volume that would be needed in 
order for them to make a positive go of their endeavour. 
 
But we don’t have benchmarks in particular. But the Highway 
Traffic Board certainly looks at the viability of a proposal in 
terms of the business plan that is being put forward by the 
proponent. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister, would the 
issue of viability just surround the give-and-take of cash flows, 
or will the viability questions also require a pretty serious 
inquiry into the financial resources that the company is bringing 
to the application? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Right. What I can tell the member is 
that various proponents might bring various financial resources 
to their operation. We do know that whether you have a lot of 
financial resources or little financial resources, if you don’t 
have the kinds of volumes that are required to make the short 
line viable in the long term, people — whether you’re a private 
operator or whether you’re a co-operative — you can’t sustain 
long periods of losses. 
 
So various proponents bring various resources, whether 
financial resources, human resources. But what we tend to look 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

at, or the Highway Traffic Board looks at, is what kind of 
volumes are required to make this operation viable — 
depending on the company or the co-op’s resources — in the 
short term, medium term, or long term. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, and to the minister. I’ll just ask 
this kind of in passing. But is viability the primary reason that 
you are looking at rewriting the legislation in this regard as it 
applies to short-line operations? 
 
And secondarily, I might ask as well, the issue of standards and 
fairly stringent standards in obtaining the operating rights on a 
short-line rail seem fairly high according to my sources. But 
they’re equally concerned with the requirements for going out 
of business if for some reason the line isn’t viable. 
 
So I guess what the saying or what the vernacular of that 
question might be is, it’s going to be tough to get into the 
business, but if you can’t make it, it’s going to be even tougher 
to get out of the business. 
 
Can you explain to me what your rules and regulations might 
be, what kind of things you’re envisioning for the termination 
of a short line if viability ultimately is non-existent? 
 
(11:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can put to the member is that 
The Railway Act, existing Railway Act to the province of 
Saskatchewan is, I believe, over 10 years old. 
 
There has been a significant amount of development in the short 
line industry in the last few years because of the changes to the 
Crow benefit which allowed the class 1 carriers to consolidate 
their operations. 
 
So we need to update the Act, not only in terms of making it 
more in line with some of the provisions in the federal 
legislation, but also in terms of occupational health and safety 
or citizen safety kinds of issues. Those are important. 
 
And as you know, the federal legislation has provisions for 
salvage and we are taking a look at that. What happens if a 
short line operator goes out of business? What are the 
implications for those communities that, in a sense, give up 
salvage value in order to accommodate short lines in the 
province? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman and again to the minister, I 
noticed in the Speech from the Throne that it says specifically 
that the government and the department is working with 
communities and grassroots organizations throughout the 
province. 
 
While I don’t object to that in any way, I also notice the glaring 
omission, frankly, of privately owned short-line operations. 
 
Are you working with short lines that are privately owned and 
operated and, if so, are they going to be on a playing field that 
is entirely level, no matter whether it’s a volunteer, a 
co-operative effort, or whether it’s going to be a private 
ownership scenario, whether it’s in province or from 
out-of-province? Can you assure us that the rules and 

regulations will be equitable for all? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can report to the member is that 
short lines are coming to the province or being started in the 
province because of the impacts that communities and 
grassroots people are feeling as a result of branch line 
abandonment, the need to try and minimize their transportation 
costs as much as possible. 
 
And I was looking at some interesting data the other day in 
terms of what’s happened to farmers in this province in terms of 
their costs. And transportation as a proportion of their cost of 
production has grown dramatically in the last several years. So 
farmers are looking at ways to minimize their transportation 
costs. And communities, obviously, are looking at ways to 
enhance their communities by keeping branch lines along their 
towns or villages. 
 
We have a number of groups in the province that are working 
with private short lines, the developing co-ops . . . There’s a 
whole myriad of possibilities and we don’t treat any particular 
proponent differently than another proponent. 
 
What we want to ensure, from a public policy perspective, is 
that we have a integrated road and rail transportation system in 
the province of Saskatchewan. And that we have a way to get 
our commodities — because we’re such a large trading 
province and exporting province — a way to get our 
commodities to market in a way that minimizes costs for 
shippers, whether they are farmers or other shippers; minimizes 
cost for taxpayers who are having to pay for a publicly funded 
road infrastructure; and puts our province in a position where 
we can take advantage of some of the global markets that are 
available to us if we have the necessary physical infrastructure, 
whether it’s road, rail, air, truck, water, with some of the 
economic development opportunities that communities and 
private interests are talking about in the province. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It is my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
House, Claire Belanger-Parker. Claire is the owner-director of 
CNT Tours here in Regina. And one of the things that Claire’s 
company does is they tour hospitality staff from various Regina 
businesses around the city in order that they will be able to 
better promote the city and its attractions. 
 
Today she has with her three staff from the Days Inn: Joan 
Jakobson, front desk agent; Jewel Mayer, front desk agent; and 
Shawna Hubenig, front desk agent. She also has with her three 
staff from the Travelodge South, Mr. Chair. They are Jennifer 
Whelan, front desk manager; Tammy Martens, reservations 
manager; Melanie Thompson, reservations manager. And, Mr. 
Chair, these are three of the — I’m referring here to Jennifer, 
Tammy and Melanie — three of the most dedicated, courteous 
professionals I have ever had the pleasure of meeting. 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

 

And I have to say that because the Travelodge South is where I 
stay, and I would like my stay there to continue being an 
enjoyable one, I would ask everyone to join with me in 
welcoming these hospitality industry professionals here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I certainly 
want to join with my colleague on the opposite side in 
welcoming these dedicated hospitality professionals to our 
Assembly today. 
 
There are two things I want to say in welcoming them here. 
First is that I think it goes to show the strength of small 
businesses that we have a business like this operating here. And 
second of all, I want to say to those people who work in the 
hotel sector, particularly that of Travelodge South in my riding, 
that you do indeed do a fantastic job down there. I can’t say 
about the Days Inn. I haven’t stayed there and it’s not in my 
riding but I’m sure they do every bit as good as the Travelodge 
South. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
(Subvote HI01) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Madam Minister, in 
view of the comments you made just prior to the introductions, 
in the interests of public policy and the needs to have an 
integrated transportation system, would the government at some 
point consider subsidizing — paying a subsidy of some sort — 
to maintain a short-line railway and its viability? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — . . . answer that question. I won’t get 
advice from the officials. One of the things that has struck me 
since becoming minister is the impacts of the branch-line 
abandonment and the huge increase in the amount of truck 
traffic that we’re now experiencing on Saskatchewan’s primary 
roads, secondary roads, and municipal roads, and thin 
membrane surface roads. 
 
My understanding is — and I think this is probably a low 
estimate — from the officials in our department that within 
three or four years we may see an increase of about $86 million 
per annum which will be necessary to repair our roads. 
Obviously we need to consider that as a way to minimize 
budget increases in the Department of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — I know that there has been considerable interest 
in the issue of subsidies expressed by some RMs, in 
correspondence with me. And I understand that the impact on 
our roads would make consideration of subsidies a more 
appealing route. 
 
But I am somewhat concerned, I guess too, about the way those 
subsidies might also distort the viability issue and the question 
of government involvement in what is basically a private sector 
initiative. So I don’t want to take a stand on that. I’m just 
interested in knowing what the department’s position on that 
particular issue is. 
 
Now we’ve talked several times about the submission of the 
department to the CTA. And I requested copies of the 
submission this last week and unfortunately, in my absence, I 
wasn’t able to get the whole thing read, but I do plan to go 
through it. I did pick out a few points in there. 
 
But, if you would, Madam Minister, for the record today, could 
you kind of discuss the difference between the submission of 
last October and the one just put in in April? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just want to go back to your comment 
that you made prior to asking me the question about you might 
have a concern about the province providing a grant or 
whatever to support short lines. 
 
What’s interesting about this whole issue of transportation — 
and this is something I’ve tried to get up to speed on in the last 
couple of months — when you look at the air industry, there is 
airlines obviously, there are airport authorities now, and there is 
very little in the way of public subsidization. They’ve been 
basically turned over to communities or non-profit 
organizations to run the airport authorities. 
 
When you look at shipping, the ports of Vancouver, Prince 
Rupert, and so on, these are now commercial operations, very 
little in the way of federal government subsidy. 
 
When you look at the rail industry, the physical infrastructure of 
the rail industry is basically owned by private companies — not 
only the locomotives, but also the track. 
 
When you look at the public highway system in the province of 
. . . or in this country, this is infrastructure that is paid for by the 
provinces and the territories, with a little help from the federal 
government but not a lot. And yet the mode that goes up and 
down those highways is the private trucking industry. 
 
My point is that there are some people who would argue that 
the province is subsidizing one mode of transportation over 
other modes. In the case of any province in this country we 
have a publicly funded infrastructure in terms of our provincial 
highways or our municipal roads. In the case of the air industry, 
there is very little or they are moving to get out of it. They will 
become commercial airport authorities. In the case of shipping, 
commercial port authorities, and in the case of railroads, they 
are owned privately by the rail industry. 
 
So there could be, and I’m not saying there should be because 
we’ve not made a public policy decision, but given the huge 
impacts that we’ve experienced in the province of 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan — and our province has experienced this impact 
greater than any other province — of rail line abandonment, 
we’ve seen I think a 900 per cent increase in the amount of 
volume that’s going down our provincial and municipal 
highway or road system. 
 
There may be, from just the ability to pay for this physical 
infrastructure, there may be a public policy argument to look at 
trying to put some of that volume back on the branch lines with 
some funds from the province. That determination has not been 
made. I’ve not discussed it with my colleagues but it’s just an 
observation I’ve thought about in the last couple of months 
when I tried to deal with this issue. 
 
Now I’ll get to the substance of your question. In the first 
submission that we made to the panel in October, the panel had 
particular terms of reference that they wanted us to address. In 
the second submission they had a different set of questions that 
they asked us. I can share that with you if you want, in the name 
of time. But there were a different set of issues that we 
addressed in the first submission from the issues that we 
addressed in the second submission. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
we’re bouncing around here a little bit because every time you 
say something, I think of something else I want to ask. 
 
The issue of subsidies, whatever we think of them, pro or con, 
in the public interest, is not necessarily what I want to discuss. 
 
But I guess what concerns me is the kind of a slippery slope 
argument. If viability is an issue and we opt for subsidies 
because it’s in the public interest to take the heavy loads off of 
the roads, if viability can’t be maintained, will the government 
be put in a position to take over, to consider taking over that 
short-line railway? Will the government be put in a position 
where it would have to entertain running railways as a Crown 
corporation, for instance? 
 
Those are the kinds of issues I think that the subsidy question 
kind of leads us into. And I think that there’d be some hesitancy 
on the part of myself and many of my constituents to see it 
develop into that kind of an issue. So I think there’s some 
reason for caution on the issue of subsidies, even though it may 
seem to be in the immediate public interest. 
 
Have you, as a department, changed your mind about some 
issues that you have dealt with in this latest submission to the 
CTA? I’m wondering if there is kind of a changing of heart on 
the issues that are before the department in terms of the 
presentation you have made to the CTA. 
 
Not as opposed from the fall submission in October, but I 
understand that you’ve been working on the submission for the 
spring’s hearings on an ongoing basis and that there has been 
some dialogue in your department, and some tension maybe or 
questions about how you need to go. And I’m just wondering if 
you can explain for us what that’s all about. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In answer to the member’s question, 
what I can say is that — and maybe I don’t understand the 

question properly — in the first submission we dealt with the 
issue of competition. In the second submission we dealt with a 
number of other issues that had to do with air, road, and ports. 
 
So we don’t think our submission has changed at all since our 
October submission. We simply, in the second submission, 
reiterated our policy around competition and dealt with the 
specifics of the questions that were asked by the CTA on other 
modes of transportation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
again to the minister, maybe I can clarify my question a little bit 
by being quite a bit more direct. What role do you see for the 
company Omni Trax in the department’s view of how short-line 
rails and competition ought to be developed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. There are two issues here. The 
submission that we gave in October and then again in March — 
or I believe it was April — for phase 1 and phase 2 of the CTA 
review panel, there are two different processes. There is a CTA 
review panel where they are looking at the whole issue of 
changes to the Canada Transportation Act, and there are a 
number of citizens that have been appointed by the federal 
minister to address issues, particularly in the grain handling 
industry. So there’s phase 1 and phase 2 submissions that have 
to do with the review panel. 
 
Omni Trax has applied for joint running rights under the 
existing CTA legislation and regulations. That is different than 
the review panel. And that is being addressed by the CTA itself, 
not the review panel. 
 
In terms of Omni Trax, what I can report to the member is that 
the Government of Saskatchewan has a position regarding 
competition in the rail industry. We haven’t changed our 
position. But we have not ever taken the position that we 
support a particular organization or a company in their 
application. What we do is we support our public policy 
position. 
 
So in terms of Omni Trax’s application, the province of 
Saskatchewan has indicated to the CTA what our public policy 
position is with regard to competition and also with the issue of 
merit or is this in the public interest. And we have indicated 
what our public policy is with regard to public interest matters. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, through the Chair, can I 
assume then that you will not take a stand on any similar type of 
application by any similar type of rail operation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’ve had the same position with 
Ferroequus, which is another private group that is applying for 
joint running rights in the northwest part of Saskatchewan going 
into Alberta to the port of . . . I think Port Rupert or Port George 
. . . no, Prince Rupert — sorry, Prince Rupert. So we took the 
same position. 
 
We do not support any particular group. We have a public 
policy position and we laid that out before the CTA. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — In your earlier comments, Madam Minister, 
you refer to the fact that we have seven short-line operations 
conducting business in the province at this point. What in your 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

 

view and what in the view of your department is the ultimate 
number of short lines we could see? And do you have a 
preference, do you have a number — a benchmark of some sort 
— that you’re working toward in that regard? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can report to the member is that 
we’re . . . we do not know how many short-line operations there 
will be in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
What I can also report is that we would expect that over time 
we’ll have a more integrated system because some of the branch 
lines, as I understand it, are more viable than other branch lines. 
So you may cross . . . companies may cross-subsidize those 
branch lines in order for them to have . . . you know, bring cars 
or other cars go down those tracks. 
 
So we think . . . In the short term, we don’t know how many we 
will have. In the long term, we think that there may be a more 
integrated approach to this issue in order to ensure we have a 
branch-line system feeding into the secondary or mainline 
system. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, Madam Minister. The short line 
that runs through the biggest part of my constituency is Great 
Western Rail. It’s a BC (British Columbia)-based company that 
came here and made private arrangements to buy trackage from 
CPR that CPR ostensibly was planning to abandon. 
 
They have overcome tremendous odds even in their short time 
of operation to become a very important element in the 
transportation provisions of the constituency of Cypress Hills 
and Wood River and maybe even into the Thunder Creek area. 
 
One of the things, though, that has stared them right smack in 
the face and caused them some concern is the difficulty of 
negotiating suitable arrangements with CPR (Canadian Pacific 
Railway), who are supposed to be their benefactors in some 
way, but have become very difficult to deal with on some 
issues. 
 
In situations like that, will your government or will your 
department go to bat for the short-line operators and throw the 
influence of the government behind the short lines, in trying to 
move the class 1 railways to a position that is going to enhance 
the viability opportunities of the short lines? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can report to the member is that 
we have been active in supporting various groups in their 
endeavours to work out arrangements with not only the CPR, 
but the CNR (Canadian National Railway) as well. 
 
So this is not something that’s foreign to us. We have, you 
know, advocated certain policy positions in order to support 
local community groups or municipalities that are trying to get 
these short lines into their communities. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, again to the minister. Have you 
been able to win the battle with the class 1 railways, making it 
clear to them that it’s in their public relations best interest to be 
as co-operative in sustaining these short lines as possible. I 
think that that’s the role that the government could play, and 
I’m wondering how effective you’ve been able to be in 
achieving that. 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, the big area is multi-car 
discounts, and we’ve not been able to convince CP or CN of the 
merits of that. So we’ve got some more work to do. But what I 
can report to the member is that I have had an opportunity to 
meet with both CN and CP, and we’re trying to establish the 
ability to have a rapport with each other, and I think that’s 
important in terms of moving issues along. We need to build 
some trust, and I’m attempting to do that as well, so that we 
have a clear understanding of each other’s policy positions. 
 
I have done more work with the CN than the CP, but I’ve asked 
them a number of questions. I’ve received some answers but 
I’ve gone back to them with some more questions. So it’s a 
matter of trying to develop a trusting relationship, both ways, 
between our department and the class 1 carriers in order that we 
can move some of these issues along to benefit local farmers 
and other shippers. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I know that the response from farmers in my 
constituency and others that I have talked to on this issue has 
been, frankly, they felt the government didn’t do enough to 
argue against the rail-line abandonment that’s transpired over 
the last decade or so. And I think that now they see some 
opportunities for these branch lines to be saved, in some cases 
rehabilitated. They don’t want to lose any opportunities that 
might exist. And they would, I think, be quite interested in 
seeing the government push that agenda as urgently and as 
significantly as possible. 
 
There are going to be as we mentioned earlier in terms of 
subsidies, there are going to be some reservations about going 
down that route. But I think that they would prefer to see no 
opportunity lost by the government in trying to see the class 1 
railways, CN and CP, to co-operate in whatever way possible 
on the short-line development that’s happening right now. 
 
I have a number of other questions on that issue, but I think 
we’ll leave that and move to a different area of the estimates 
today, if we may. 
 
I have taken the Highways and Transportation estimates, the 
summary from the budget, and would like to turn our attention 
to that particular area right now. And if it’s suitable and 
amenable to your department officials and yourself, Madam 
Minister, I’d like to kind of go through this in just a 
chronological order as it’s been developed in the budget. 
 
(12:00) 
 
I’d like to look at the area, first of all of the administration that 
is laid out here. I did some quick calculating last night and 
noticed that there is going to be an 8.5 per cent increase in 
salaries in the area of administration for the Department of 
Highways and Transportation. And I’d like to ask, Madam 
Minister, how much of this increase is related to wage 
adjustments for personnel already on the administrative staff? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The administrative subvote has 
increased by $211,000 which represents a 4.5 per cent increase. 
What I can tell you is that an additional assistant deputy 
minister position has been added to the department. As well, the 
rest of the costs reflect increases in salaries to administrative 
staff. 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister: can you tell us 
about the additional deputy minister’s position and who’s filling 
the role and what his responsibilities will be — his or her 
responsibilities? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The additional position is Don 
Wincherauk and he is in charge of corporate services. So he’s 
involved in a lot of administrative issues but inside the 
Department of Highways and Transportation. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Leave to introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m very 
pleased to introduce to you and through you, 10 very bright and 
promising grade 11 students from across Saskatchewan seated 
in the Speaker’s gallery, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The students will soon be headed to Victoria to represent 
Saskatchewan at the annual Interchange on Canadian Studies, 
or ICS, at Royal Roads University. This is the 30th ICS 
conference, bringing high school students from every province 
and territory together to hear about and discuss issues such as 
the economy, the environment, health, and human rights. 
 
Saskatchewan last hosted the ICS in 1997. Each participating 
student is twinned with a student from the host community and 
our Saskatchewan students in turn will host their counterparts 
for one week this summer. 
 
The theme for this year’s interchange is Canada’s youth . . . 
voice into action/La jeunesse canadienne . . . une voix active. 
And the conference will focus on today’s youth and their 
current and future role in the shaping of public policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a tremendous opportunity for these young 
people to learn about the formation of public policy, but as 
important, it is an important opportunity for them to meet other 
young people from every part of Canada. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’m sure all members of the House will want to 
join me in welcoming Tyler Dixon of Regina, Kate Gotell of 
Prince Albert, Jinell Jesse of Drinkwater, Anne-Marie Kidd of 
La Ronge, Lindsay Richels of Churchbridge, Kate Wilson of 
McCord, Kate Pashovitz of Sonningdale, Kyna Daley and 
Gregory Mullens of Saskatoon, and Nicole Stebbings of 
Lanigan. 
 
I also want to acknowledge the provincial coordinator for ICS 
(Interchange of Canadian Studies), Kim Engel of Regina, and 
chaperone Doug Panko of Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I ask all members to join with me in wishing 
them well and welcoming them into the Assembly today as 
well. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and to 
members. I’d like to join with the Minister of Education in 
welcoming the 10 students and their teachers and chaperones 
into the Assembly. I know that you’re going to represent our 
province well. I haven’t met any of you individually but I’m 
sure you’ll do a good job of telling everybody what a great 
place Saskatchewan is. Have a good time, learn lots, and I’m 
sure you’ll learn lots here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
(Subvote HI01) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I hope they learn as 
much as I’m learning this afternoon. 
 
Madam Minister, the modern age of telecommunications has 
made us dependent on replays, and I could have used a replay in 
some of the answer you gave just a little while ago because I 
missed some of it. 
 
I asked if there were administrative positions over and above 
the salary increases that are reflected in the increase indicated in 
this year’s estimates. You did tell me about one new deputy 
minister but you didn’t, to my knowledge, indicate if there were 
any other positions created that are reflected in that amount of 
money. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are no other positions that are 
reflected in this. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, out of the 89.8 full-time 
equivalents that have been indicated are coming to your 
department as part of the increased hiring opportunities 
available through the provincial budget this spring, can you tell 
me how many of those 89.8 people will be in the area of 
preservation and how many will be in the area of operation and 
how many in the area of construction, since none seem to be in 
the area of administration? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’m going to explain this to you the 
way we do it, if that’s okay, and if you have a problem with 
that, we can try and rejig it to meet your requirements. 
 
But what I can tell you is that there’s 74.5 full-time equivalents 
for front-line crews; 48.2 full-time equivalents for maintenance 
section and bridge sulphur crews. Out of those, 15 to 20 new 
permanent seasonal positions will be created. And the 
remaining full-time equivalents will be used to increase the 
utilization of existing staff so longer work time for maintenance 
work, and then increased summer hiring. 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

 

Okay. There are 28.2 full-time equivalents for engineering 
crews; 8 of those will be used to fund new positions and 20 will 
be used to create 70 additional summer student positions. 
 
As well, there is 3.5 full-time equivalents for sign crews and 
this one new crew encompassing 2 new positions will be added 
and the remaining full-time equivalents will be used for 
increased utilization of existing staff. 
 
You have to account for all . . . This sounds confusing, so I 
know you’re hearing it for the first time, because I was 
confused when I first heard it. But you have to account for 
extending people’s hours of work or time of work in terms of 
full-time equivalents. And that’s what the department has done. 
 
As well, we’re adding five new traffic officers for front-line 
enforcement on truck weights and vehicle safety. So this is an 
operational increase. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well I’m not entirely confused, Mr. Chairman, 
but there is some question. The budget indicates an increase of 
89.8 full-time equivalents and you’re telling me that there is 72. 
And so the difference between 72 and 89 — which is what, 17 
— is attributable to increased working hours for various 
individuals? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — One other thing that I neglected to tell 
you, sorry about that, there are full-time equivalents in the 
Revolving Fund as they’ve been increased to 18. But these 
aren’t . . . what it does is, is they’re not actually new full-time 
equivalents. What it does is it reflects that actual utilization of 
the fund and how we utilize people. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Out of the full-time equivalents that were 
discussed, you talked about 20 summer students. I’m assuming 
they are engineering grads — or engineering students rather, 
I’m sorry, not grads — but engineering students. Is that one of 
the prerequisites for the summer employment program? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — My understanding is most of these 
students are technologists or people who are studying 
technology in SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology) but there could be other university 
students or SIAST students as well that have . . . that are 
working in a particular field to give them some work 
experience. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — As part of your earlier answer, Madam 
Minister, you did talk about 28.2 full-time engineers. Are these 
people that will be on staff with the department here in Regina, 
are these design engineers, are they construction engineers? Can 
you tell me a little bit about that group of people please? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are eight full-time equivalents 
which will fund new . . . this will be new positions. And the 
rest, the other 20 are being used to create 70 additional summer 
student positions. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Summer student positions as labourers or as 
engineers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The students are in engineering 
programs and they work as surveyors or soil testers or these 

kinds of things. So they’re trying to get some work experience 
to enhance their credentials when they graduate from school. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chair, welcome to the chair. I hope we enlighten you today as 
well. 
 
The summer students then will not be filling potholes. It will be 
a work experience type of thing. They won’t be actually part of 
a work crew out of any given depot or any given regional 
office, they will be doing something more significant maybe as 
opposed to filling potholes. 
 
Do you have summer student positions for just ordinary 
labourers? Do you have a position of that sort available for a 
high school student who’s looking for work for the summer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I said to the member, these are new 
positions, but we have existing summer positions for students. 
We’re not exactly sure how many, but we believe 40 to 50. And 
they’re involved with maintenance crews. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, to the minister. Are any 
of these summer employment opportunities for students able to 
be financed through the summer student employment program 
that the government has talked about? Will that be used to 
offset some of the costs or will this come . . . the costs for this 
hiring program come entirely out of the department’s budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Our 70, as I understand it, are funded 
independently from that program. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, as was indicated many times 
during debate on the budget, and even during question period, 
the government made a fair amount of . . . took a fair amount of 
pain to say that of the 570 or 80 new people that were going to 
be hired, many of them would be going to rural communities. 
 
And in view of the fact that you have an apportionment 
somewhere in the range of 70, can you tell me how many of 
those people are going to go to rural communities? And if so, 
can you tell me where they’re going? Because that is an 
important question for employment opportunities to the people 
of the rural areas. 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re still in the process of hiring. So 
I’m going to give you a sense of where we think people are 
going: 2.3 to Prince Albert, 1.5 to Meath Park, 1.5 to Meadow 
Lake, 1.5 to Puskwakaw, 1.5 to Meadow Lake, 1.5 to Green 
Lake, 1.5 to Goodsoil, 1.5 to St. Walburg, 1.5 to Buffalo 
Narrows, 1.5 to Southend, 1.5 to Watrous, 1.5 to Kelvington, 
1.5 to Outlook, 1.5 to Eston. 
 
It’s all 1.5: Kyle, Kindersley, Moosomin, Grenfell, Estevan, 
Bengough, Lumsden, Qu’Appelle, Southey, Central Butte, 
Wood Mountain, Gull Lake, Cadillac, Consul, Shaunavon. 
 
Is that good enough for the member? It’s all over rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — The member from Melfort is disappointed, I’m 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

sure, that he’s not going to get another highway worker. 
 
Madam Minister, when you’re hiring people for these types of 
positions, whether they’re permanent or not, are there 
applications that require specific educational criteria or work 
experience criteria, or are these individuals hired on a 
first-come, first-served basis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Okay. There are two kinds of positions 
in Highways. There’s the labour service positions and those 
people are hired locally by the area managers. And then there’s 
Public Service Commission positions and they’re hired through 
the Public Service Commission. 
 
There are various requirements for various jobs; and it may be a 
grade 12, it may be a two-year engineering diploma, it may be 
an engineering degree. It may be a heavy-duty mechanic 
credential, just depends. Some don’t require any particular 
education and training, others do. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, and to the minister: 
would you say that the majority of those positions then, 
basically, will be a PSAC (Public Service Alliance of Canada) 
types of positions with those qualifications or will they be kind 
of ad hoc types of hirings? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I understand it from the ADM 
(assistant deputy minister) of operations, most of them will be 
labour service. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, let’s move to the 
accommodation and central services section of the budget if we 
may, (HI02). 
 
I notice that having done the simple arithmetic there’s a 3 per 
cent increase indicated there for supplies. Is that 3 per cent 
representative of the cost of inflation only or have you built 
some other costs into that increase? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — For supplies, it’s inflation only. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, the other item noted in the 
accommodation and central services section is capital. And I see 
that you have budgeted $1 million of increased spending under 
the capital section. Can you indicate for us what the capital 
projects are that are included in this $1 million. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Morse equipment storage building, 
the Lloydminster equipment storage building, the Milestone 
equipment storage building, the Moosomin equipment storage 
building, and the Regina area weigh scales. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Are these buildings leased or are they being 
purchased? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The buildings are owned by the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, having mentioned the 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation, I understand 
that they are also responsible for equipment, actual equipment 
that is used by the department, whether it’s bought or leased. 
I’m talking specifically about road graders and heavy trucks 

that are used for material transport and snow removal and those 
kinds of things. 
 
Where in your budget do you account for the payments to Sask. 
Property Management for that equipment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We only tender through Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation. So we don’t give them a 
payment. The equipment is owned by the Department of 
Highways and Transportation. We tender requests for 
equipment or leases but we don’t give them money. The money 
comes out of our departmental budget. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — In that case, Madam Minister, could you tell 
me where it comes . . . or where it’s indicated in your budget for 
equipment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It is noted in the Revolving Fund and 
for this year we are estimating $2.2 million. And for the 
information of the member, the Revolving Fund has separate 
statements and it is tabled with the legislature. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, can you detail for us today 
the types of equipment the department is in the process of 
procuring and whether or not the fleet is being expanded? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t have that information here at 
this moment. But it’s not being expanded; equipment is being 
replaced. And we will get that for you. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I’d like to move our 
questioning on to the third portion of the Highways and 
Transportation budget — moving to the preservation of the 
transportation system, (HI04). 
 
According to the quick arithmetic that I did again, the surface 
preservation section sees a 14 per cent increase in spending this 
year; that amounts to just short of $14 million. How much of 
that will go to the 800 kilometres of TMS (thin membrane 
surface) repair that has been promised in this year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The 800 kilometres that you’re 
referring to is not in this particular subvote. This is the 800 
kilometres that we’re going to upgrade over the next three 
years. 
 
But I can tell you what’s in this subvote if you’d like me to . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Okay. 
 
The preservation subvote, this is an increase almost entirely 
related to delivery of on-road programs. We plan to invest about 
$13.9 million in this surface preservation program to improve 
the condition of paved and TMS highways. 
 
There’s $2 million increase to the strategic rural roads 
partnership program, and that’s where we’re looking at 
alternative truck routes, if communities are worried about their 
thin membrane surfaces and the viability of those thin 
membrane surfaces in the long term. 
 
So I think there’s some money, I think, for the area 
transportation planning councils, those kinds of things. And I 
think that’s what I can tell you. 



April 27, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Can you give us an accurate estimate as to 
what the department believes the cost will be to repair one 
kilometre of TMS road? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Depends on the condition of the TMS 
kilometre. It can be as small as $1,200 a kilometre to as high as 
5 or $6,000 a kilometre to maintain it. 
 
If you’re asking me about construction, there’s a different 
answer to that question. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, may I have that answer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well depends on what we’re talking 
about. If we’re talking about rebuilding the road to a structural 
pavement, depending on soil conditions, water tables, you name 
it, availability of granular materials, and so on, it could vary 
from $90,000 a kilometre to 150, $160,000 a kilometre. 
 
I know that’s one of the things that’s confusing for the public, 
because I’ve met with many citizens in the province who don’t 
understand why we can’t do a particular piece of road for this 
amount of money. 
 
But it depends upon, I’ll just use the word from layperson’s 
point of view, the science of what’s happening in that particular 
kilometre of road that determines what it may or may not cost. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, you said that the 800 
kilometres of repair that were discussed in the Throne Speech 
or maybe the budget per se are not included in these figures at 
all. Can you tell me when you’re going to account for those 
repairs and when they will appear in the financial statements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The amount of money that we’re 
talking about to upgrade 800 kilometres of TMS over the next 3 
years is in subvote under construction and transportation 
system, (H103). 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chairman, again to the minister. Continuing with the questions 
on the preservation of the transportation system, it specifies a 
certain amount of money for regional services. Can you 
describe for me and tell us what regional services are? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Regional services are the regional 
offices that are responsible for the area transportation planning 
committees. The regions are now going to be responsible for the 
liaison and contact with the area transportation planning 
committees because they’re more in touch with what’s 
happening in transportation in rural Saskatchewan. So we’ve 
decentralized this out to rural communities. So that’s what I can 
tell you about the regional services sub . . . or program. 
 
The regional services provide planning, engineering, and 
management of preservation programs within the regions. As 
well, they look after the area transportation planning 
committees in the area. So they have two purposes: they deal 
with transportation policy, in a sense, in terms of those area 
transportation planning committees; and they deal with the 
planning, management, and engineering of preservation in those 
areas of the province. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, the transportation planning 
committees have been in place for a number of years now. I 
think you would agree that they’ve had greater or lesser success 
depending on the seriousness with which the issues are treated 
by the local people and the intensity of the problems maybe. 
 
But the cost of those transportation planning committees is not 
detailed here. Can you tell me what that cost is and whether the 
department feels that they’re getting good value for the money 
they spend on those, on those committees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — $250,000 is what we budgeted for the 
area transportation planning committees. 
 
I agree with you that there have been some ATPCs (area 
transportation planning committee) that have been highly 
successful; others need some more capacity building. And I 
think with the decentralization of this out to the regions with the 
area managers, I think we might have a better chance of getting 
some of the area transportation planning committees more 
involved because they’re very familiar with those area 
managers. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, will the department put some 
onus on these committees to perform to a greater standard? Are 
you going to use a carrot to entice them to take these issues 
more seriously? And if they do, if they do take their 
responsibilities seriously, will the department act quite 
specifically on the recommendations that they make? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well I think . . . I don’t believe in the, 
you know, taking a hammer to people who are just coming to a 
process or have just become involved in a process. There are 
various capacities of communities to respond to particular 
issues and we know that there are some areas of the province 
where we need to do a lot more work in terms of developing the 
capacity of the area transportation planning committee. But we 
think with the area managers and the people in the regions 
working with the committees, we may have a better chance of 
more community involvement in transportation planning. 
 
The second issue that you raise is about whether or not we’ll 
listen to what the area planning committees have to say. I think 
that they have offered very sage words and good advice in the 
past, and we will do our level best to respond. 
 
Part of the problem that we will have in terms of responding is 
how do we balance what various regions of the province are 
saying about transportation with a budget that is fixed. So, you 
know, we’ll try and respond as best we can but if we don’t have 
all of the money that’s required to respond then that makes it 
very difficult. It’s not that we’re not listening, but we have only 
so much capacity ourselves. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, through the Chair, I notice 
that the budget for the regional services is increased by about a 
quarter million dollars. What is that money going to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That’s the ATPC. We transferred it out 
of head office to the regions, so you have to account for it. 
 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 27, 2001 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I see the clock has proceeded 
well past the noon hour and I have more questions to go, but I 
think we’ll forego the questioning at this time and I’d like to 
thank the minister for the answers. I think that she was fairly 
candid today. We haven’t got to the tough questions yet though 
and we’ll anticipate doing that at a later date. 
 
And thank you to the department officials as well for coming. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — This House stands adjourned until Monday, 
1:30 p.m. A good weekend to all. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:36. 
 
 
 


