















































Hansard: June 22, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2061 
 June 22, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again present a 
petition today from people in my constituency who are 
concerned about the Fyke report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Kelvington health 
centre be maintained at its current level offering 24-hour 
acute care, emergency and physician services and that 
laboratory, physiotherapy, public health, home care, and 
long-term care services be readily available to the users 
from Kelvington and district. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the people who have signed this petition are from 
Kelvington and Lintlaw. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — . . . honour. To present petitions this morning 
concerning the restoration of old Government House at 
Battleford. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to designate the restoration of Government 
House in the Battlefords as a centenary project and provide 
necessary funds to complete the project prior to 2005 
centennial of the province. 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
morning I rise to present a petition signed by individuals from 
my constituency concerned with the condition of Highway 339. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Belle Plaine and Avonlea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
petitioners concerned that we do not have an adequate hospital 
in the city of Swift Current and the southwest region. The 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 

Mr. Speaker, petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current, from the communities of Webb, as well as Vanguard. 
 
I so present. 

Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned with the lack of an in-patient treatment centre in the 
city of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre in the city of 
Weyburn and provide funding for the same. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about cellular 
telephone coverage in their constituency. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Rabbit Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to do with the lack of funding to non-profit 
personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Esterhazy, Bangor, and Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here, 
citizens opposed to the possible reduction of services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by good citizens from Davidson, Regina, Kerrobert, and 
Craik. 
 
I so present. 
 



2062 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly to present the petition on behalf of the citizens 
of Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency in regards to the health 
care services. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petitioner, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Mildred, Spiritwood, and Shell Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks that are concerned about the high energy costs. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenue to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Unity, North 
Battleford, Kerrobert, Langham, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today with a petition from concerned citizens with 
reference to the high cost of energy and electricity. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Coronach. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
amend The Labour Standards Act to recognize the needs of 
greenhouse proprietors and employees. 

 
And seven other petitions that are addendums to previously 
tabled petitions. 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT AND 
SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Thomson, Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations, presents the 
committee’s second report of the twenty-fourth legislature 
which is hereby tabled. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m presenting 
today the second report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations. The report will be circulated shortly to members. 
It reports simply that we have concluded our review of the CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan), SaskTel, 
SaskEnergy, and Sask Water annual reports for the years ’98, 
’99, and 2000. 
 
The report also contains advice that we’ll be seeking additional 
information from the minister responsible for Sask Water and 
that we are dealing currently . . . we have a recommendation to 
deal with an overlap of responsibilities between the Public 
Accounts Committee and the Crown Corporations Committee 
that has been dealt with in The Provincial Auditor Act that this 
Assembly has approved but unfortunately will not take effect 
for the year 2001 at this point. 
 
At this point I will move: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Crown Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
That is seconded by the member for Swift Current. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would request leave of the 
Assembly to move a motion arising from the second report of 
the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. The motion 
that I seek leave to introduce, reads simply: 
 

That those matters contained in the 2001 Spring Report of 
the Provincial Auditor pertaining to CIC Crown 
Corporations be withdrawn from the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts and referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown Corporations. 

 
If I have leave, I will move the motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Referral of matters pertaining to CIC Crown Corporations 
to Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member for Canora-Pelly who is the Chair of the Public 
Accounts Committee: 
 

That those matters contained in the 2001 Spring Report of 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2063 

 

the Provincial Auditor pertaining to CIC Crown 
Corporations be withdrawn from the Standing Committee 
on Public Accounts and referred to the Standing Committee 
on Crown Corporations. 
 

Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker. For Employment Equity 
Week, I have the following questions for the minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission. I give notice 
that I shall on day 68 ask the government the following 
questions: 
 

(1) In 2001 how many men are employed in the 
Saskatchewan public service; (2) how many women are 
employed in Saskatchewan public service; how many 
Aboriginal men and women are employed in the 
Saskatchewan public service; how many physically 
handicapped persons are employed in the public service; 
what is the number and percentage of women in 
out-of-scope management positions; what is the number 
percentage of Aboriginal men and women in out-of-scope 
positions; what is the number of physically handicapped 
persons in out-of-scope positions? 
 

I have parallel questions for the Crown corporations and also by 
way of comparison for the year 1992. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you 
and through you to members of the Assembly, two people 
sitting in your gallery that work in our caucus office, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And as this session is drawing maybe to an end, I would like to 
introduce Jannet Shanks, who is the member’s secretary; and 
Sarah Stills, who is a sessional researcher in our caucus office. 
These two women do exceptional work . . . Oh and also Gail 
Fehr, who works in the caucus office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to thank these three members . . . 
or these three people, publicly, that they do an excellent job for 
us and we appreciate it very much. So please welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, it’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you two people who are very important in my life. 
Seated in the Speaker’s gallery, visiting us here today in the 
Legislative Assembly is my wife, Olesia, who’s enjoying her 
recent retirement and who is also celebrating her birthday today. 
 
And with her is our grandson, Sam Wilkinson. This is Sam’s 
first visit to the legislature. Sam is from Saskatoon; he’s five 
and a half years old; he’s got three more days left in 
kindergarten and then he’ll be graduating into grade 1. And he’s 
come here just to see where his dido works. So I’d ask all 
members to welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Recognition of Medical School Graduate 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
was with great pleasure that I rise today in the Assembly to 
congratulate a constituent of mine who recently made history. 
Jack Janvier of La Loche is the first student to ever graduate 
from medical school. 
 
Jack attended K to 12 in northern Saskatchewan, graduated 
from the Dene high school in La Loche in 1993. He attended 
the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) where he took a 
four-year undergraduate degree in microbiology. He attended 
medical school in Saskatoon for four long years. 
 
(10:15) 
 
He specializes in internal medicine. And Jack is now practising 
in Saskatoon but would like to come north to do a few clinics. 
Jack would like to practise in the North but because of the area 
that he specializes in, he is limited to the larger centres. 
 
As far as Jack knows, he is the first person in the northwest side 
to become a doctor. Jack is a fluent Dene speaker and is now 
beginning his medical residency in Saskatoon. He encourages 
all the other students in northern Saskatchewan to pursue 
careers in health sciences. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with great pleasure that I congratulate Jack 
and his family, his parents, Jack and Shirley. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Outlook Team to Compete in Airplane Pull 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This summer a team 
of men and women from the Outlook area will be competing in 
a most unusual competition this summer. This competition will 
be an unusual demonstration of both strength and teamwork. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a team of 20 men and women will be attempting 
to pull a Boeing 727 airplane a distance of 25 feet. This unusual 
competition will take place on August 18 and 19 at the 
Saskatchewan Remembers Air Show at Sask Place in 
Saskatoon. 
 
The captain of the Outlook team, Mr. Vern Gessner, has been 
quoted as saying, “this is quite a challenge.” And yes, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m quite sure it’s going to be. It’s not every day that 
you can tell people that you helped pull a 727 down a runway. 
 
Each team will be allowed two pulls with the best time being 
posted. Teams with the lowest scores in each of the two days 
will receive several prizes, including use of a VIP (very 
important person) tent on the flight line during that day’s air 
show. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all the money that will raised through this event 
will be directed to the Law Enforcement Torch Run and 
eventually into Special Olympics. 
 
I ask the members of the Assembly to join me in wishing Mr. 



2064 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

Gessner and his team from Outlook the best luck in this 
upcoming event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Family Service Regina’s 70th Anniversary 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In 
Saskatchewan it is well known there are many people and 
agencies that do much work to help support and educate 
individuals and families in Saskatchewan. One such agency is 
Family Service Regina, an organization that has been helping 
this city’s residents for more than 70 years. 
 
Wednesday of this week I had the pleasure of attending, along 
with the Minister of Health and the Minister of SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), a 
Regina Family Service luncheon, their annual general meeting 
celebrating 70 years of contributing to the fabric of our 
community. 
 
Family Service Regina is a non-profit charitable organization 
that provides services for individuals and families. Family 
Service Regina’s vision statement attests to the important work 
that this agency does. Their vision statement is, and I quote: 
 

Family Service Regina is a responsive and caring agency 
which uses community resources to meet family and 
individual needs. 

 
There are many areas in our society in which people need extra 
help and extra education. Family Service Regina provides 
resourceful workshops and programs that benefit those who 
need information and support, like teen parents or victims of 
domestic violence. Other services and programs range from 
anger management workshops to marriage preparation courses. 
 
The history of this organization has been captured in a book, 
Let the Family Flourish, from the years 1913 to 1932 by Jim 
Pitsula. An updated sequel is on the way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing I’d like to thank all those involved and 
dedicated to making Family Service Regina so successful. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Nomination Meeting 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to highlight 
to the Assembly that on Wednesday last the Saskatchewan 
Party had a successful nomination meeting in the Saskatoon 
Idylwyld constituency. The contested nomination attracted two 
candidates, Shelly Hengen and Bob Roy, with Shelly Hengen 
being the winning candidate. 
 
Both of these very, very excellent and competent people 
presented ideas focusing primarily on the urgent urban and 
provincial issues, and in particular, Mr. Speaker, citing the 
current inadequate attention to the lack of growth in economic 
development, and especially compared to other Canadian 
jurisdictions. 
 
The Statistics Canada 21,000 job-loss figures received the most 

attention, as this significantly impacts on the confidence in both 
rural and the urban regions of our province. 
 
So again, Mr. Speaker, congratulations to Shelly Hengen for her 
winning the nomination in the Saskatoon Idylwyld 
constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Students Promote Alternative Energy Use 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. As we 
speak, outside the legislature an eco-bus has arrived and it’s 
touring Canada from west to east. And I understand this was the 
brainchild of a young math student, who masterminded the bus 
to promote awareness of alternative energy. 
 
Now the bus runs on recycled French fry oil — the kind that 
your French fries are cooked in, Mr. Speaker — and it’s got a 
tank to strain out the larger bits from the oil, and as well a small 
converter in the diesel engine to heat up the oil so that it can 
burn better. And at an event in the park last night, they also 
were educating people on ways to prevent damage to the ozone 
layer by carbon emissions in the atmosphere. 
 
So I just want to congratulate these young people, Mr. Speaker, 
for their initiative in promoting alternative energy use, for 
giving up their time to go across Canada and raise awareness, 
and to say that innovation is alive and well and with the next 
generation the earth is in good hands. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Claybank Brick Plant Annual Open House 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to invite you and all members of this Hon. Assembly to the 
annual open house of the Claybank Brick Plant to be held this 
Sunday, June 24. 
 
The plant is an excellent example of 19th century industrial 
technology still operating, at least this one day of the year. And 
I’d like to read from a letter of Helen Holizki, president of the 
Claybank Brick Plant Historical Society, wherein she states: 
 

We are pleased that the Government of Saskatchewan, 
through the Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation, and also 
previously through the New Careers Corporation, is helping 
to develop the former Claybank Brick Plant into a 
nationally recognized heritage attraction. This combined 
industrial complex and natural area (the site includes a 
portion of the Dirt Hills) has the potential to become one of 
southern Saskatchewan’s premier heritage destination 
points. A decision to convert Highway 339 back to gravel 
or to leave it in the horrendous condition it now is in would 
undoubtedly have an adverse impact on visitation to the site 
and on the economic development in this area. If left to 
deteriorate further, the condition of Highway #339 will 
jeopardize the good work that your government has 
accomplished to date at the Claybank Brick Plant National 
Historic Site. Also, a deteriorating highway will work 
against your much-needed Rural Revitalization program. 

 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2065 

 

So once again, Mr. Speaker, I extend the invitation to you and 
all members of this Assembly to attend this important and 
interesting event. But I urge you to drive carefully on the way 
there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wind Power 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
government’s commitment to buy wind power for its facilities 
will allow SaskPower to harness the wind to generate clean, 
renewable electricity. The opportunity to support wind power is 
an important step forward, Mr. Speaker. It will provide the 
people of Saskatchewan with an alternative energy source now 
and into the future. 
 
Suncor Energy and Enbridge Inc have joined forces to develop 
the SunBridge Power Project, Saskatchewan’s first large-scale 
wind power project, at Gull Lake. Over the next 10 years, $12.4 
million worth of green power produced by SunBridge will be 
bought by SaskPower and sold to the federal government for 
use in federal buildings in Saskatchewan. 
 
In a second wind project, the provincial government has 
committed to a 10-year, $5 million deal to purchase wind power 
from SaskPower. This 5.3-megawatt project will be completed 
in August 2002 and will supply power to government buildings 
and SaskPower’s head office. Extra power will be available to 
high volume users and residential business customers who want 
to supplement their normal electrical needs with green power. 
 
Mr. Speaker, together these two wind power projects represent 
the third largest wind power development in Canada. Mr. 
Speaker, our commitment to renewable resources will have a 
long-term benefit to Saskatchewan people. It will help reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions and improve our environment as we 
work to meet the challenges of the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame Inductee 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to congratulate a constituent, Jake Hort of 
Endeavour, who will be inducted into the Saskatchewan 
Baseball Hall of Fame in August. 
 
Mr. Hort began playing minor ball in his hometown of 
Endeavour. In 1957, he started working for SaskPower and 
played with senior teams wherever he lived. In 1977, he pitched 
four games in the provincial tournament for the Assiniboia Aces 
Twiliters, winning three. He had a .714 batting average for the 
tournament. 
 
When Mr. Hort retired in 1990, he moved to Endeavour where 
he continued to organize and coach minor ball. Mr. Hort wasn’t 
just a player and a coach. He was also a builder, building 
diamonds in Avonlea, Assiniboia, Endeavour and looking after 
the maintenance of these diamonds. 
 

As well as being an avid baseball player and coach, Mr. Hort 
has been active in the Lions Club, Elks Club, recreation board, 
mayor of Endeavour, president of the Endeavour and district 
economic development loan program, board member of the 
Preeceville hospital trust fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the Assembly to join me in congratulating 
Mr. Hort on his induction into the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall 
of Fame and for his commitment to baseball and to his 
community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Educating Youth about Tobacco Use 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the past few months I served on 
the all-party Committee on Tobacco Control. That’s why I’m 
extremely disappointed that the government did not go far 
enough in implementing the committee’s recommendations, 
especially in the area of anti-tobacco education for children. 
 
The committee’s final report contained several 
recommendations on educating young people on the harmful 
effects of smoking. These recommendations are completely 
ignored in the legislation currently before this House. 
 
To the Minister of Health: why did the NDP government 
completely ignore the education recommendations contained in 
the tobacco committee’s report? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, if the member had listened 
to the press conference that we had where we set out our plan 
for dealing with tobacco, she would have recognized that 
exactly what’s she’s talking about is part of our plan. 
 
The legislation is one piece, but this is only a piece of a broad 
plan, which includes working in the schools with Sask 
Education, working throughout the community and the health 
districts around education. 
 
But this legislation is a piece of a broader plan and we are going 
to be working with all of the appropriate people to make sure 
we have a broad education plan in the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The NDP have been in power for 10 years in 
this province and there is not one component that is mandatory 
for educating young people in our schools. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every study ever done on smoking shows it’s a lot 
easier to prevent young people from starting to smoke than it is 
to get them to quit once they’ve already started. The legislation 
currently before the House deals exclusively with stopping the 
sale of cigarettes to minors. While that’s important, if minors 
are trying to buy cigarettes, we may have already lost the battle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s why the Tobacco Committee recommended 
making anti-tobacco education mandatory in schools, starting in 



2066 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

kindergarten. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Why is this important 
recommendation being ignored by the NDP? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as my hon. colleague, 
the Minister of Health has outlined, there are significant 
programs that are parallel to the legislation in terms of 
education with regard to preventing the start of smoking. 
 
We in the education system strongly believe that curriculum 
development is a joint responsibility of the stakeholders within 
our education system, and we are currently engaged in 
consultations to develop those programs in our curriculum to 
prevent young people from smoking, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the committee’s goal was to 
educate young people about the dangers of tobacco use and 
denormalize smoking among young people. The committee 
recommended penalties for minors caught buying or possessing 
cigarettes. Again, the NDP ignored this recommendation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee’s recommendation struck an 
unbalanced approach between the education system, retailers, 
and young people themselves. Each has an important role to 
play in this process. However . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Each has an important role to play in this 
process, Mr. Speaker. However, the NDP legislation puts all the 
onus on the retailers and completely ignores the 
recommendations about education and penalty for possession of 
tobacco. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Why is the NDP ignoring the 
recommendations of the all-party committee, and why is the 
government ignoring the recommendation to impose penalties 
on young people for possession of cigarettes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have put forward the 
proposals around education, around the specific issue of 
criminalizing young people for possession of tobacco. We’ve 
had that discussion. We do not think that’s an appropriate thing 
to do. 
 
We have surveyed the country and there is no legislation in 
place like that yet. And in Alberta, they have passed a law but 
they have not proclaimed it because they haven’t found any part 
of the province that wants to use it. 
 
What we will do is continue to listen, but we are not in the 
business of further criminalizing young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 

Increases in Property Taxes 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Education. It’s been now almost three months since the 
provincial budget was introduced and since Saskatchewan 
municipalities were completely shunned by the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) government. The members of the NDP 
government dismissed the concerns of municipalities who said 
that property taxpayers could not take another tax increase. 
Municipalities were doing everything they could to hold the line 
on property taxes and they were looking to the provincial 
government for help. But they were ignored. Grants in lieu 
would take care of everything, the NDP said. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the numbers are in and the property 
taxpayers and municipalities across this province are angry. 
Thanks to the NDP, the education portion of rural municipality 
property taxes has increased, on average, thirteen and a half per 
cent. 
 
Will the minister explain to ratepayers and to RMs (rural 
municipality) how his NDP government can sit on a fiscal slush 
fund of a half a billion dollars and not help them hold the line 
on property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, as related many times 
to the members opposite, our budget in education increased the 
total to 33 million on the foundation operating grant. We 
completely covered the teachers’ extended benefits to the tune 
of $9.3 million. And when you add in the additional expenses 
with regard to CommunityNet and other initiatives in early 
childhood development, there was a substantial amount of close 
to $50 million in this provincial budget. 
 
And guess what, Mr. Speaker? That amounts to, with last year, 
over 16 per cent in two years, Mr. Speaker; just two years, an 
increase on the provincial budget of 16 per cent. 
 
And I would say to those members opposite that their plan for 
education was zero per cent increase, and that would have 
off-loaded $70 million onto the taxpayers at the local level, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Education. 
Why are school divisions having to increases taxes then? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, in some RMs, increase in the 
education of property taxes was dramatic. The RM of Rodgers 
had an increase of 42 per cent. The RM of Lumsden increased 
47 per cent. The RM of Eyebrow was 50 per cent. The RM of 
Canaan was hit with an increase of 61 per cent. And that is the 
same RM where the government is refusing to pay their portion 
of the property taxes on the potato storage sheds. 
 
The biggest increase by far was in the RM of Britannia, Mr. 
Speaker. Their education tax went up 90 per cent. 
 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2067 

 

Mr. Speaker, these are incredible increases hitting rural 
businesses and farm communities who are already struggling to 
make ends meet. How does the minister expect these people to 
be able to come up with the money to pay these huge increases 
in property taxes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, the responsibility for 
education is a joint responsibility between the provincial 
government and local school boards. The fact is that this 
provincial government has greatly increased its contribution this 
year to the financing of K to 12 education. 
 
And I must say that the members opposite did not vote for that 
budget. They did not vote for those increases to education. 
 
And we also recognize that this year was a year of 
reassessment, and assessment across the province of 
Saskatchewan increased some 10.8 to 11 per cent overall. There 
was an increase in assessment in Saskatoon alone of 21 per 
cent. This allowed municipalities and school boards to look at 
their overall assessment and apply their mill rates. 
 
And I must say that school divisions throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan, over 95 per cent of them actually dropped their 
mill rates this year, Mr. Speaker. And the fact of the matter is 
that when we talk about what we are doing in this province, this 
province is very committed to K to 12 education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education still 
doesn’t get it. Just because the rates went down doesn’t mean 
they don’t pay more money; there’s an assessment involved in 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the total dollar value of education 
tax increases this year is $25 million increase, Mr. Minister. 
That’s exactly the same amount of the property tax rebate 
program the government brought in last year. In other words 
farm families that the NDP are professing to help, actually 
you’re giving them no help at all. You’re taking from one hand 
and giving it back in the other hand. There’s no help at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government announced yesterday they were 
going to help farmers in areas of drought, but they ignore the 
fact that education taxes on pasture land jumped 28 per cent. 
They could have done something about that. The one thing the 
government could have done for all property owners across the 
province was increase revenue sharing to municipalities in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Why are you forcing property tax 
owners and RMs to pay these huge increases in education tax? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, we now know that the 
members opposite did not vote for the budget that allowed for a 
massive increase in spending by this provincial government for 

K to 12 education. 
 
And let me just point out what they were planning to do in 
agriculture in their platform, Mr. Speaker — lobbying the 
federal Liberal government, demanding the federal Liberal 
government. They take no responsibility for doing any 
provincial initiatives in their platform and in their most recent 
convention, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I quote from their most recent convention, their policy. 
What did they say about agriculture? 
 

The Sask Party government will implement policies to 
encourage the local processing of commodities and direct 
Internet marketing of ag products. 

 
And they then criticize us for doing that, by getting into the 
Internet to market ag products, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That group has no credibility whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we didn’t support that budget because it forced tax 
increases all over this province, both urban and rural. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not only rural ratepayers 
who are being hit by huge tax increases. The NDP’s lack of new 
funding to urban municipalities is also driving up property 
taxes. Homeowners all over Saskatchewan are being forced to 
dig deeper into their wallets to pay for this government’s 
decision to ignore municipal government in this year’s budget. 
 
The Sask Party has heard from numerous cities, towns, and 
villages who have been forced to raise property taxes. I’m sure 
the minister is hearing those same complaints. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given all the huge hikes on property taxes across 
the province this spring, will the Minister of Municipal 
Government admit it was a mistake to ignore municipalities in 
this year’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said it time and 
time again and I know that those people that we continue to 
dialogue with and talk to, with SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association), and people know the efforts 
on the part of this government and the commitment to 
municipal government through targeted programs. 
 
Yes, and we responded to what SARM and SUMA had asked. 
What SUMA had asked was more money for education. The 
Minister of Education, my hon. colleague, has just indicated to 
this House and to the public what has happened in the education 
sector to assist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been targeted programs and I’ll be 
happy to go through all the targeted programs, the additional 



2068 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

money that this government has supplied to municipalities 
throughout this province to assist them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, Mr. Speaker, yesterday I had the 
opportunity to attend a meeting in Kipling, a SARM district 
meeting. And a hundred-and-some people that were there are 
not happy with that minister or the Minister of Education, or for 
that matter the Minister of Finance for not addressing the issues 
of rural and urban Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to believe that the minister isn’t hearing 
their concerns because many cities and town councils have 
written to us outlining the tax hikes the NDP has forced on 
them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the city of Moose Jaw, property taxes up 3.4 per 
cent; city of Saskatoon, property taxes up 4 per cent; city of 
Weyburn, taxes up 6 per cent; city of Melfort, up 8.1 per cent; 
town of Porcupine Plain, property taxes up 10 per cent; town of 
Rocanville, property taxes up 14 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s just a few examples. Now every one of 
these tax hikes comes courtesy of the minister of Municipal 
Government and his NDP counterparts. Why is the NDP raising 
taxes for so many Saskatchewan families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, what the member 
opposite is not telling the Assembly are those letters that they 
wrote not informing those councils of municipalities about the 
intent of their amendment to the budget. 
 
I’ve received copies of letters . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
They say they’ve received letters. I received letters saying: oh 
we were not made aware of the amendment cancelling . . . 
asking this government not to hire people, Mr. Speaker, to put 
104.5 full-time equivalents into Saskatchewan Environment and 
Research Management to assist communities with all the 
problems that they’ve been experiencing. They voted against 
that. 
 
And they misinformed the people in the communities what the 
intent of their amendment was. I hear from those people as well, 
and they’re telling us that they appreciate the efforts that this 
government has made to assist them in those targeted projects 
that are so essential for the quality of life in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister should know that of the hundred and some 
people at that meeting yesterday, every one of them said they 
would rather have increased revenue sharing than see this 
government grow the size of government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we received a letter from the village of Parkside 
that summarizes all the attacks on property taxpayers by this 
NDP government. And it says, and I quote: 
 

The reduction of revenue-sharing grants, the total loss of 

capital grants, and the cuts to grants such as fire, signages, 
and etc., and the continued increase to requisitions from 
SAMA means we receive one-third of the funding we did 
10 years ago. This is not to mention the continual . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Just . . . must be able to hear what the member is 
saying. I would ask members to quieten down a bit so we can 
hear what the member is saying. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it’s a good 
question, Mr. Speaker; they should listen up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the village of Parkside goes on to say: 
 

This is not to mention the continual increase in power rates, 
energy rates, and the policing costs on municipalities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of these NDP attacks, Parkside has 
been forced to hike municipal taxes by 17 per cent at the same 
time education taxes are going up 25 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s a huge tax increase. 
 
Why does the NDP continue to attack property taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those are pretty 
harsh words, attacking taxpayers. Taxpayers are not under 
attack, Mr. Speaker. We are working with people to try and 
resolve some very serious concerns. 
 
And the members opposite should be aware that school property 
taxes, for example, can change as a result of a number of things. 
Just as an example, they can . . . shifts from property 
reassessment in 2001 can cause that. Changes to school grants 
and/or decisions by school boards regarding budgets and setting 
of mill rates — those are the kinds of things that affect taxes in 
different communities throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while revenue-sharing grants have been stable 
since 1997, the government has provided monies to 
municipalities through infrastructure programs. And the list 
from 1994 to 1998: the federal contribution, 69 million; 
provincial contribution, 98 million, Mr. Speaker. How can the 
members opposite say that this government has not contributed 
to the well-being of rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I find it interesting this morning that the two ministers 
on that side that are sticking up for increasing taxes all across 
this province, what the NDP has done, are the two Liberal 
cabinet ministers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, they should be sitting on this 
side helping us trying to keep taxes down in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2069 

 

(10:45) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, last year the Minister of 
Finance promised historic tax cuts. Well he delivered. His tax 
cuts were history before the Saskatchewan people ever saw 
them. Last year’s tax cuts were eaten up by PST (provincial 
sales tax) increases and dozens of hidden fee hikes. This year’s 
tax cuts were eaten up by SaskPower rate hikes, SaskEnergy 
rate hikes. And now higher property taxes. 
 
Saskatchewan families are winding up with less money in their 
pockets, have absolutely less dollars to spend, Mr. Speaker. 
And that’s a direct result of the NDP ignoring municipalities in 
this year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister finally admit he made a mistake 
and commit to higher revenue sharing for municipalities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, the problem here of course is 
that the opposition wants to be all things to all people and they 
want to speak out of both sides of their mouth. 
 
Here we have the member from Kelvington-Wadena getting up 
today and what does she say? She says we should spend more, 
even though we’ve had record increases in education spending. 
 
But what does she say in the Humboldt Journal of April 12? 
There she says, quote, “The budget spending is not 
sustainable.” There she says spend less. 
 
Then we have the member from Canora-Pelly releasing a 
so-called economic analysis the other day. You know what the 
economic analysis says, among other things, Mr. Speaker? It 
says that the policies of our government favour tax reduction 
and spending over debt reduction. 
 
It says not that we should do more tax reduction as the member 
from Saltcoats is saying today. No, it says we should do less tax 
reduction. It says we should consider the experience of the 
federal government and refrain, refrain from further 
commitments to tax reduction. That’s what their own policy 
says, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recommendations of the Special Committee 
to Prevent the Abuse of Children in the Sex Trade 

 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question this morning is for the Minister of Justice. Mr. 
Minister, for months now the all-party committee on child 
prostitution has been meeting. We have held province-wide 
consultations and we as a committee have developed a series of 
recommendations which at this time are being printed, and 
hopefully will be tabled in the near future in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this has been a long, thorough process, and we 
hope the NDP government will not take the work and the 
recommendations of this committee lightly. The all-party 
committee has already written to the Minister of Justice 
detailing specific recommendations and asking them to be acted 

on immediately. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the minister is: will the minister 
introduce legislation this session to implement any of the 
recommendations from the committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say 
that the Legislative Assembly looks forward to the report of the 
committee. We will look at the recommendations of the 
committee. If there are recommendations of the committee that 
lend themselves to speedy action by the Legislative Assembly, 
then I’m sure that we will want to do that. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, a few 
weeks ago the co-Chair of the committee, the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone, told the media that he certainly expected 
the government would introduce legislation to prevent the abuse 
and exploitation of children through the sex trade in this 
session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been delay after delay by the 
government on this issue already including the simple project of 
printing the report. Mr. Speaker, if this government is not 
prepared to act immediately after all of the diligent work done 
by this committee, Mr. Speaker, will this government commit to 
a fall sitting of this legislature for the specific purpose of 
introducing legislation that will help get Saskatchewan children 
out of the sex trade? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the member speaks of delay, and I think it’s up to the 
members of the committee to ask themselves why there have 
been delays and to answer those questions for themselves. 
That’s not something that the Legislative Assembly can 
comment upon, Mr. Speaker. Having said that, Mr. Speaker, my 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I suppose they call it question 
period because they don’t want to hear the answers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we expect, or as I understand it, the committee 
will be making a report to the Legislative Assembly in a matter 
of days. If there are recommendations contained within that 
report that the Legislative Assembly can act upon immediately, 
then I think the Legislative Assembly will want to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s the position that I would take and I hope 
that’s the position that the members opposite would take. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
question is to the Premier. 



2070 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Special Committee to Prevent the Abuse and 
Exploitation of Children through the Sex Trade was struck by 
this legislature after much diligence on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Party to raise the issue on the radar screen. 
 
It has been a process where members of the committee heard 
heart-wrenching stories from families who have lost children to 
the sex trade, from children who are recovering from years of 
abuse and involvement in the sex trade, and from police, social 
workers, and social services agencies who deal with johns, 
victims, and the general social impact the involvement of 
children in the sex trade has on society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the Premier is this: if the 
government is not prepared to act in this session, will the 
Premier call a fall session to deal with this very serious issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it’s very interesting 
in the light of the last two questions and the answers that have 
been provided, for the member to say that if the government is 
not prepared to act during this session. I don’t think that the 
answers I’ve given indicated that. 
 
What I have said, Mr. Speaker, is that if there are 
recommendations contained within this report, which is 
expected within a matter of days, if there are recommendations 
that can be acted upon immediately, then I think that this side of 
the House, and hopefully that side of the House, will want to do 
so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 52 — The 
Railway Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when I 
last had the opportunity to speak to this Bill, I spent quite a 
substantial amount of time developing the arguments 
surrounding my concerns about the provisions in The Railway 
Amendment Act that dealt with the ability of short-line 
operators to come into existence, to begin business, to offer 
service to communities that were served by short-line rails. 
 
I also went into some detail describing my concerns about how 
this Act applies to those operators who might successfully 
become short-line operators, and their ability or inability to get 
out of business if the need should arise because of the 
provisions of this Act. 

And I won’t go into a lot of detail or rehash those arguments 
again, today, Mr. Speaker. But I do think that there are some 
elements that arose from those particular arguments and those 
particular points of view that need to be addressed to some 
extent in our discussion of this Bill today. 
 
Having looked at the Act further and having consulted with 
additional people and . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, to ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and to my colleague, 
the member from Maple Creek . . . Cypress Hills, I’m sorry, for 
allowing me to interfere with his speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to other members of the 
Assembly, I’d like to introduce a group of students from my 
constituency. They are the grade 4 students from Midale 
Central School at Midale. There’s 16 students . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — The Johner Brothers are from Midale. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Yes, it is the home of the Johner Brothers. Their 
teachers are Jana Epp and Brenda Molstad. And they have also 
six chaperones. I hope they enjoy the proceedings here and I 
look forward to our visit after the tour. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2001 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Having looking at 
this piece of legislation in greater depth, and having talked to 
more of the parties interested in the implications of this 
legislation — both at the local level and at the larger 
professional level — I understand that there are certainly 
serious differing points of view. 
 
There are some people who support this Bill and all its 
involvements and all its contingencies fully. And there are 
others of course that have very serious reservations about it and 
would prefer to see virtually most of the Act removed or at least 
modified. 
 
But there are some things that come to mind, having read the 
Act, that I would like to touch on now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having dug into the details of the Act, there is a tremendous 
amount of ministerial discretion allowed for in this particular 
Act. And while on the surface of it there might not seem to be 
anything wrong with that, there is, as a result of that provision, 
an opportunity for abuse frankly. 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2071 

 

Now what we have to assume is that that isn’t going to happen. 
But having looked at all the regulations and all of the areas of 
ministerial discretion here, it has occurred to me that this Act is 
heavily weighted toward public ownership opportunities in the 
short-line rail business. 
 
When I say public ownership, I’m not saying necessarily 
provincial government ownership although that is certainly 
possible. It’s provided for in this Act. But I also think that the 
Act is weighted toward groups, small groups, co-operatives, any 
type of voluntary group that come together to salvage a rail line 
operation. 
 
The reason I say that is that even though the public interest test 
that is required in this legislation is stringent — and I recognize 
the government does have a right to determine whether a new 
operator might be a bona fide operator — it appears to me that 
the rules for entry into the short-line business have been written 
to favour a public ownership role in the short-line business. 
They certainly aren’t written in such a way as to provide any 
benefit or any clear opportunity or prejudice toward a business 
enterprise coming in and establishing a short-line railway. 
 
And I think maybe seeing that predilection in this particular 
piece of legislation suggests to me that there is an underlying 
bias that is being established in this legislation toward a public 
ownership role. 
 
Now some people might argue that, philosophically or 
ideologically, that’s a preferable way to go. But if you 
discourage the private enterprise operator, the business operator 
to come in here and pursue an opportunity with short-line 
railways, the question remains, have you done the best for the 
province and have you provided the greatest opportunities and 
the greatest potential for the people that are going to be served 
by these railways. And I’m not so certain that that is being 
achieved with this particular piece of legislation. 
 
I refer, Mr. Speaker, to the explanation, the explanatory notes 
that came with the legislation concerning this, and part of it 
reads as follows: 
 

If the minister determines that a class 1 railway is merely 
selling a line to avoid paying the compensation to 
municipalities upon abandonment as required under federal 
legislation, the minister may deny the application. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, a class 1 railway, as we have alluded to on 
previous occasions, is CP (Canadian Pacific) Rail, CN 
(Canadian National) Rail, and some of the larger rail operations 
that we know of in the United States and in eastern Canada. 
 
The question that arises when I read this explanatory note is 
how will the minister know, how will the minister ever know 
for certain if a class 1 railway is merely selling a short-line to 
avoid paying the compensation that’s required of those railways 
to pay to municipalities when they propose abandonment? 
 
(11:00) 
 
It sounds to me like there is going to be some subjective 
elements that come into this. And given the wide-ranging 
ministerial latitude that this Bill provides, the minister could say 

at any given time that any rail-line abandonment proposal or 
any short line, new short-line proposal, is just an extension of a 
class 1 railway and she could rule against it automatically. 
 
I think that that does not bode well for the short-line industry. I 
think it sets up too many opportunities for the minister to 
provide winners and/or losers in this business; to be the sole 
authority in deciding who is going to operate the railways from 
the perspective of what’s in the best interests of the government 
of the day, whether it’s this government or subsequent 
governments. And I think that there is a real concern there. 
 
There is an opportunity for preconceived notions on the part of 
this minister or any minister to play into the decision as to what 
operator will have the opportunity to create and to run a 
short-line railway. 
 
Furthermore in the explanations, the class 1 railway will have to 
retain the line if the minister decides that they’re only dumping 
it to some other operator to get out from under their obligations. 
The class 1 railway will have to retain the line; transfer the line 
to another operator; or go through the Canadian Transportation 
Act, the CTA abandonment process, and allow governments to 
acquire a line at net salvage value or pay compensation as 
specified within CTA abandonment provisions. 
 
I really believe, Mr. Speaker, that while the Bill is 
well-intentioned, that the process is flawed and the 
opportunities for abuse in this particular Bill are rampant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are, as I mentioned, differing points of view 
on this particular situation and I would want to refer to a 
document I received from one of the class 1 railways in terms 
of their opinion on this Bill and how it leans and is weighted too 
heavily toward the public ownership possibilities for short-line 
rails. And this particular document that I received starts out as 
follows: 
 

Based on reasonable business principles, this legislation 
diminishes the prospects for growth and development in 
Saskatchewan’s rail industry as well as industries 
associated with rail. In essence, its unprecedented measures 
will seriously inhibit if not prevent future private 
investment in the short-line rail industry. 

 
And that’s an outcome that this economy in particular cannot 
afford, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve seen much, much government investment in industry in 
this province with no real advantage. We need to see more 
private investment. We need to see more private monies coming 
into this economy in order to achieve some of the real 
potentialities that this province has to offer. 
 
The goal of creating conditions for the future development of 
dynamic industries is completely distinct from the concept of 
guarding past industry structures. In fact they’re often at odds. 
The Saskatchewan government sees them as being essentially 
the same in this particular piece of legislation. 
 
This document outlines what some of the flaws and the 
problems are contained within this Act. Three elements, 
according to the author of this document, stand out. All 



2072 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

provincially regulated railways that require capital to operate 
will be unable to offer assets as security for their investors. 
 
We talked the last time we were discussing this Bill about the 
net salvage value and the regulations that require the sale of 
track to the government if any short-line operator can’t continue 
operations. And when the Act provides for that eventuality 
only, no new private operation is going to be able to use those 
assets as security when they’re trying to obtain financing to 
undertake the rail venture. 
 
So railways wishing to discontinue rail operations and 
dismantle the assets will now be subject to the provincial 
Highway Traffic Board’s arbitrary determination of the value of 
those assets. No private investor can reasonably be expected to 
provide capital under those conditions. 
 
Secondly, the scope of the assets covered by this Act is 
unprecedented. By broadening the definition of railway and 
railway company, the Act expands the types of private railway 
assets to include assets of a wide range of companies owning a 
wide range of assets. And it would include owners of sidings 
and loading facilities. This effectively spreads the investment 
problem beyond the railways themselves to companies that are 
now just simply associated with railways such as grain 
companies and other smaller, individual operations. 
 
And thirdly, the legislation gives wide discretionary powers to 
the government to interfere with the commercial operations of a 
provincial railway. This will give investors pause for thought 
before coming to Saskatchewan to invest in the rail industry. 
 
In fact one of the provisions in the Act says that if a shipper 
wants to move goods over one piece of railway and then that 
ties into a second piece of railway, if the two railway operators 
can’t agree on a rate, the Highway Traffic Board can come in 
and arbitrarily set the rate. Well that really interferes with the 
normal transactions you find in commercial endeavours. 
 
There ought to be and there would be, I would assume, in any 
common sense consideration of this issue, there would be a 
middle ground. And in a commercial environment, one business 
is going to find ways to make a deal with another business 
because it’s in their joint best interests. I don’t believe we need 
arbitrary powers dedicated to the Highway Traffic Board to 
achieve those kind of commercial results. 
 
I’ve alluded to the widespread ministerial discretion that is 
allowed in this particular Bill. And, Mr. Speaker, just for the 
record, I would like to point out some of the specifics of that 
discretion. 
 
Under provisions of this Act, the minister’s approval is required 
to construct, to alter, or to purchase a railway asset. 
 
An authorization certificate is required to construct, acquire, or 
alter a railway. The authorization certificate may contain any 
term or condition the minister considers appropriate. The 
Highway Traffic Board may make orders fixing terms and 
conditions between railway owners and railway operators. 
 
The minister must approve the opening of a railway. The 
minister may employ inspectors who may make orders in 

regards to safety or compliance within the Act. The minister 
may make almost any regulation he or she wants at any time 
suitable to the minister. 
 
Those are fairly broad powers and are open and subject, I think, 
to concern by people who will fall under the jurisdiction of the 
minister. 
 
The industry, the larger railway industry have raised, I know, 
many concerns with the government about this Act. And one of 
the things the government has said is there is nothing in this Act 
that is really significantly different than what railways have to 
live with under the Canadian Transportation Act, the CTA. And 
I don’t think that that’s quite true. 
 
Given the fact that the industry has taken some time to compare 
very carefully the CTA and the Saskatchewan Railway 
Amendment Act and have detailed the differences, I think that 
to say that there’s no substantive difference is incorrect. And 
it’s not surprising to me that the government would take that 
position, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve heard on many previous 
occasions among different ministers or from different ministers 
on different pieces of legislation that the legislation simply is 
following precedent established elsewhere; it’s similar to 
legislation that exists in other provinces; it’s identical in many 
respects. But we have found time and time again that that’s not 
necessarily the case. There are substantial differences; as in this 
Act, there are substantial differences. 
 
The scope of the Highway Traffic Board to determine net 
salvage value of provincial railway assets is not unprecedented 
according to the government. This was in response to an issue 
raised by the class 1 railways. This Bill results in the same 
outcome brought about by the CTA’s ability to determine net 
salvage values of federal railway assets under the CTA. 
 
In their response the railway companies have said to me the 
results of the Saskatchewan legislation compared to the CTA 
are very different, and they pointed out the two specific points. 
First of all, the Saskatchewan Act covers assets well beyond 
what the federal Act considers to be railway assets. Industries in 
the Saskatchewan Act other than railways will be affected. 
 
Secondly, the CTA typically determines the net salvage value 
of small isolated segments of large federal networks under 
consideration for discontinuance. To an investor, very little of 
the total picture is affected and the asset base would not be 
exposed at any given time. By contrast, the legislation here in 
Saskatchewan would, in effect, apply to the entire network of a 
smaller provincial railway. 
 
In other words, small, provincial short-line railways that need to 
salvage assets would most likely need to salvage all of the 
assets to maintain their financial viability or salvage their 
financial situation. 
 
So there is a substantial difference in that particular point. And 
to say that the scope of the Highway Traffic Board is identical 
to the scope of the Transportation Agency, the Canadian 
Transportation Agency, is inaccurate in several other ways as 
well. The agency and the federal minister, pursuant to the CTA, 
can make regulations only in a few very discreet areas. The 
minister and the board under the Saskatchewan Act can make 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2073 

 

regulations in regard to over 30 items, including the setting of 
rates. The minister under the Saskatchewan Act has wide power 
to exempt any railway assets or class of assets from the Act. 
There is no analogous discretion in the CTA. 
 
The Saskatchewan Act stipulates that the minister may decide, 
in the minister’s opinion, whether an application for approval of 
construction, alteration, or acquisition is complete. Further, the 
minister may cause any person to do anything necessary to 
permit the desired construction or alteration. 
 
Now this is very broad-based discretion which could include the 
right to expropriate lands. And I think there is a very serious 
potential problem with that explanation and with that 
understanding. There doesn’t seem to be in our reading of it any 
similar provision in the CTA. 
 
And under the Saskatchewan Act the minister may suspend, 
alter, amend, or cancel an authorization certificate, quote, “for 
cause.” And this can be done without a public hearing if the 
minister so chooses. 
 
Also the Highway Traffic Board may suspend, may alter, may 
amend, or cancel an operating authority for cause either before 
or after hearing from the holder of the certificate. The agency 
under the CTA has no such authority. 
 
Under the Saskatchewan Act, once the Highway Traffic Board 
suspends a certificate, it may authorize another person to 
operate the railway and provide service on the line and even 
establish rates to be charged for the service. There’s no ability 
to do this in the CTA. 
 
Now that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is an issue that, I think, would 
raise alarm bells in the minds of anybody who was thinking 
about coming to this province to provide short-line service. 
 
The Saskatchewan Act says that a crossing cannot be 
constructed or altered without approval of the minister. There’s 
no requirement for approval of crossings under the CTA. 
 
And the Saskatchewan Bill: after discontinuance, a further 
process is required pursuant to the Act where a railway is to be 
dismantled. And there is no such provision requiring approval 
prior to dismantling in the CTA. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these kinds of differences in the two 
Acts are going to, are going to provide a more difficult 
regulatory regime for operators in Saskatchewan than the class 
1 railways experience under the CTA. There’s just no question 
about that. It is a more onerous Act. 
 
All of these conditions, all of these obligations, all of these 
uncertainties provide a deterrent when it comes to private 
investment. In fact, it may be more troublesome from the 
perspective of the legislation that it begs. Regulations can be 
rescinded easily by order in council without consent of the 
legislature. If the government wishes to better define these 
powers, why not redraft the Bill itself? That was a question that 
was posed to me. 
 
(11:15) 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, the other area I want to touch on is the 
regulations. I look through the legislation and there’s several, 
several pages here that talk about where regulations may be 
imposed and applied. And, as you know, the saying the 
regulations are the . . . the devil is in the details applies very 
clearly to regulations. Regulations are not submitted to public 
review; they’re not considered in detail by the House; 
regulations are applied at the governmental administrative level. 
And we have no way of knowing for sure what the regulations 
are. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that that is a major concern, whether 
it’s a private company that’s going to invest in the short line or 
a public enterprise of the type that is talked about in terms of 
community co-ops and so forth. They need to know what the 
rules are going to be clearly. They know now what they can’t 
do; the regulations will spell out what they must do. 
 
I want to wrap up my comments on this particular Bill by just 
quoting again from a document that was provided to me by 
people inside the industry: 
 

By loosening the tight regulatory grip so apparent in this 
particular draft legislation, the government would do much 
to promote the rejuvenation of rail in this province. 
 
This would be a significant benefit to both shippers and 
producers, increasing their competitive transport choices 
and options. And it would also be a decided advantage to 
the provincial treasury in so far as movement of freight to 
rail would lead to reduction in road construction and a 
renewal expenditure. 
 
Finally a more robust short-line rail sector would have a 
beneficial impact on the environment, reducing the 
consumption of fuel and its attendant greenhouse gas 
impacts. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, short-line rails are a vital component to 
rural Saskatchewan’s infrastructure. And there’s no 
disagreement between myself — or the official opposition — 
and the minister of the day in terms of the need to maintain a 
viable short-line industry. 
 
The problem we’ve got is that we have to encourage that group 
to establish their operations in this province. And we disagree, I 
think in substantial ways, with the methodology that this 
particular Act requires for that to happen. 
 
We are hopeful, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of seeing some changes 
in this Act and we will address that at a later time. But for now, 
I will wrap up my comments having made this presentation this 
morning. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to stand today and enter into debate on Bill 52. My 
remarks will be brief. My colleague from Cypress Hills has 
covered the details very eloquently and accurately and my first 
inclination is just to say ditto to his remarks, but I do have a few 
comments that I would like to make. 
 
We do know the value of short-line railways in this province 
and the value it is for producers. We know the value it is for 



2074 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

heavy haul, and we know the disadvantage that we’re seeing 
with relation to our roads because of heavy haul going on the 
road system rather than the rail system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to make a comment about a 
rail line that indicates some of the problems we have. We have 
a short-line rail system that runs through my constituency and 
one of the problems we have with that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
we also have a grain company that basically refuses to use the 
rail system. And I think if we were putting in some legislation it 
might have been very appropriate to include something that 
would entice elevator companies to use the rail system when 
it’s there. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you see a rail . . . an elevator 
company that is loading truck after truck of B-trains as a very 
serviceable heavy haul rail line is going right by their facility, it 
really does not make sense to me. And I believe that’s where 
some of the earlier legislation could have dealt with. 
 
There’s another thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is of concern of 
mine. In the last number of years we have seen rail lines 
abandoned and salvaged. Here we are after 10 years of an NDP 
government, finally we’re bringing in legislation that for all 
intents and purposes would appear good on the surface. Why 
wasn’t it done when rail lines were being ripped up years ago? 
 
We seem to have disseminated an awful lot of rural 
Saskatchewan and now after it’s disseminated, you’ll never get 
a railroad back and it’s unfortunate that it’s this late in the 
game. 
 
One of the other issues, and I know my colleague has touched 
on it, is with this legislation the exit clause of this legislation 
makes it extremely difficult for owners of a railway line, a 
short-line railway to get out. And that may not seem like a 
problem initially, but getting in to the short-line railway when 
you don’t have an exit strategy can be very difficult for an 
operator to try and buy in. 
 
And I use the example if you have to buy in at a huge price per 
mile of rail line and then find out that your salvage rates are 
substantially less and for no reason of your own that you’re not 
making a go of it and you’ve lost money for a couple of years 
and you need to exit. You could be losing a whole pile of 
money. 
 
So under this legislation, it would appear that somebody 
wanting to get into the short-line rail business would have to 
have very deep pockets based on the exit strategy. 
 
One of the things, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I really wish to 
address is environmental issues. There’s nowhere in this 
legislation that I see anything pertaining to environmental 
issues. Cleanup for an example, and I’ll give you the example 
of the rail line that has been ripped up and salvaged that goes by 
where I live. The rail bed is there. The large rocks are still there. 
And it’s been abandoned. 
 
Now I believe that there should be legislation that deals with 
cleanup and environmental issues of abandoned rail lines or rail 
lines that are salvaged. I really believe that the cleanup should, 
at the very least, demand the removal of track materials 

including the ballast. It should also include the removal of the 
bed itself. 
 
Failure to do this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, means that the future 
taxpayers are going to be footing the bill for any of the cleanup. 
And in my constituency, we have witnessed some problems 
already with rail lines that have been abandoned. With the 
ballast and the cleanup that was not carried out properly, tires 
for tractors have been wrecked, cattle have had problems 
injuring themselves on some of the debris that have been left on 
the rail line. 
 
So for these reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll be introducing 
an amendment to the legislation during the Committee of the 
Whole. But I really firmly believe that we should have some 
environmental issues that are addressed in this Bill. 
 
With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I will conclude and 
recommend this Bill goes to the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Today I have 
Craig Dotson, to my immediate right, deputy minister of 
Education. Directly behind me, John McLaughlin, who is the 
executive director of the Teachers’ Superannuation 
Commission; and seated beside him is Michael Littlewood, 
who’s the executive director, legislation and school 
administration. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, and 
to the officials, I just have a couple of questions today. When 
you introduced this Bill you said there’d be a greater 
consistency in the application of dental plan benefits to teachers 
in the registered independent schools. You also mentioned that 
it would affect a small number of teachers. 
 
Can you tell me the approximate number of teachers this will 
apply to? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, we’re looking at 
approximately 20 teachers that will be affected by this, for a 
total annual additional cost of roughly $10,000. And just to 
indicate to the member opposite that the government currently 
budgets approximately $6 million annually for its dental plan 
for teachers. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. How 
many of the independent schools is this going to affect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, this will affect two 
independent schools immediately, and of course will apply to 
other schools as they come along in the future. 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2075 

 

Ms. Draude: — Are these schools historical high schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, these are two alternative 
independent schools but they fall under the classification of 
registered independent schools just as historic schools would 
apply as well. And to give an example of one of these, Ranch 
Ehrlo would be one of these alternative independent schools. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Are there any 
applications on file right now for new historical high schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — No, there are no new applications 
with regard to historic independent high schools at this time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Are there any applications for new alternative 
high schools being considered by your department at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, there are no current 
applications with regard to new alternative high schools at all. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you to the minister and to his officials. I 
don’t have any further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(11:30) 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, just for 
clarification. These amendments that are brought forward apply 
to the teachers that belong to the Teachers’ Superannuation 
Plan, and that I believe is referred to as the old plan. Is that 
correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes that is correct. The old plan is 
the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan; the new plan is the 
Teachers Retirement Plan. And they are treated separately. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Roughly how many teachers under this plan 
will these amendments affect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the amendments with 
regard to the teachers’ superannuation and disability benefits, 
each of these particular amendments affects a different small 
group. So it’s not an across-the-board piece that we can 
identify, say these are the total numbers. There’s small, little 
groups within each of these that would be identified with regard 
to each of the clauses. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Regarding the amendments dealing with 
restrictions on superannuated teachers being able to provide 
teacher services without having their pensions reduced, it’s my 
understanding that the boards of education primarily in rural 
and northern areas are affected the most. 
 

Are there teachers with specific subject training that are lacking 
in these areas, and how many teachers would be needed to bring 
the numbers up to adequate levels across the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, recognizing that this is an 
important initiative and that this was a result of collective 
bargaining, and we are allowing teachers now, retired teachers, 
to participate and also to be subject to recruitment initiatives 
from various school boards. So the circumstances within each 
school division would be different. 
 
So subsequently it’s not targeted to, say, a math teacher or a 
physics teacher or a special education teacher. It would depend 
on the local circumstances within that school division. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, there is probably a certain group 
of teachers that are mostly affected. I know that . . . it’s my 
understanding that math and science teachers are the ones that 
are in highest demand right now. 
 
Is there one specific area that you’re finding there’s most need 
for at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly with regard to northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair, there’s all classes of teachers that 
really would be subject to some of the recruitment initiatives 
there. 
 
In southern Saskatchewan, she’s correct — or the member 
opposite is correct — in identifying that certainly senior math 
teachers, special education teachers, practical and applied arts 
. . . many of the categories that I outlined when we were in 
estimates recently in terms of what we like to see with regard to 
our recruitment and retention initiatives and the million dollar 
fund that we’ve created, I identified at that time some of these 
with regard to math, sciences, special education, and of course 
practical and applied arts. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think 
the biggest concern that was brought forward to me, not just by 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) but also 
recognized by the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 
that this amendment — recognizing there’s a teachers’ shortage 
— the amendment might actually deter a board from looking 
for a teacher because they can use one or two of the teachers 
that have retired. And it may mean that a young person that may 
have the qualifications for the job won’t be able to get it. 
 
Now I know that this isn’t a concern that maybe we are looking 
at right now because there is a teacher shortage. But being that 
it’s going to be in legislation, there is a concern at the back of 
people’s minds that maybe it’s going to be more difficult for a 
young person to get a job in certain areas. 
 
If you already know somebody who can do the job or you know 
a couple of people who can fill in and take the, take the place of 
it, it might be just easier to just go with what you’ve got rather 
than looking for a new teacher. 
 
I don’t believe that the boards of education are intending to do 
that but down the road there may be some changes. 
 
Now have you thought about this and what kind of processes 



2076 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

you’re putting in place to make sure that there is . . . the young 
people that are looking for jobs will have all the opportunities 
that should be available to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite does 
bring up a very important point. And it certainly is the intention 
of the groups who have been involved in putting forward this 
initiative, the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, the School 
Trustees Association . . . Of course the department will be 
monitoring the impact of this change to determine if it has any 
negative consequences. 
 
Certainly, I believe that most boards of education would prefer 
to hire a young teacher, recognizing that stability and having 
someone who is there for the long term is important to that 
school division and that these retired teachers will probably fill 
areas where it would be very difficult or impossible to hire a 
recent graduate coming into the system. 
 
So I see them working together but it is certainly is something 
that we would be monitoring on a regular basis. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Wood River on his feet? 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
thank you to my colleague from Kelvington-Wadena and the 
minister for allowing me to introduce some guests in the east 
gallery. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have 18 grade 4 students from 
Assiniboia along with their teacher, Bev Coldwell, and 
chaperones Laurie Good, Terri Fender, Bob Mayes, and Leanna 
Batty. 
 
I have not had a chance to talk with the students as yet, which 
I’m going to right after the next few minutes in here. But I’ve 
already forewarned them that this is very sedate part of how the 
legislature works, which is good to see. They missed the 
boisterous question period and I think they would have liked to 
have seen that, but at least they’ll see the workings of the House 
when it’s very quiet. 
 
So would members please join me in welcoming the group from 
Assiniboia. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and I’d like to 
also welcome the students here from my colleague’s area, from 
Wood River. 

Right now, we’re talking about a Bill on education and teachers 
that will be hired in the future. And even though it maybe 
doesn’t make a lot sense right now, it’s going to have an impact 
on you. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know what you’re saying about the teachers, 
making sure that the boards will be hiring the teachers that’s 
best qualified, making sure we can get fresh blood into the 
school and that type of thing. I’m hoping that there is some 
agreement with the STF and SSTA that they will be watching 
this and making sure that it’s to the benefit of not just the 
teachers but the school boards and the children as well. 
 
The one good thing about this department — although there’s 
many good things about it — but I believe that we’re all 
working in the best interests of the children and I’m sure that 
this is something that we’ll be watching. 
 
I’ve heard that many teachers and stakeholders groups have, for 
a number of years, been saying that the restriction of pension 
benefits based on the number of days worked after retirement is 
not appropriate because a person’s pension is their entitlement. 
And they didn’t think it was within the government’s right to 
penalize them for being able to . . . for working. Could you tell 
me how long the practice has been in place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, it’s my understanding that 
the actual rule with regard to restrictions on retired teachers 
goes back many decades and there was some fine-tuning 
recently with regard to the 60-day rule. But the 120-day rule, 
we’re looking at probably going back to the time that the plan 
was created. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, can you tell me in the 
last few years — and maybe you don’t have the exact number 
— but give me what the average number of days worked past 
retirement was and the amount of money that has been withheld 
from their pension plan as a result of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, because the rules are 
well-known to retiring teachers, very few of these teachers 
would have actually exceeded the 120 in the first year of the 60 
day subsequent. But it is my understanding that there have been 
a few and they would amount to probably less than 20 teachers 
in any given year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Can you tell me how much money that would 
involve then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I’m not able to give the member 
opposite a global number, but just in rough terms, it would be 
roughly $2,000 for each month that they went over. So if there 
were 20 teachers, it would work out to roughly $40,000 per 
month over and above the 120/60 rule. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I don’t have any 
further questions on this. I’m told that this amendment is 
something that both the SSTA and the STF have been looking 
forward to seeing the passage of. So I’m sure that they’re 
saying, let’s quickly get this put in place, so thank you. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2077 

 

Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Education Amendment Act, 2001/ 
Loi de 2001 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you again, Mr. Chairman. Just to clarify 
some of the concerns that I have with this. When I read the Bill, 
if a teacher has been terminated, the teacher has 20 days to 
apply to the minister for the investigation of that termination. 
And if the teacher has been given a formal reprimand, the 
teacher has 15 days to apply to the minister for an investigation 
for a formal reprimand. Is this correct? 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, no, the member isn’t 
correct in that assumption. It’s 20 days for a formal reprimand, 
suspension, or termination. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Regarding the 
formal reprimand, I believe my colleague from Canora-Pelly 
brought forward some concerns he had with regard to the 
definition and the application of the term as it can apply to a 
teacher. Can you give me what the department’s definition of a 
formal reprimand is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly the statute 
reflects the language that was in the collective agreement. The 
parties to that collective agreement took this terminology very 
seriously. The agreement was that the terminology would be 
formal reprimand. 
 
And what a formal reprimand is is basically written 
documentation with a clear indication for the reasons for the 
reprimand, which would then allow the external reference 
committee to look at that reason. So this would be written 
documentation on a teacher that would clearly identify the 
reasons for that reprimand. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I still think the 
definition is a little vague and maybe it can be open for 
interpretation. I think that there are teachers who it’s necessary 
for them to interact with each other and with the principals and 
with parents and perhaps even someone from the Department of 
Education. 
 
And I think there should be some kind of assurance for teachers 
who might be wondering if they won’t be arbitrarily given a 
formal reprimand if they just happen to disagree with a parent 
or with a teacher. And I’m wondering if you can comment on 
this for me please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well certainly, Mr. Chair, we 
recognize that this particular language was seriously 
considered. We also recognize that in the current system formal 
reprimands already occur. What this Act does is provide an 
opportunity for the ability of the teacher who has been formally 
reprimanded to have an appeal process. And what this does is 
itemize what that process would be, utilizing the current 

external reference committee. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, is there a limit on the number of 
formal reprimands a teacher can receive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly when you’re dealing with 
employment relationships in general, a formal reprimand of 
course is one of the more serious. There is no limitation in 
terms of numbers of formal reprimand. Obviously this would be 
on the teacher’s record. 
 
This Act provides an opportunity for the teacher to appeal that 
formal reprimand. But in terms of categorizing the serious 
nature with regard to employer/employee relationships, then 
we’re talking about formal reprimand, suspension, terminations, 
all of which now are appealable. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Is there a number of formal reprimands that 
can be received before a teacher is . . . before there is a 
possibility a teacher could be terminated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — That would depend entirely on the 
board of education, which is the employer of the teacher. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I note that the 
Bill actually prohibits boards of education from entering into a 
contract with another teacher until a board of reference has 
released its ruling on a teacher. Keeping that in mind, if there 
are a series of formal reprimands being investigated, does that 
mean that the teacher is still going to be allowed to teach during 
that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The clause that the member opposite 
is referring to applies to suspensions. So in the instance where 
there was a formal reprimand, that teacher would still be 
teaching in the system. 
 
If it was a suspension, then what the clause would preclude 
would be that board of education hiring someone to replace that 
teacher until the appeal proceedings had the opportunity to run 
their course. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, if a suspension takes place, it’s 
just a substitution teacher brought in at that time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The member opposite is entirely 
correct, that in that circumstance where there was a suspension 
and the days or months of the suspension were outlined, then 
the board of education would hire a substitute teacher to replace 
that teacher in the classroom. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I just have one other question. 
What exactly . . . why was this idea of a formal reprimand 
introduced? Who brought it in, and what was really the intent of 
bringing it in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
recognizing that the concept of formal reprimand is not 
something that this statute introduces, formal reprimands have 
been out there in the collective education system for some time. 
 
What this Act does is provides an avenue of protection to the 
teacher; to allow for an independent panel to review the 



2078 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

circumstances and the reasonings surrounding these formal 
reprimands, and then to provide a ruling and an opportunity to 
overrule the reprimand if the reference committee felt that it 
was unjust. 
 
So this is really an initiative of teachers. The teachers felt that 
this was very important to them to have this additional 
protection and this appeal mechanism in place, and after serious 
negotiation it was included in their collective bargaining and 
serious discussion with regard to the language and how this 
would be applied. And this has been recognized in this statute. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister, if it’s 
something that’s been talked about or an issue for some years 
and something that the teachers brought forward and has agreed 
to, then I guess far be it from us to say that it’s something that 
doesn’t work. 
 
So I thank you and I thank your officials, and we look forward 
to the Bill being introduced. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Occupational Health and Safety 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Seated to 
my left is Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister of Labour; and 
directly behind Ms. Morgan is Jeff Parr, who is the executive 
director, occupational health and safety division. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to welcome the 
minister and his officials here today. Bill 39, the occupational 
health and safety, it seems that this Bill is widely accepted by 
both industry and labour. I just have a few questions I’d like to 
ask the minister. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask the minister to give us a bit more 
detail about the issues that were reviewed by the Tri-partite 
Mines Regulations Review Committee starting back in 1997. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I thank the hon. 
member for the question. What led to this is the mines 
regulations that were passed in 1978 have been reviewed by, as 
the hon. member points out, business — that’s the mining 
sector — and by the unions involved in mining. Both, if I can 
describe it, parties — it wasn’t just two people, but both 
portions of the mining industry — reviewed the regulations, 
updated them from 1978 to, I will describe it, to their now 2001 
regulations. 
 
And the offshoot of it is the Bill before us which, if I can 
describe it in its most simplicity, what this Bill does is transfers 
some of the authority, if I can describe it, from Mr. Parr to the 

chief mines inspector. And that’s as it resides in, as I understand 
it, every other jurisdiction throughout the Commonwealth. 
 
(12:00) 
 
The chief mines inspector has the authority over the mines 
regulations. And this is just bringing us a little more current, 
and if I can conclude by saying it is a return actually for us in 
Saskatchewan in that respect. It’s a return to what it had been 
before the last amendments to The Occupational Health and 
Safety Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, another question. How 
long did that committee meet, and could we have the 
recommendations of that committee given to the official 
opposition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, the committee 
started meeting in May of 1997 and has met right through to 
May of 2000, and many, many meetings and much work. 
 
As I pointed out earlier, what they were doing was reviewing all 
of the mines regulations and bringing them up to current. The 
draft regulations have not been completed yet; we expect them 
sometime this fall. Once we get them we’d be happy to share 
that with the opposition. We just do not have that printed matter 
yet. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask a 
question concerning the chief mine inspector. Has there been 
problems or concerns in the past where the chief mine inspector 
made orders or recommendations about certain mines or issues 
that have not been followed because he didn’t have the 
authority in the past and is this now correcting that problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the answer is no, there’s 
not been problems in the past with this. What this Bill does is 
formalize what the practice has been now for some years. The 
practice has been in Saskatchewan for the chief mines inspector 
to do the work that this Bill more formally recognizes, and as I 
point out, brings into line with other jurisdictions in that regard 
and with previous practice in Saskatchewan. 
 
But it’s no change for the chief mines inspector, it just . . . I’ll 
describe it as formalizes or, you might choose, legalizes some 
of the work that the chief mines inspector has been doing. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Will the chief mines inspector 
need to be upgraded as far as qualifications concerning the 
change in regulations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the answer is an 
unqualified no, the chief mines inspector is very well qualified 
under this Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. As you said, Mr. Minister, you are 
intending on introducing new mining regulations later this year. 
Will the industry be able to review and basically sign-off on 
those regulations before they are enacted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the industry is in fact 
reviewing, reviewing those regulations right now. And that’s 
what we’re waiting for to come back from the industry and the 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2079 

 

labour side that are reviewing it. When that comes we will have 
our draft regulations. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and your 
officials. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to thank my 
officials for their help through this and thank the hon. member 
for Redberry Lake for his questions. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 40 — The Teachers’ Dental Plan 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Teachers Superannuation 
and Disability Benefits Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 54 — The Education Amendment Act, 2001/ 
Loi de 2001 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Occupational Health and Safety 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 

The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Seated to 
my left again is Sandra Morgan, the deputy minister. Directly 
behind me is Cheryl Hanson, the assistant deputy minister. 
 
To my right and back behind is Dawn McKibben who’s director 
of human resources and administration. We have John Boyd, 
sitting directly behind Ms. Morgan. Seated at the back of the 
room is Jeff Parr, the executive director, occupational health 
and safety division. Eric Green, the acting executive director of 
labour services, is at the back, as is Peter Federko, the chief 
executive officer of the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome again to 
the minister, and your officials. 
 
I’m reading from the report of the Provincial Auditor, 2001 
Spring Report, and the auditor has a couple of concerns with 
how the Workers’ Compensation Board operates. One is 
“Workers’ Compensation Board) needs disaster recovery plan,” 
which I would like to read into the record, his 
recommendations. It says: 
 

We continue to recommend the WCB should prepare an 
adequate disaster recovery plan and test that plan to ensure 
it works. 
 

I’d like to ask the minister and his officials, are you going to act 
on his recommendation? 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the question is really 
around how the board would continue to operate in the event of 
a major disaster in its information technology, that sort of thing. 
And I’m advised that the plan is progressing along and by the 
end of the year there is an expectation that it will have been 
tested and up and running, the disaster plan. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, I would 
like to go on to the second item that the Provincial Auditor 
brings up. It’s concerning . . . He says, the WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) needs to provide public disclosure of 
payments, and the recommendation is as follows. The 
Provincial Auditor says: 
 

We continue to recommend the WCB should publish a list 
of persons, other than injured workers, who received 
money from it and the amounts the person received 
following . . . (Public Accounts) current minimum 
disclosure amounts. Alternatively, the WCB should discuss 
with . . . (Public Accounts) a different public disclosure 
requirement to meet the MLAs objectives. 
 

And I’d just like the minister to respond to the Provincial 
Auditor’s concerns about that area. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m advised that this 
matter too is proceeding forward. And in fact the board has 
done its bit and it’s now referred back to the Public Accounts 
Committee what is needed. The next step is for the Public 



2080 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

Accounts Committee to meet and consider this item and make a 
decision on how it’s to proceed further. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I have 
been notified about at least one and possibly a number of trips 
to various parts of the country and to North America. The one 
in particular is concerning a group of WCB officials that I am 
told went to a seminar in Boston, Massachusetts. 
 
I would like the minister to confirm what trips or seminars the 
officials go to, and in particular this Boston one, and if he 
could, outline what officials go and the circumstances around 
the seminars and the cost of going to the seminars. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the Boston seminar is a 
part of the business process simplification unit, if I could 
describe it that way, or team would be more accurate, that the 
Workers’ Compensation Board has set up, Mr. Chair. 
 
They have been attending . . . or have attended a seminar in 
Boston. There are nine team members; three of the team 
members have attained the process master certificate. I think 
that’s important to note, that progress is made with this team. 
 
I should say that the process simplification will provide better 
service to the clients of the Workers’ Compensation Board, be 
they injured workers or be they the businesses that fund the 
board. This replaces bringing in an outside consultant for much 
of this work and it really helps the process at the board. 
 
And I should add . . . Oh, I’m sorry, there was a question 
around the cost too. We do not have that cost with us today but 
we’ll provide it in writing if that’s agreeable. We’ll get that 
information and get it to you in a reasonably short time. I’ll 
even define reasonably short as not months; we’re talking I 
would think a week, roughly. 
 
And the other thing I want to point out to the member is that 
subsequent to the Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board 
starting this business process simplification, I’m advised that 
the Workers’ Compensation Board in Manitoba and in Nova 
Scotia are now following a similar process and attending to the 
seminar in Boston. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I have a number of 
questions concerning the Dorsey report, regarding the WCB. 
Could you give us the final cost of the Dorsey report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the cost is very, very 
close to $102,000. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. The government received this 
report on October 3, 2000, yet did not release the report until 
the spring. I would like to ask the minister, Mr. Minister, can 
you tell us what took place within the intervening months as far 
as any consultation or other review by the government, or did 
the report just simply sit on the shelf in those months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there is really nothing 
new in the answer that I’m about to give, from what I’ve 
provided in the past. The report was tabled with the Minister of 
Labour; there was a change in ministers of Labour — I was 
appointed — and it took . . . Let me describe it a different way. 

The government didn’t formally deal with it until I was able to 
bring a recommendation forward to cabinet and ultimately we 
— or exec council — and ultimately we dealt with the Dorsey 
report and quite happily made that report a public document. In 
fact, as you will recall, we invited Mr. Dorsey here for the 
release of the Dorsey report and I’m very pleased to say that 
we’ve embraced all of the recommendations of the Dorsey 
report. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ll ask, Mr. Minister, 
in your press conference the day you finally released the report, 
you announced that you were prepared to implement all of Mr. 
Dorsey’s recommendations. How did you arrive at this 
conclusion and did you consult with any stakeholders to help 
you arrive at this conclusion? And if so, who did you consult 
with? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, the consultation was really 
the Dorsey process. Mr. Dorsey did the consultation, wrote up 
his report, presented it to the Minister of Labour, and the rest is 
history, as I say. We’re pleased that Mr. Dorsey did what we 
think is a very, very thorough job of consulting, and issued a 
very, very good report and one that we were able to embrace all 
of the recommendations. We’ve accepted all of the 
recommendations and we’ll be implementing them all. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d like to ask 
the minister, recently your government received a report on the 
health care system and stated that public hearings would be 
necessary before you made any decisions. 
 
Yet in this case, you are prepared to implement everything 
without any form of consultation before the release. Why is 
this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chair, the Dorsey report was an 
administrative review. That was the challenge that was put to 
Mr. Dorsey at that time. 
 
Now we have a committee of review, which is a legally 
mandated review that has set up. We were very, very pleased 
that Mr. Dorsey was available to chair the committee of review. 
 
And this is the legislative review, if I can describe it, of the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. And that committee has been 
struck now and we’re looking forward to the committee of 
review doing its work, completing its work and then, sometime 
I believe this fall, presenting a report to us. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like you to go over some of the 
recommendations. You said some of the recommendations in 
the Dorsey report need legislative change, and obviously these 
changes won’t be brought forward to this session. 
 
Could you tell us which ones need legislative change and why? 
And I assume you will introduce these changes next sitting, 
next session. 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, the two parts of the Dorsey 
report that require legislative changes are, one, a 
recommendation that the board of the Workers’ Compensation 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2081 

 

Board move to a part-time board. We currently have a full-time 
three-member board: an appointment representing business, an 
appointee representing labour, and an independent chairperson 
— a three-person board. 
 
One of the recommendations is that that board become a 
part-time board; and that flows really from the other legislative 
change that’s going to be required, and that is that we move to 
an independent-from-the-board appeal process. 
 
Currently injured workers can appeal to the three-person board 
is, I won’t describe it as the penultimate, but it is — because the 
medical tribunal is the penultimate review — but this moves it 
from an appeal to the board to an independent body for an 
appeal. And this is something that injured workers have been 
asking for, for many, many years. That’s the second legislative 
change. 
 
And I think — I’m not sure if you asked this or just assumed 
that we would be making, introducing legislation next session 
— I will say that is my plan. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Of those changes that do not 
require legislative approval, do you have a timetable for 
implementation of each of those recommendations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for the 
question. At the Compensation Board they’re working on this 
— the Dorsey report — as we speak; but primarily or largely 
developing the plan of implementation. Although I don’t want 
to leave the impression they’re delaying; some of the 
recommendations are easier to deal with than others. 
 
The next critical step on this process is the appointment of the 
next chairperson of the Workers’ Compensation Board. And 
we’re in a process of seeking a new chairperson as we meet 
today. That’s the next step. 
 
After that, I think it’s fair to say, deadlines will be established, 
the board will present the plan for implementation, deadlines 
will then be set. As a matter of principle, I don’t think there’s 
any view that we should be delaying the implementation of the 
Dorsey recommendations. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Have you estimated 
the cost to Workers’ Compensation for a full implementation of 
the recommendations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, that’s part of what is being 
developed, is the costing of the implementation of all of the 
Dorsey reports. When we have the new Chair of the 
Compensation Board, that will be presented, I’m advised, to the 
chairperson and to me as the minister at that time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. When will the new chairman be 
appointed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that the 
competition closed, the applications closed last week. And so 
we’re moving into the shortening or they’re moving into the 
shortening of the applicants, and then interviewing will be 
starting, I think, next month . . . late this month. Later this 
month the interview process will start. 

I can’t give you a definite date, Member, for when it will be 
done, but it is advancing and we’re anxious also to have a new 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — One of the recommendations made by Mr. 
Dorsey is that all policy directives and decisions made by WCB 
should be made public. Was this in response to changes that 
WCB made to the independence allowance, which they never 
bothered informing WCB clients who were entitled to benefits 
with the change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Dorsey’s 
recommendation was made so that all injured workers could 
readily access the policies and the procedures that the Workers’ 
Compensation Board use in their determination and 
adjudication of each worker’s compensation case. 
 
I’m advised that now we have a situation where all of the 
policies are on the Internet, and more recently, all of the 
procedures are on the Internet. The Workers’ Compensation 
Board has done that one already. They’re now meeting that 
requirement. 
 
And I’m further advised that there is a process in place to 
update, on an ongoing basis, the policies and the procedures as 
any of those may change. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Again on the independence 
allowance, Mr. Minister. We have heard that WCB was now 
making independence allowance available to those workers who 
suffer permanent impairment on the job. Could you give me a 
brief explanation of how this allowance works? How many will 
be eligible to receive it? The total cost you expect? And who 
and where will the money be coming from to pay for the 
allowance? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for that 
very important question, because the independence allowance 
. . . I think we should be as clear as we can about what it is for. 
It is a tragic truth in not only Saskatchewan, but all of the 
provinces, that every day people are injured on the job. It is a 
tragic truth that some percentage of those people who are 
injured suffer a permanent functional impairment. 
 
The independence allowance is to acknowledge that . . . for 
example, whenever there’s painting needed to be done at our 
place, I usually will get my family lined up and we’ll paint. But 
the truth is I do most of the painting at our household. 
 
Injured workers, tragically, can’t always continue to do the 
painting, the washing windows, the normal maintenance, the 
mowing the lawn, the shovelling of the walk, many of the 
day-to-day things that those of us that are reasonably 
healthy-bodied take for granted. 
 
So there was an independence allowance created that would 
help injured workers to stay in their homes, if I can describe it 
that way, with the minimum disruption to their family lives and 
so on that is possible. Unfortunately, we can’t always make 
bodies whole and perfect but we can provide an independence 
allowance recognizing some additional costs. 
 
There is a hundred per cent independent allowance paid for 



2082 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

injured workers who have a 40 per cent or greater permanent 
functional impairment rating. That’s been the policy for some 
time. More recently it has been determined that for injured 
workers rated in the 10 to 39 per cent of a permanent functional 
impairment, that the Compensation Board would pro-rate that 
independence allowance accordingly. 
 
I’m pleased to report that to date there are 400 injured workers 
that we have found that were previously not receiving in that 10 
to 39 per cent range of independence allowance; there’s 400 of 
them that now are. And I’m very pleased to report that this is an 
automatic payment now that they will get each year. The cost of 
that, I’m advised, is just under a million dollars. 
 
I’m further advised that the Compensation Board continues to 
look for other employees. They’re now in the process of getting 
an actuarial to look at it to determine what all of the costs are 
but they’ve identified the easiest to find ones, I think that’s 
fairly safe to say. Not that they’ve identified all of the workers 
that might qualify, but so far it’s at a million dollars. I don’t 
think it’s productive for me to speculate on where that dollar 
figure might ultimately end. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I note that it was a 
policy change that brought this independence allowance to the 
public’s eye, and what concerns me is the amount of time that 
was allowed to pass. 
 
I’m wondering why WCB didn’t tell workers about this, 
especially when we’ve been given to understand that this policy 
change was recommended and implemented more than two 
years ago. Could you please explain your department’s rationale 
behind this, Mr. Minister? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, when the policy decision 
was made to make the improvement to the permanent functional 
impairment payment, that was posted, the Workers’ 
Compensation Board posted that on the Web site at that time 
and as quickly as the policy was passed. 
 
The matter came to my attention, obviously this year as 
minister, and I’d some discussions with the board and they 
agreed to more actively search out for injured workers that 
would qualify for the, this independence allowance. And the 
rest brings us up-to-date in terms of the answer that I provided 
previously. 
 
But I’m very pleased with the actions of the board, as we’re 
actively now moving to make sure that every injured worker 
that should have the independence allowance does get it. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Still on the Dorsey, one of the 
more interesting recommendations is that an independent appeal 
tribunal will be established. Can you explain how this will 
work? And what safeguards will be in place to ensure that it is 
in fact independent from WCB and the government in making 
its decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, the question of the 
independent review appeal panel — if I can describe it that way 
— is a most interesting one. We have not made a decision on 

how that is going to operate. I have stated repeatedly publicly 
that we have a committee of review chaired by Mr. Dorsey and 
businesses, labour . . . interested parties have an opportunity to 
make their views known to that review commission. And I urge 
them to do so there. I will very much look forward to the 
recommendation coming from there. 
 
In addition, we’ve talked a bit about we have a new chairperson 
at the board that we’re . . . I mean we don’t have, but we will 
have reasonably soon. This will be a matter that the new Chair 
of the board is going to want to consider. And I look forward to 
having some discussions with that new Chair, the board, and the 
officials around this whole matter. Nothing but nothing is cast 
in stone at this moment. 
 
Well I shouldn’t say nothing. What is cast in stone is our 
absolute determination to make this work. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Has there been a process put in 
place that will be used to select the members on the tribunal, or 
are you waiting for the new Chair to make those decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, no, we’re nowhere near that 
point yet. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Again, on the tribunal, do you foresee this 
tribunal working similar to that of the Labour Relations Board 
as a quasi-judicial body? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, I genuinely thank the hon. 
member for the questions and his interest in it. We’re just . . . 
the questions are ahead of where we are in this process right 
now. We just, just do not know the answer to that. There’s a 
step-out process that has to be followed so that we can get the 
best recommendations. 
 
We are determined to have the system work, but I just can’t 
answer that question because there is no answer at this stage. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — I appreciate your answer, Mr. Minister. I have 
a number of questions concerning how . . . about the operation. 
But one of the concerns is this body or tribunal doesn’t end up 
another, basically, another appeal process that’s a year or two 
behind on its appeals. 
 
Are there any safeguards you can tell us about today that will 
rectify that problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, I think the best way I can 
answer the question is to say that I share the concern, that we 
are not interested — I’m not, the department is not, the 
Compensation Board is not interested — in this becoming 
another appeal process that simply takes longer for an injured 
worker to access. We’re interested in having a process that 
works demonstrably well, that’s open, accountable, as far as 
those issues can be, and we do not wish for it to slow the 
process down at all. 
 
While I’m on that though, I do want to say that the 
Saskatchewan Workers’ Compensation Board, while the appeal 
processes have problems and while . . . I don’t want to 
understate nor overstate it. There are problems and there are 
timeliness problems, but my understanding, every time I’ve 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2083 

 

checked with other jurisdictions, is that the Saskatchewan 
Workers’ Compensation appeal process works remarkably well 
compared to virtually every other jurisdiction. 
 
So I say that in defence of the good people that work daily at it, 
but I absolutely, freely acknowledge that there are problems. If 
there weren’t, we wouldn’t be having this discussion today. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Will this independent tribunal be 
available to those who have long-standing claims with WCB, 
and also to people that have been turned down recently? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, again we’re just nowhere in 
developing this legislation at this point. I would urge that if 
organizations or individuals have views on that, that they make 
them known to the committee of review — that would be a very 
appropriate place at this moment — and then that will be 
considered there. 
 
And as I say, I look forward to getting the report from the 
committee of review. The consultation that I expect to have 
with the incoming president, or Chair rather, of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board . . . There’s some things to happen, but we 
just don’t know the answer to that question at this stage. It’s just 
premature. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I have a question too concerning 
the Worker’s Advocate’s office. 
 
Many people rely on the Worker’s Advocate office and . . . well 
people are helped by this office; they tell us they are very 
satisfied with the office and the staff. And I was just wondering, 
what are you proposing to do about the long waiting lists at the 
Worker’s Advocate's office and what do you propose to do 
about this and help in that area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, again I thank the member 
for the question. The Worker’s Advocate’s office is not a 
simple operation. Because though I’m fairly familiar with it and 
I share a frustration with the time it takes for an appeal from 
start to finish — and in fact I shared that with the Worker’s 
Advocate’s office staff when I was over there earlier this year 
— and I agree with your comments about the Worker’s 
Advocate and his staff being very fine people who work very 
diligently. 
 
What we’ve done, been able to do is we’ve added some staff 
components. We have been working on administration areas to 
try and make that work better. One example out of the Dorsey 
report would be that the Worker’s Advocate’s office should be 
able to access, electronically, injured workers’ files that they’re 
working on. Well that’s one of the recommendations. It hasn’t 
happened yet but we’re looking forward to that happening and 
that facilitating the operation at the Worker’s Advocate’s office. 
 
Probably as importantly is the matter we were talking about a 
short while ago, the independent appeals process. I’m thinking 
that will relieve some of the pressure of the Worker’s 
Advocate’s office as well. 
 
There’s that. There’s more I can provide and happy to provide 
more detail of the things that are happening at the Worker’s 
Advocate’s office. But it’s one . . . I think the best answer I can 

give is it’s an area that we’re concerned with. We’re trying to 
funnel increased resources to try and address that, I’ll describe 
it as a backlog, in the appeal process. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I notice that another of the 
recommendations that Mr. Dorsey refers to as a complete 
transition to independent oversight. I’d like to ask, Mr. 
Minister, does this mean you as a minister would be even more 
removed than you claim you’ve been? Would it get to the point 
where you or your successor will not even be willing to answer 
questions about WCB operations either in the question period or 
in estimates? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chair, the short and the long answer is 
no. There will always be a minister responsible to answer the 
questions regarding the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — As far as the operations of WCB, can you 
describe if any of the proposed recommendations deal with the 
split of duties between the CEO (chief executive officer) and 
the chairman? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chair, as I understand the question, it 
was: did Mr. Dorsey, in his report, address the delineation of 
the Chair of the Workers’ Compensation Board and the CEO. I 
believe that was the question, and the short answer is no, that 
was not commented on in the Dorsey report. 
 
I will say that it is in the legislation and there’s a differentiation. 
The chief executive officer is responsible for the staffing and 
the daily and the ongoing operation, if I can describe it, the 
operations side at the Workers’ Compensation Board, and the 
Chair is responsible for the policy and the governance side. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. One of the major complaints we 
hear from WCB activists is the need for independent medical 
opinions. People often find that the word of their own doctor is 
completely discounted for that of doctors paid for by the WCB. 
Do you see a problem with this and do you plan to make any 
changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chair, I’m advised that the last 
amendment to the compensation Act removed from the 
Workers’ Compensation doctors the ability to direct the care of 
an injured worker. They couldn’t direct the medical treatment or 
care. 
 
The injured workers’ care is now directed by the injured 
workers’ doctors, and these are self-selected doctors. The 
Compensation Board has medical advice available to help the 
people who work at the board understand what is taking place 
with an injured worker — to understand perhaps more 
medically what the injury is about — and it will help facilitate 
in the moving forward of that injured worker’s case. But again I 
say, the treatment is directed by the injured worker’s own 
doctor. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, I’d like to ask the 
minister: does your government have any intentions of 
revisiting the concept of establishing an occupational disease 
panel in relation to WCB coverage which the government was 
very close to doing a couple of years ago? 
 



2084 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, again, the short answer to 
that is no, we’re not anticipating moving back. We see it as a 
significant step back in Workers’ Compensation benefits. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Understandably there are many 
people, particularly employers, who would be concerned about 
such a move. They would fear that it would open the door for 
coverage of all manner of illnesses now considered 
work-related injuries. 
 
However, one occupation that argues for something for their 
industry is the firemen. We’ve met with the firemen — and I’m 
sure you did as well, Mr. Minister. The professional firefighters 
we visited with have a great deal of concern about occupational 
diseases. They told us that firefighters have four times higher 
incidents of heart disease and cancer than the general public. 
 
Is this something your department is aware of, and has there 
been consideration to looking at these diseases as possible 
work-related for firemen specifically? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chair, I’m very pleased about this 
question because it gives me a chance to share what I view as 
good news. 
 
We have a chief occupational medical officer in Saskatoon. The 
Compensation Board is working with the chief occupational 
medical officer and with firefighters. They’re gathering the 
latest information on this very important matter. 
 
The only thing I could possibly say further to that is that I 
discussed this with the board, I discussed it with firefighters, 
and I’m following the progress that they’re making. And I’m 
very pleased that they’re looking at the most current research 
that’s available and hopefully can move this along to a proper 
and a just resolution for all involved. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. In fact, Mr. Minister, life 
expectancy for the average fireman is a full 10 years younger 
than the general population. This is not because they are killed 
on the job. In fact the last firefighter to be lost directly as a 
result of a fire was in the early 1980s. So something else is at 
play here. 
 
Has your department examined this and how do you respond to 
statistics like this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chair, I too know the statistics. I think 
the answer I gave previously would be hard for me to improve 
upon. We’re looking at the statistics from a safety perspective. I 
know that the safety of firefighters, the use of Scott Air-Paks, 
the methods of fighting fires have improved hugely from the 
1950s or the 1960s or even the 1970s. 
 
Even though we think this year is the same as last year which 
was the same as the year before, things do change, things do 
progress. Firefighters become more and more aware and we no 
longer have the old smoke-eaters that were around 20 and 25 
years ago, and they’ve referred to themselves as smoke-eaters 
because they go into a fire basically unprotected. 
 
Now that’s not to say that Scott Air-Paks is the total answer. 
We do everything we can on the side of occupational health and 

safety in what is recognized as inherently a very dangerous job. 
 
With respect to the adrenalin flow that comes and the medical 
concerns related to adrenalin pump and then withdrawal, there’s 
very little that we can do. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. How does the WCB 
apply to volunteer firefighters? Are they eligible? Are they 
eligible to volunteer firefighters? Is WCB eligible to volunteer 
firefighters? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, volunteer 
firefighters — there’s a policy on it and I’m advised they are 
eligible for benefits. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. The firefighters we spoke to also 
have a concern with section 489 of the occupational health and 
safety regulations. We’re told that often, in some of our 
mid-sized cities, often go to fire calls with only four members 
— and sometimes only three. This makes it impossible for these 
fire crews to enter a burning structure lawfully since the safety 
regulations are not met. 
 
Is this a problem you are aware of, and what are you going to 
do about it, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, yes, I and we are very 
aware of this issue. I’m pleased to say that my officials have 
been working and have developed a protocol in conjunction 
with the fire chiefs around the province and that we’ll be happy 
to share with the member. We can send that over to you. And 
like I say, I’m happy to report that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d appreciate that. One of the . . . 
probably the major problem is funding. Have you had a 
discussion with the Municipal Affairs minister about funding 
local governments to an adequate level so enough firefighters 
can go on these calls and meet the safety regulations and protect 
people from possibly being entrapped in a burning building? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, staffing levels, I’m advised, 
are decided by municipal councils. I’m further advised my 
department is happy to work with them to try and make sure 
that the staffing levels and procedures that firefighters, in this 
case, would follow will be as safe as they possibly can. 
 
And let me here acknowledge that there are times where you 
have unsafe acts. You have . . . I know if I were driving by a 
house and saw a house on fire and thought I could pull 
somebody out, I would try it, even though I have zero training 
in that. I know that I would do that. I know myself that well. 
 
Firefighters have those same feelings of protection of life that I 
think virtually every human being has. And from time to time, 
you just get caught where you don’t have the staff that you 
should have. I’m just acknowledging that can happen. Someone 
can have the flu. There’s a number of things can happen. 
 
I want to come back to the answer I gave you to the previous 
question, Member. I said that we would send across a piece of 
information to you. I’m advised we don’t have that paper with 
us today, but we’ll get it to you very shortly, if that’s 
acceptable. Thank you. 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2085 

 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Just a few more questions. One 
question concerning government tendering policies. And as we 
know, the Crown Construction Tendering Agreement was 
allowed to expire last December 31. However, the issue of 
tendering practices, particularly for the Crown corporations, 
remain unresolved. 
 
Could you possibly list the tendering practices and really flesh 
out the meaning and the direction of the tendering policies? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chair, tempting as it is and as much as 
I personally would love to enter into it, this is really a matter for 
Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation and I would 
invite the hon. member to ask the question when their estimates 
are up. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Just have two or three questions 
concerning our Minimum Wage Board. I understand the board 
is in place now. And is the government planning on doing a 
thorough study of the economic impact of a possible minimum 
wage adjustment? 
 
(13:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, the Minimum Wage Board, 
yes, is up and running. They’ve in fact met three times. Now 
they’ve not provided us with a recommendation at this stage 
and so there’s nothing further that we can do on this file. 
 
I will say that I’m looking forward to getting that, ultimately, 
the report. And in my heart of hearts I’d want it to be sooner 
rather than later but I don’t control that. It’s an independent 
Minimum Wage Board. I’m pleased that they’ve met three 
times. And I’m looking forward to their report to me. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’d like to ask you how many minimum wage earners are there 
in the province currently? 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — To introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, today I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, some good friends of the family. They’re Lynn and 
Henry Dechant from Fairview, Alberta. They flew in just a half 
hour ago in this wind with a private plane. They’re going to be 
taking in the Farm Progress Show. And they’ll be visiting with 
us over the weekend, accompanied by my wife, Marlene. 
 
I’d ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 

Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, I’m advised that about 15 
. . . between 15 and 16,000 Saskatchewan residents earn the 
minimum wage. And I’m going to volunteer a little bit more 
answer. Within a dollar of minimum wage, we believe there is 
about 54,000 Saskatchewan people earning within a dollar of 
the minimum wage. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, I guess it goes back 
to my first question. Will the government, or has the 
government contemplated doing a study into any increase in the 
minimum wage before they implement it, and will they discuss 
their study with all the stakeholders, small business, chambers, 
and private businesses? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Chairman, the process with respect to 
minimum wage has been that the Minimum Wage Board meets, 
considers the matter, will discuss minimum wage with who they 
choose to — if I can describe it that way. Typically what we 
have is business organizations and businesses, worker 
organization and some individual workers that will share as 
they can with the Minimum Wage Board what their views are 
respecting minimum wage. 
 
Since 1919 Saskatchewan has had a Minimum Wage Board. 
And to my knowledge every change in minimum wage 
subsequent to 1919 has come as a result of a recommendation 
from that Minimum Wage Board. 
 
Currently we have no recommendation from the Minimum 
Wage Board so there’s really nothing for us to study. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s all the 
questions I have at this time. We’d like to thank the minister 
and your officials for attending today. 
 
Subvote (LA01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (LA02), (LA03), (LA05), (LA04), (LA07), (LA06), 
(LA08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Just 
before the officials leave, I want to thank the officials not only 
for the work that they have done in the three times that we’ve 
been here in estimates, but for really the terrific work that all of 
the people at the Department of Labour do throughout the year 
on behalf of working people in Saskatchewan and on behalf of 
the employers. 
 
This is just a very fine department, full of some of the finest 
people you would find anywhere. I thank them, and particularly 
this day, I thank my officials. 
 
And I want to also, while I’m at it, thank the hon. member for 
Redberry Lake for his very good questions. 
 
The committee reported progress. 



2086 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, on 
my right, Brent Prenevost, the Crown counsel of legislative 
services, public law division; and behind him Monte Curle, who 
is the deputy director of the corporations branch in the registry 
services division of the Justice department. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
welcome to the minister and to his officials. The Partnership 
Amendment Act is one of the . . . of some of the Acts that have 
been affecting professionals and these sorts of things that we 
strongly endorse, that we think are good pieces of legislation 
and have been very timely and probably needed for a while. 
 
On Bill No. 1, The Partnership Amendment Act, would the 
general public see any difference when they interact with the 
professionals under the new legislation from what they 
experienced before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, the relationship between a client of a 
professional will remain the same in terms of liability, 
responsibility and so on. The only thing that might be different 
is the name on the door might be a little different to indicate 
that it’s a limited partnership. 
 
But in terms of the relationship, the professional responsibility 
and so on of the lawyer, the accountant, or whatever, that would 
remain the same. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. On the other Bills that we’ve 
discussed of a similar nature dealing with professionals, one of 
the questions has always been how do we relate to other 
provinces. And I’m just wondering, is this piece of legislation 
based or sort of profiled on another province’s legislation or is 
this one that’s quite unique to what’s happening across Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chairman, I’m surprised that the 
member would ask this question. It’s because he always asks it. 
 
The legislation grew out of Uniform Law Conference proposal, 
which means that it essentially grew out of a recognition by all 
of the provinces that there was a need to be kind of on the same 
page. 
 
Alberta and Ontario have introduced legislation following on 
from the Uniform Law Conference proposal. And ours . . . 
essentially they’re all the same but there are little bits and 
pieces that are different. And we essentially have drawn what 
we consider to be the best response and what professional 
associations consider to be the best response from those three. 
 
So we’re pretty early in responding to this call. And I’m glad 
that you’re supportive of it too. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think 
that basically covers the questions. We’ve asked a number of 
questions earlier on, on this particular Bill and some of the 

similar ones. So I think we’re prepared to say that concludes 
our questioning. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(13:30) 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2001 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I’d like the Assembly to welcome Jim 
Hall, who’s sitting behind Brent Prenevost, who is the 
Superintendent of Insurance and the Registrar of Credit Unions. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And again welcome to the 
officials on this particular Bill. 
 
The credit unions throughout Saskatchewan are a fairly active 
group and I think they keep fairly on top of things and do a 
moderate amount of lobbying of government people. Is this 
piece of legislation totally on the initiative of the credit union 
movement or are some of these items that have come from 
government itself? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, essentially that’s the case. 
There are a few — and as a teacher, the member will appreciate 
this — there are some spelling, reference, and grammatical 
errors which he’s always pleased to note that we’re clearing up 
in this amendment. 
 
But the core, the substance of this relatively small Act is in 
response to concerns raised by the credit union system. And the 
member will remember that not very long ago there was a major 
rewrite of credit union legislation, not unusual to have a couple 
of substantive points and indeed some of the other spelling, 
reference, and other matters to be cleared up. So that’s what this 
Bill is about. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — This Bill changes essentially the role of the 
board of directors of the credit union. And if you could just 
briefly explain what specific changes are being made that 
involve the board of directors and what changes those will . . . 
or how that will affect how the credit unions will be operating. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, there are really two issues here, and one is 
essentially a clarification. The credit unions were not sure 
whether the legislation permitted the president and 
vice-president of the board to sit on the credit union’s audit 
committee. This Bill will clarify that, so that presidents and 
vice-presidents are permitted to sit on the audit committee. 
 
And it also will allow the credit union to . . . the credit union’s 
Conduct Review Committee to review transactions between 
related parties, rather than that being done by the board of 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2087 

 

directors, but the report from the Conduct Review Committee 
will go to the board of directors. 
 
But it’s seen as a facilitative measure. It’ll be easier for the 
credit unions to do their business if a committee can review 
those kinds of transactions. So those are the two, the two points 
involved here. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. My second question was one that 
you just answered and that is that the work that the Conduct 
Review Committee does goes back to the board of directors, 
and I’m taking for granted that at that point the board of 
directors then becomes ultimately responsible for decisions 
made by the Conduct Review Committee. 
 
And that concludes the questions that we have on Bill No. 15. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you. This is a fairly lengthy . . . short Bill 
with many clauses. Is leave granted to deal with the Bill page 
by page. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 19 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 2001 modifiant 

la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 

The Chair: — Recognize the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
right, members will recognize Susan Amrud, whose title I don’t 
have but everybody knows who she is. And on my left, Ken 
Acton, who is in charge of mediation services. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And again thank you for this opportunity to 
ask a few questions and welcome to the minister’s new 
officials. 
 
This Bill No. 32, I think is a fairly new direction in a specific 
area that’s taking place. And so, the question is how long has 
this program been in development? Like, has the idea just come 
up in the last six months and here it is, or has this been a 
long-term process to get this far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, since 1996, the department 
has been utilizing this kind of mediation process on a voluntary 
basis and over the last short while, the last year and a half or so, 
evaluating how best to proceed into the future. And that 
evaluation and looking at what has happened in some other 
jurisdictions as well leads us to develop a pilot project which is 
mandatory. 
 
So that in Yorkton and Saskatoon, couples who are separating 
will be required to go to mediation as a part of the process of 
ensuring that the separation, if it is going to take place, is as 

constructive as those kinds of situations can be. So it’s been 
voluntary. 
 
The member will know that many people have argued that there 
should be some more required course of action for people who 
are separating and particularly where children are involved. 
And so, this is a mandatory process which we’re piloting, as I 
said, in Yorkton and Saskatoon and hopefully we will see 
expanded across the province. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I think, in philosophy, we 
basically support where this piece of legislation is going and 
also the part that it becomes mandatory. Because, obviously, 
just to give people the option to opt out and then make the thing 
more acrimonious than necessary is not desirable. 
 
The question is, obviously you’ve done a fair bit of research on 
this. You’ve had a voluntary program in effect. But you can’t 
very well go from the voluntary program and say this is how 
well this program will work because now you put into the mix 
people who are forced into it. 
 
So I would imagine or I would hope that you have some fairly 
sophisticated evidence from other jurisdictions where it is 
mandatory to see how well it works. And I am just wondering 
how well it does work in those jurisdictions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well indeed, Mr. Chair, this has been 
implemented after looking at practices in other provinces, really 
in Manitoba . . . sorry, in Alberta and British Columbia. 
 
And both those provinces have seen this program lead to 
positive results with a reduced flow of cases in family court, a 
greater awareness on the part of those participating of the full 
range of appropriate dispute resolution options available to 
them, and — what I think many people are very interested in — 
an increased awareness in how the separation process and the 
dispute resolution process affects children who are involved in 
the relationship. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. The classes that are now going to 
become mandatory obviously . . . or at least I would hope that 
you’re not just giving a group of people or these two people 
over to another individual and say, try and solve it. There must 
be a plan, a program, or a curriculum — whatever term you 
want to use. 
 
I’m wondering if you can briefly outline what that curriculum is 
and whether I’d be able to receive a copy of that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I’d be happy to ensure that the 
member gets a copy of what process is taking place. I think it’s 
important that as many people as possible are fully familiar 
with and supportive of the process that is taking place. 
 
And I’d say that this process is very much supported by judges, 
by lawyers, and by other professionals who work with families 
and relationships. 
 
The mediation sessions will be carried out, some by members of 
the mediation branch in the Department of Justice, some by 
social workers, and some by family lawyers, mediators — 
people who are trained to provide these services. 



2088 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

And really they have three main components. One, the 
presentation of options for resolving a dispute. So discussion of 
those options available to separating and divorcing couples, 
information on child support guidelines as well, information on 
the stages of separation and divorce, including information on 
those stages and the effects of separation on adults. 
 
Secondly, focus on the children’s reaction to separation and 
divorce. There’s a video presentation for example which 
addresses the effects on children at varying ages. 
 
And thirdly, a session dealing with parenting after separation 
and divorce, again with videos and discussions regarding the 
emotional issues, parental stress, parental issues, and the needs 
of children. 
 
So a comprehensive program to assist parents and assist 
children, carried out by professionals in what will first of all be 
Saskatoon and Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I believe a unique component of 
this program is where the one spouse who initiates the 
proceedings has to sort of serve the other spouse with sort of the 
statement that you need to start attending these classes, and so I 
guess a bit of a barrage here. 
 
Why is that avenue chosen? And secondly, what happens if 
someone fails to attend the classes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The way the process would work is 
the partner who wishes to end a relationship would make a 
petition . . . would petition the court to do so and include within 
that petition a request that the other partner participate in 
mediation. The court would essentially then order that. If the 
person decided not to attend, there are a number of options 
available for the petitioning partner. 
 
(13:45) 
 
What is most likely to happen is that the judge will order the 
person who doesn’t want to attend to attend just in the hope that 
that will give him one last chance to reconsider. Because the 
other consequences are that the petitioner can apply to the court 
just to strike out any pleadings the other partner might present, 
any of the other partner’s arguments, and refuse . . . and also 
ask the court to refuse to allow the other partner to make any 
submissions in support of his or her point of view, his or her 
case. 
 
So the most likely is that there will be every encouragement for 
the partner who does not want to participate in mediation to go 
and participate because the consequences of not doing so are 
that they could end up by not being able to make their case at 
all. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well thank you. And that concludes the 
questions that we have on Bill No. 22. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 5 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 

Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, on 
my right is Andrea Seale, Crown counsel for legislative services 
branch in the Department of Justice. And at the back: Bert 
Linklater, who is the executive director, district management 
services branch at the Department of Health; Ken Kolb, senior 
policy analyst in the program and policy development and 
review branch of Municipal Affairs and Housing. 
 
Arun Srinivas, senior tax policy analyst with the taxation and 
intergovernmental affairs branch of Finance; Will Egan, who’s 
corporate counsel for SaskTel; Kim Mock, who’s acting 
manager, legislative and contract services branch, 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training; and Doug 
Kosloski, general counsel and corporate secretary for the Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan — which is probably 
why this is called a miscellaneous Bill. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Again, welcome to the minister’s many 
officials. But then I guess on the other hand, he may not be sure 
how many questions I am going to ask so I guess he came well 
prepared. 
 
One of the things that’s being repealed is The Wascana Energy 
Inc. Act and part of that particular Act dealt with the head office 
maintaining . . . or being maintained in Regina. Are we then to 
conclude that that stipulation has now come to an end? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks very much, Mr. Chair. Indeed 
this does indicate that the relationship with Wascana Energy has 
come to an end. But I should say that in commercial terms and 
in terms of commitment to the province, there are now more 
employees here. The head office or the office will stay here. 
And the commitment of the company, the new company to 
Saskatchewan remains extremely important to the province and 
extremely significant. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And I guess that seems to 
indicate that sometimes having less red tape really doesn’t hurt 
the situation at all. 
 
Back in 1996 the Crown foundations and health district Act was 
passed. This was considered a very important piece of 
legislation at that time. It was, however, never proclaimed. So 
now some four or five years later, it’s just being taken off the 
record altogether. 
 
I would imagine this is then a fairly definite admission that that 
piece of legislation wasn’t necessary and was maybe useless 
and poorly thought out. Am I correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well of course the member’s free to 
hold his own opinions on such things. But the legislation 
became unnecessary after the federal government changed the 
Income Tax Act placing donations for those kinds of 
organizations and other charitable organizations on the same, on 
the same footing. 



June 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2089 

 

So basically changes to the federal Income Tax Act made the 
legislation unnecessary. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with 
apologies to all the fine people who came to answer questions 
and help out the minister, that concludes the questions we have 
on Bill No. 55. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member from Lloydminster on his 
feet? 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Chair, leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Chair, through you and to the 
Assembly, I would like to introduce — I believe this is correct 
— a group of students from Kamsack. Is that correct? 
 
I apologize. The information that was given to me, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, was for another group. We have several groups coming 
at this time of the year, so I do apologize. But on behalf of the 
legislature, I would like to welcome you here. 
 
And as you can see, we’re in the midst of doing some what we 
call committee work, and questions are being exchanged 
between one side and the other. I hope you have an opportunity 
to look around the legislature, this beautiful building, and I 
hope you will have fond remembrances of your trip here. 
 
So welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 

Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m requesting leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank my 
colleagues in the Legislative Assembly. There is a group in the 
east gallery from Lampman, Saskatchewan, in the southeast 
part of the province. And I feel compelled to acknowledge 
them. You see, Lampman was the hometown of my 

father-in-law, and indeed I know a fair number of the people 
down in Lampman and it’s a beautiful part of the province. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming the group that’s here 
from Lampman. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 1 — The Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 15 — The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Queen’s Bench 
Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 2001 modifiant 

la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour du Banc de la Reine 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this 
Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 55 — The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal 
(Regulatory Reform) Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, before we adjourn, 
I’d seek leave of the Assembly to move a motion with respect 
to granting a leave of absence to two of the members of the 
Legislative Assembly so that they can attend the Partnership of 
Parliaments in Germany on behalf of the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Leave of Absence 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would then move: 
 

That leave of absence be granted to the members for Moose 
Jaw Wakamow and Cypress Hills from Monday, June 25, 
2001 to Friday, July 6, 2001, inclusive, to attend the 
Partnership of Parliaments in Germany on behalf of this 



2090 Saskatchewan Hansard June 22, 2001 

 

Assembly. 
 

And I would so move, seconded by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:00. 
 
 


