















































Hansard: June 21, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2035 
 June 21, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — Will the minister please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chairman. On my 
immediate left, Mr. Keith Comstock, who is the acting 
executive director program policy development; Mr. Ken Kolb, 
who is sitting to my right, senior policy analyst; Mr. Gordon 
Hubbard, who is the acting manager, advisory services; and Ms. 
Lynnette Scarlud . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Skaalrud — 
I’m sorry, I apologize for that — who is legislation and 
regulation specialist. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your officials tonight. Being that it’s 
such a nice night outside I would maybe suggest that we move 
our chairs outside on the lawn. I think it would make for a lot 
better evening. But seeing we don’t have that choice I guess 
we’ll go forward here, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have agreed to deal with the rural municipal 
bill first and I believe that’s where we have most of our 
questions, but I think many of our questions would actually 
have been duplicated in the other Bills. I think we can go 
through them here and cover them here. 
 
I realize in the Bill that I think the biggest factor that we’re 
dealing here is with the impediments to amalgamation. So 
maybe, Mr. Minister, if we could start by, and it might shorten 
up our questions, if you could just run through the impediments 
that we’re removing here to amalgamation and the problems 
that they had before, that this Bill will actually remove and 
make it easier to amalgamate. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and to the 
member I apologize for the delay. There are a number of 
impediments, as you know, there were two main focuses to get 
government out of the face of local governments, municipal 
governments; and the other was to remove the impediments that 
the members asked about for restructuring. I’ll go through 
these. I can give you a copy of these. I can send a copy to the 
member or I can just list them in detail. I’ll shrink them down. 
 
Primarily, first of all, to clarify that references to municipality, 
rural municipality, include municipal districts. To change the 
requirements for the Lieutenant Governor in Council to issue 
orders to dissolve and urban municipality introduce provisions 
of a minister’s order in these cases. So it eases that process and 
to provide legislative authority for urban municipalities to 
directly become an organized hamlet without the need for any 
reversion. 
 
Provide for issuance of restructuring orders, clarify the effect of 
restructuring of former municipalities; provide for application 
of The Urban Municipality Act (1984) in restructured 

municipalities. And a great deal of these you will see will be to 
allow adjacent municipalities, hamlets, villages to enter into 
their own agreements to decide how they want to call 
themselves and how they want to incorporate and how they are 
going to share one another’s opportunities for equipment and 
administration and so on. 
 
And one of the important things is to provide discretionary 
authority for councils to delegate certain municipal functions to 
a community advisory committee and to confirm that members 
of community advisory committees will have the same 
protection against personal liability as would an employee of 
the municipality. 
 
The list does go on and I would be prepared to continue if the 
member so wishes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think we get the 
idea and I think we understand what you’ve removed here. I 
just wanted you to kind of touch on that. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you have any number in mind that you’d like 
to see in the long term like a number of districts out in the 
province. When we talked about forced amalgamation, I think 
Mr. Garcia had talked possibly of 14. Do you have a set number 
in your mind that 10 years down the road or 5 years down the 
road you’d like to see actually eventually be determined within 
the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, just to clarify again that the 
intent is to allow municipalities of their own accord to enter into 
whatever agreements, arrangements, with neighbouring 
municipalities, hamlets, villages. There is no number. It’s 
purely voluntary and I feel confident that the people, the elected 
officials, the leaders in those communities, will make those 
decisions that will benefit the municipalities that may become 
involved in these kinds of restructuring discussions. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As you know, Mr. 
Minister, I was one that was very much against the forced issue 
of amalgamation and I’m not just sure we didn’t set the whole 
process back a bit with the idea of forced amalgamation. 
 
Have you talked with SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) at all? Have you discussed what may be 
coming in the future? They maybe have a better feel than you 
do or I do about where they are going in the future. Are they 
getting much talk out there in the rural municipal end of it with 
villages, towns, or whatever that some of this is going to start to 
happen. 
 
I know in my area I had the I think it was the . . . it was the RM 
(rural municipality) of Calder and the Village of Wroxton 
voluntarily did it and it’s working to my understanding very, 
very well to the betterment of the ratepayers in both areas. It’s 
working very well. 
 
Do you get a feel from SARM, is there a movement starting? 
Are they talking out there? What’s the feeling? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there’s been no specific 
discussions with SARM. I believe that what will happen . . . 



2036 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

perhaps folks are just waiting to see what these legislative 
changes will allow them to do. 
 
I know, and as the member has indicated, Mr. Chair, that these 
changes have been welcomed and it’s as a result of the input 
from municipalities. But with respect to specific discussions 
about what areas or what communities, that has not been 
discussed to any extent at all. 
 
And what the member has mentioned about the voluntary 
restructuring, there have been others; I believe the RM of Pelly. 
So I do believe it will come as people recognize the positive 
advantages in their best interests and the best interests of those 
communities that they serve. I believe you’ll see that unfold and 
evolve as time goes on. And once the administrators and the 
leaders, the reeves, the mayors of the different villages and 
councils will recognize the autonomy that these legislative 
changes will give them in moving forward. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I agree with 
that. I think we’re going to get to the point. I think we saw in 
the session this year where our water and sewer has become a 
very big issue with communities out there, and I think as we see 
the cost of restructuring some of these that may be 30, 40 years 
old out there, we may see the necessity for amalgamation 
happen a lot quicker than maybe even you or me could feature 
in the long run. 
 
I think through necessity this may happen, and I think . . . I 
know I am, I am very glad to see the Bill removing these 
impediments to let this happen out there if the ratepayers so 
wish. I feel, and I think you maybe agree with me, Mr. Minister, 
that if the people out there, the ratepayers out there do it under 
their own supervision and of their own will, I think they’re 
going to be a lot more satisfied with where they end up. 
 
Mr. Minister, when a new district is set up for an amalgamation 
of two or more municipalities joined together — and if I’m 
trying to read into the Bill and get the proper reading of this — 
do you, as minister, have the final say though in the okay or 
denial of this amalgamation to go forward and the restructuring 
of a municipal body. Do you, as minister, still have the right to 
say, no this can’t happen or yes it will happen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — When all the information comes to the 
minister’s office, there is an order that would be signed by 
myself. It would be a minister’s order based on the information 
and probably ensuring that the information is . . . both are 
compatible and agreeable to . . . I would want to be sure, to the 
member, Mr. Chair, that both parties were in total agreement 
under the framework that’s available to them. And if there were 
any question coming out of the information that’s supplied, I 
think in all fairness there would need to be clarification. 
 
And I can’t think of, offhand, under which circumstances that 
there may be a denial. Given what’s transpired over the last year 
or so, I’m not sure there would be any conditions that would 
elicit a denial from the minister’s office to not allow that 
amalgamation to take place as long as both parties, or several 
parties, whomever it might be, have attested to the fact that they 
agree with all the terms and conditions and have resolved how 
they’re going to share their services, their administration. And I 
guess just in simple terms, as long as everybody’s happy with 

their own agreement and arrangement, it would be difficult to 
deny the positive effects of that kind of a union. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You actually 
answered my next question because I was kind of wondering at 
what point or for what reason you may deny the amalgamation 
of any type of municipalities out there, and you’ve actually 
answered that. 
 
Do you or your department have any preference to the way this 
would be done, whether it’s a village and an RM, or four RMs? 
Is there a set . . . do you have a predetermined pattern that you 
would like to see start as these districts are set up, or is it free 
for the municipalities to do whatever they wish? I think you 
mentioned that before, but I guess I’m wondering if you have a 
preference for what you would like to see happen out there in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that’s a good question, and 
I want to assure the member that there is no preconceived 
notions as to what we would impose on municipalities, hamlets, 
or villages. That would be totally their decision and I would 
rely on their good conscience, their deliberations, and their 
ideas to ensure that whatever agreements were entered into 
were such that they would be administratively manageable. 
 
(19:15) 
 
But having said that, I have confidence in those community 
leaders in making those decisions before they made the request. 
And by the way, just to add, once there’s satisfaction with all 
the information from all the parties involved, then the 
legislation says: 
 

The Minister shall issue that order. 
 
So as long as everything’s in place and the i’s are dotted and the 
t’s are crossed, then it’s incumbent on the minister to sign that 
order. 
 
But again, just to underline the response to the question asked 
by the member. That again would be left to the decision-making 
process of the local leaders to decide what they felt would be in 
the best interests. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wasn’t fishing 
to see if you had an ulterior motive here behind the scenes 
although I was a wee bit interested. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s my understanding the way this would work 
that when a new district was being set up, no matter how many 
municipalities involved, that the councils would cease to exist 
in every entity out there. Is there some type of a set-up within or 
a system set up within here that an interim council would be set 
up, or how would that work? Or else the municipality of a new 
district would actually have to function without a municipal 
body. Can you explain how that would work when it’s in the 
formation process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, part of the request for that 
restructuring would need to contain the information on the 
agreement reached between the two jurisdictions or three or 
whatever, and they would include in that how they anticipate or 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2037 

 

how they would expect to govern. That would all need to be in 
place prior to the order being signed. 
 
In the meantime, in that transition stage, business would 
continue as usual. The technical business would continue as 
usual, but by that time, with the agreement of the parties 
involved, the final, the final nail would be the signing of the 
order. But everything would have to be in place as to how they 
intended on governance prior to, prior to even having that order 
signed. 
 
There could not be a request for restructuring without having all 
this . . . all these other details that are important to those 
communities in place so that they could proceed as soon as the 
order is signed. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — So if I’m understanding you right, Mr. 
Minister, I would think that would probably happen in most 
cases is that the councils that are in place now — take for an 
example the RM councils, the village council, town councils — 
would probably stay in place until the actual point where the 
new elections would take place, just as our elections do every 
three years and two years. But these councils would probably 
stay in place, do their duties as they usually do until a new body 
was in place to take over. I guess my concern is that we may go 
through a period of time if that didn’t happen with absolutely no 
body sitting out there to control what is going out there and to 
actually run the day-to-day operations of RMs in towns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I’m told that there would be an effective 
date for the order which would coincide with the elections, so 
the member’s absolutely correct that there would be 
governance, local governance, until everything was in place, the 
order was signed, and an election take place for the new 
governance structure. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I want to just 
change gears here a bit, Mr. Minister, and still talking about 
districts and that, but I want to get into the point where there’s 
been a wee bit of confusion in the Bill here. Some of us are 
reading it one way; some are reading it the other way. 
 
But how it affects the right to vote in more than one 
municipality. I know in urban, you vote in one and you only 
have that right to vote in one. But in rural, if you have land — if 
I’m understanding this — you know we could vote here, but if 
we had land we could vote here. Does that change this in any 
way? Because some of us are reading it one way and saying, 
well now we’re removing the right to vote. We have to choose 
if we reside in this RM say for an example, but we own land 
over here, we don’t have the right to vote. Myself I don’t read 
that into here and I’d like your clarification on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — That’s an important question and in order 
for me to get the clarification I wanted to make sure, because 
having read it, it allows an individual who lives in one RM and 
owns land in another can vote in both because of that ownership 
status and assessment on that land. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Can I get . . . I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, could 
I get you to repeat that? I’m not quite sure I understood that. Is 
what you’re saying is you still have the right as you did before? 
You can vote in this one, you can vote in that one. That was my 

question I think, Mr. Minister. 
 
Now for an example, if you say we get a lot of large farmers out 
there that may have 10,000, 20,000 acres right now where they 
may end up voting in four or five different areas. If they’re all 
within one municipal district, I would presume that they would 
be back to the one vote within that district would they not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, there would be one vote within a 
division wherein they had the highest assessment or where they 
resided I guess. That’s clear. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, and I’m not trying to belabour the 
point here but I think we, as farmers out there, need 
clarification, and for that matter people that live in the urban 
areas, I think they’re quite interested in this too. 
 
Should a farmer have land — and this is quite possible — in 
two or three districts, depending on where the boundaries are 
set up, would he then still have the right to vote in two districts, 
three districts, whatever it is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, under the legislation, yes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Okay, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that 
clarifies that completely for us and kind of settles some 
arguments that we’ve had on this side between some of the 
members over here. 
 
Maybe, Mr. Minister, we talk about municipal service areas and 
the ability to provide special services. Could you maybe touch 
on that a little bit, Mr. Minister, and explain what we’re talking 
about there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the purposes of that 
particular clause is to designate service areas, for example in 
those situations where you have an urban and a rural 
municipality that restructure, amalgamate. 
 
The designated service areas would be those for street lighting, 
specific street lighting; garbage pickup perhaps; and those 
services that would not be . . . would not be extended to the 
rural municipality in a similar fashion. There would be a need 
for different kind of services in that special service needs area. 
And that would allow again the governance of that new . . . new 
co-operative if you wish, to determine what services and what 
special areas require what special services. 
 
But that would be determined again during the course of the 
consultations and the agreements to make sure that people were 
looked after as they had been looked after, and perhaps in some 
cases even services enhanced because of whatever situation. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, has 
much thought been given to . . . and I think you’ve probably 
heard this, and I know I’ve heard it many times out there, is that 
RM councils that may be in very good condition out there 
financially, very stable, and have been approached by a village 
or I guess possibly even a town for that matter, maybe a little 
larger entity, where the town, their infrastructure . . . say again, 
going back to water and sewer, it could be I suppose some of 
the machinery that’s involved in some of those towns such as 
graders and stuff like that are getting very old. 



2038 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

I think some of the RMs are somewhat concerned with the fact 
that there may be a cost involved once they are drew together 
that they may have to not only provide this service but, in some 
cases, provide an upgrading of the water, sewer, and things like 
that. Has that been taken into consideration, how we could . . . I 
think this would be a great attribute to what we are trying to do 
here or what we are trying to enable them to do. Have you got 
some comments on that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — That’s a very good question and I can 
appreciate the member’s not necessarily concern but good point 
about a poorer neighbour taking advantage of the richer one. 
That would all be hammered out in the agreement beforehand. 
Again, and there could be levies . . . there would have to be in 
the agreement the levies that might be placed differently as a 
result of a situation that’s been explained. 
 
So it allows for flexibility, and again it would all have to stem 
as a result of discussion and agreement ultimately to offset, if 
you wish, or ensure that the ratepayers from both municipalities 
or whichever were involved were satisfied with the agreements 
that were reached, that it was not a matter of taking advantage 
of the benefits of a partner that they were entering into a 
partnership with. So that would have to be hammered out and 
made very, very clear at the outset. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand what 
you’re saying. That wasn’t exactly what I was asking. I guess 
what I was asking is that, has municipal government, your 
department thought of, whether through the infrastructure 
program or maybe a special fund set up to assist 
amalgamations, have you thought of having some money put 
away in a fund there to assist this? I guess what I’m saying is I 
think it would happen a lot quicker if we were there to assist 
them a wee bit in some of these situations, maybe all of them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, that’s an excellent issue or 
matter that the member has raised. I want to point out . . . I 
don’t want to elude that particular question because I think it’s a 
good one. I think it’s one that needs serious consideration. It is 
a budgetary issue, not a legislative one and one that certainly 
has crossed my mind in the direction that the member has 
mentioned, that if there are situations that may need some 
assistance to overcome some impediments to a good thing. 
 
But at this point, nothing like that is available, but there is 
consideration because I do believe that’s a valid point that the 
member has raised. And again, as I say, it’s a budgetary issue 
that will need to be considered and discussed and follow the 
process with respect to availability of finances for that type of a 
move or an approach. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m 
kind of optimistic to hear what you’re saying there. I think 
we’re heading in the right direction. I just think that with the 
infrastructures as old as they are out there . . . I know in many 
of our small towns, it was even in the ’50s and ’60s that some 
of these waterlines were put in and sewer lines were put in. And 
I think for an RM to jump in there knowing that these are that 
old — you know these systems are that old — and knowing 
what the cost would be to replace some of these, I think would 

scare them off very quickly. And I think unless they have it 
determined how this would work . . . and you have talked about 
they would have to have this all set up ahead of time whether 
it’s through levies for the people that live in the small 
community. But I think possibly if in our next future budgets 
that we could look at something like that I think we can help 
speed up this process. 
 
My counterpart for North Battleford — and I want to go back to 
the voting for a minute — brought up a different scenario that 
we maybe missed in clarifying this. Should a district be set up 
. . . district 1, say for an example, and district 2 over here. If a 
taxpayer lives in a town — say in urban Saskatchewan — a 
small town out there in one district and lives in an RM, has a 
farm in an RM in another district, would he get to vote in both 
districts? Would he have a vote in the urban on one side and the 
rural on the other? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — To the member again, just to make sure 
that there’s no confusion, the question was if he lived in one 
district and had land in another district. The answer is that yes 
that person could vote in each of those two districts. 
 
Now just to make sure there’s no confusion, if it’s within the 
same district . . . and it would all be one anyway whether it’s a 
hamlet or an urban or whatever. And if there’s any confusion 
about that, I want to try and clarify so there isn’t. But if it’s 
separate districts, yes. The answer’s yes. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s 
what we had thought even though one was an urban area he was 
living in and the other district was a rural, he would still be able 
to vote in both areas. And it’s understandable that if it was all 
within one district you only get one vote, although we in rural 
Saskatchewan like as many votes as we can get. There’s less of 
us all the time. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to talk for a minute about the tax discount 
and the changes within the Bill here. I believe now the minister 
has the power to determine the rate of discount for prompt 
payment or early payment. Why was this done, Mr. Minister, 
and what will that rate be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, the same as the urban people 
through their bylaws. It would be those councils that would 
place their discounts on the tax payments; on the advanced tax 
payments. So it would be up to the . . . it would be by bylaw 
that those municipalities would be allowed to set their own 
rules and their own discounts. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So I’m not 
reading that right then. What I read into that Bill was that the 
minister would have the power to set those rates. And what 
you’re saying, actually, the municipal districts through bylaw 
would set their own rates as they have before? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The minister would have the right to set 
the maximum rates of discount but that would only occur if it 
created a great deal of problems if something really serious 
happened and preferably that would not occur. So there is the 
option of setting the maximum rate that can be applied for 
discounts, but not likely it would happen. 
 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2039 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — So actually the municipalities out there as 
long as they were under the cap that you put on if you should do 
that it would be 2 per cent, 3 percent whatever for whatever 
time they have that right. Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you explain the conflict of interest rules for 
those serving on councils have been changed by this Bill? I 
think we touch on it, do we not in there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I’ll just refer to the portion of 
legislation which provides authority for municipalities to adopt 
more rigorous conflict of interest guidelines for council 
members by using provisions within The Members’ Conflict of 
Interest Act so it does give them more latitude to be more 
stringent that . . . if they see it necessary, so it gives them that 
autonomy. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would those 
rules then also apply to those serving on community advisory 
committees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, it would be the council that 
would set the rules for the community advisory committee. So 
it’d be up to the council and they could make them as strict or 
as lenient as they wish, within those guidelines. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think that’s all 
the questions we have on the rural Bill right now, Mr. Chair, so 
we would move on. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 46 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’d like 
to say a special hello to two guests in the Speaker’s gallery, 
John and Anne Penner. John, as members will know, was a 
member of this legislature and a minister of the Crown for a 
number of years, and he served in a number of different 
portfolios, and I think fair to say that he was a very capable and 
confident member. And so John, it’s good to see you back here 
as we’re winding through legislation, and I hope you have some 
fond memories when you watch what’s going on here tonight. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I’d also like to welcome the Penners here this 
evening. John and I taught together in the Swift Current 
collegiate system a long time ago, and I’m also sure he has 
some good memories of this place. And I wish to assure him 
that he should probably stay because I can also assure him he’s 

very much needed. So would you join me in welcoming him 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(19:45) 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Deputy Chair: — Does the minister have any new 
officials to introduce? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The same officials as for the previous Bill, 
Mr. Chairman, are here to assist us. I can reintroduce them if 
you wish. Thank you. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, many 
of our questions I think were answered through the rural Bill 
that were very . . . (inaudible) . . . Was there any differences 
though in the urban Bill and the rural Bill when we’re talking 
about the amalgamation issue? Was there anything you added 
into the urban one you may have not have added into the rural, 
and vice versa? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — We were talking previously about the 
removal of impediments to restructuring. I’m not sure whether I 
mentioned that, although we did have a question about the 
special tax levies to accommodate new circumstances due to 
amalgamations, that will be a removal of an impediment that’s 
in place for voluntary restructuring. 
 
Of course, the expanded potential for the dissolution of urban 
municipalities. The others, municipal ward commissions now 
will be the responsibility of the council and as . . . previously it 
was not. And the main things here as well as it was for The 
Rural Municipality Amendment Act was the reduction in 
provincial involvement in local decision-making. And I don’t 
think we really talked too much about that for The Rural 
Municipality Act. 
 
But there are some things here that I believe are important. That 
the province is going to remove ministerial approval of land 
subclasses for the purpose of applying local tax tools. That will 
be left to the local communities. 
 
Removal of the Highway Traffic Board approval of local 
bylaws. That will be up to the local restructured community. 
 
Statutory restrictions on hiring administrators. That was an 
important one I believe to those RMs. 
 
The removal of the minister’s prescription of various financial 
reporting forms. So there will be a reduction in some of the red 
tape and paperwork. 
 
Improved flexibility for records retention and disposal. That 
again will be left up to local governance. 
 
And there will be an approved ability to dispose of assets and 
use proceeds for local priorities and manage capital funds with 



2040 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

no restrictions placed on how that restructured community can 
utilize that capital. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Disposal of 
assets, Mr. Minister, could you maybe give me some examples 
of what you had in mind when you dealt with that? I think I’m 
understanding what you’re talking about here. Could you 
maybe just give me a little bit of clarification on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I apologize to the member. I missed that, 
the request for clarification. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just wondered, 
you talked about the disposal of assets. And I presume what 
you’re talking about here is when a new district is set up and 
there may be a duplication of equipment or buildings or 
whatever that is, and is that what you’re talking about here 
when you’re talking about disposal of assets? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I’m told that prior to this legislation, it was 
. . . the municipalities had to request permission from the 
minister’s office to dispose of assets and also for permission to 
use certain assets for specific purposes. With the change in this 
legislation, there will not be a need for that process, and once 
again it will give the autonomy to local governments, to those 
community leaders, to make up their minds and to make the 
decisions as to how to best apply whatever assets, disposal, and 
capital that they may receive from sale of goods and where they 
might apply those monies. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
we’ve been . . . a House amendment has been distributed here. 
Could I just ask you just give us a quick clarification of what 
you’re doing in the House amendment so that it may meet with 
our approval very quickly if we could understand what you’re 
doing here. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I do have the notes, and the 
purpose of the amendment is to correct an oversight during the 
drafting process. The proposing the amendment . . . and I will 
be proposing that when we get to that particular area. The 
proposal is that the subsection 60(2) be stricken and substituted 
with a provision that makes subsections 46(1) and (3), 47(2) 
and (3), 48(2), and 49(2) effective upon assent of the Bill and 
deemed to be in force since January 1, 2001. It was an oversight 
in the drafting of the Bill, and this is meant to correct that to 
ensure that it becomes effective January 1, 2001. 
 
It was our intention to provide the cities with the authority to 
establish subclasses of property for the purposes of applying 
any of the municipal tax tools available to municipalities 
retroactive to January 1 of 2001 to coincide with the 2001 
municipal tax year. 
 
So regrettably there was an oversight. This House amendment 
is merely to correct that oversight and ensure that the intent of 
allowing municipalities perhaps some better options for the 
current year would be in effect. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
explanation. Mr. Minister, to go on with a few more questions 
we have on the urban Bill, as far as the municipal districts are 
concerned, do they have a choice or not whether to run or not to 

run with the ward system? Or are they required to be divided 
into wards as the health districts are? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, and once again this is good 
news I believe, that they will have a choice on how they choose 
to direct their operations and what method they choose to 
proceed by. So that will be left to their good discretion. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, we’ve had some concern 
brought to us about one part of the Bill and that’s to do with the 
minister’s power to dissolve villages of less than 100 by a 
simple order. 
 
And I guess, I think we can both understand their concern out 
there that . . . what are you, what are you actually trying to do 
with this part of the Bill? I think they have some concern that 
— and maybe because of a little mistrust from when we were 
talking about the forced amalgamation — but I think they have 
concerns about what you are doing with this part of the Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, to the member, that would 
occur only under extraordinary circumstances, where for some 
reason or other there was no council and there was a situation 
where it was deemed absolutely necessary in order to allow 
some other process to proceed. 
 
So it would not be done — I can assure the member — it would 
not be done frivolously. It would only be done under 
extraordinary circumstances. And one of those being, that I can 
think of just offhand, would be the inability to elect a council 
and continue to proceed with the needs of the people, the 
villagers in that community. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I understand what you are saying, Mr. 
Minister, but does the Bill actually elaborate on that and explain 
that specific situation? I think it’s kind of wide open. It really 
doesn’t have that explanation in there that may reassure them 
that that’s the only case that that may happen. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, the provisions that are within 
the Bill outline that the minister may by order dissolve an urban 
municipality where the council requests by resolution that the 
urban municipality be dissolved. There is a failure to elect a 
council. 
 
In the case of a village, the population is less than 100 and that 
would then apply to some of the reasons above — the fact that 
they couldn’t get a council and no administration of the 
community was in place. And the final one, in the case of a 
resort village, that the number of persons within the resort 
village is less than the minimum required pursuant to another 
section of the statute. 
 
And I believe 4(1)(a) of the numbers there . . . pardon me . . . 
and it’s not in this one because this is just the outline of the 
other Bill; but if there are fewer members in that resort village 
than would serve any purpose to allow business to occur and the 
needs of that small community to be undertaken. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think all we 
wanted there was we needed your comments on the record 
because as you know this last week ministers’ comments have 
gone back to court cases where it’s been dealt with for the 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2041 

 

environment. We have you on the record; we’re going to hold 
you to your word on that one. 
 
Mr. Minister, kind of an unique question has been brought to us 
about — we’re going back to the amalgamation issue — but 
what if two urbans wanted to get together but the municipality 
in the centre, the rural municipality involved, say two towns for 
example, any of our constituencies in rural Saskatchewan we 
could have this happen. 
 
What if they wanted to join — and I don’t know how they 
would do this — or amalgamate or share services in a district 
agreement that would be set up but the RM municipality wanted 
no part of it? Has that been hashed out or ran by anybody to see 
how that might work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, those could create some 
difficult circumstances; however if those two communities were 
able to work out the logistics, without any interference or 
interfering with the other local government, it would have to be 
. . . the logistics would have to be worked out between them and 
there would be no opposition. That opportunity has always been 
there and I understand that there have been some hamlets and 
villages that have talked about that. 
 
It wouldn’t be totally unrealistic for that to happen or totally 
impossible. But logistically there would need to be some real 
serious considerations and discussions again without 
encroaching on the party that would separate the two. 
 
So it is possible, I guess is what I’m saying, but it would take 
some discussion and determination I expect. And they might 
even be able to convince the body in between them to join the 
party. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. The member 
for Cypress Hills brings another example that might come into 
play then too which would be larger . . . Like say the city of 
Regina and White City at some point may say, it’s to both our 
advantages to be one entity but there’s a part of an RM running 
in between. And I’m wondering, would they have to annex that 
RM? Has any thought been given . . . it may happen, we don’t 
know, down the road. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, the Act has always allowed 
urban to urban to amalgamate. There’s no need for coterminous 
boundaries for any of these locations. So they could do that 
without any problem if they could agree to doing that, 
regardless of the separation in between them. And perhaps 
under the circumstances the member described, that may very 
well be feasible without including the third partner. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman, and through 
you, to the minister, I have some questions I would like to 
direct specifically as it concerns clause 17, section 104 amended 
in this particular Bill. 
 
Mr. Minister, you and I have had some very brief and informal 
discussions about some of the issues raised in this particular 
part of the Act and I think that for my own sake I have an 
understanding of why these particular clauses were included, 

but I was wondering if, for the record, you would please 
describe for me the impetus, the rationale behind, specifically, 
clause (c) which says: 
 

(c) limit the number of businesses in a particular class of 
business that may operate in a defined area of the urban 
municipality; 

 
and secondly, clause (d) which says: 
 

(d) specify a minimum distance that two or more 
businesses or two or more classes of business must be 
separated from one another in a defined area of the urban 
municipality; 

 
Would you give us the rationale for this and the origination? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, just to read in the explanation, 
the city of Saskatoon requested clarification with respect to the 
licensing of businesses within the municipality. Additional 
authority is sought to limit the number of licenses issued to any 
particular class of business and to provide that a municipality 
may regulate spacing requirements between businesses of any 
particular class. 
 
So the amendment is modelled after other similar legislation in 
Ontario which provides additional municipal authority with 
respect to limiting the number of body rub and adult 
entertainment parlours for specific areas of municipality. 
 
So that was part and parcel. And in the city of Saskatoon, they 
also wish to control the number of pawnshops and second-hand 
stores within the Riversdale and Pleasant Hill areas. So that is 
some of the rationale in those neighbourhoods. 
 
Now, again, with respect to businesses and licensing, the 
municipalities had requested that they be given authority to 
further regulate businesses and define classes of businesses for 
licensing purposes. So there were concerns. The ones that I 
related in the explanation that may not relate to the small 
community in rural areas, but all encompassing within the 
changes to allow again some autonomy to local governments to 
make the decisions with respect to how many businesses, kind 
of businesses, the licensing of those businesses for some of the 
reasons that I’d mentioned which apply to a major urban centre, 
but for all intents purposes could involve similar situations in 
smaller cities and maybe even trickle down to the smaller towns 
around the province. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. To the minister 
through the Chair. Would it not have been possible to define 
explicitly and specifically the kinds of businesses that you 
wanted to regulate with this type of clause or is there some legal 
ramifications of doing that in this particular Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the member raises a very 
valid question, concern. But one of the thrusts of changes to the 
legislation as it was in place is to get big government out of the 
faces of local government and give them the autonomy to make 
decisions with respect to certain aspects of local needs, 
requirements, considerations. 
 
So what the legislation allows them is to make their own 



2042 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

conscious decisions in the best interests of the communities that 
they serve. So it takes away the Big Brother aspect of big 
government being in their face to tell them what they can 
license, what they can’t, and distances and so on with respect to 
particular businesses. That’s primarily the reason. 
 
So if we sat down and tried to sort out which businesses should 
be included and which shouldn’t and you miss something, well 
it would be a pretty major task, I would think, to have to sit 
down and sort out, well what the folks in southwestern 
Saskatchewan, would they be in agreement with the businesses 
included the same as in southeastern Saskatchewan. You may 
get in to all kinds of problems. There may be some implications 
in trying to extend by specific names. 
 
In this instance now it will allow the local councils to make 
their decisions, and I would suspect that if there were 
controversial issues that there would be consultation with their 
local community that they serve. 
 
At least in my humble opinion, it would be in their best interest, 
if it might be a controversial situation, to consult and then make 
a decision with respect to whether they would license, whether 
they would not, or whether their consideration of applying a 
distance to businesses, to like businesses, which may enhance 
the option or the opportunity for access to services by their local 
communities. 
 
But I guess with all due respect to the member, the bottom line 
is to allow people the autonomy to make their own decisions in 
this kind of a broad part of the legislation — virtually, you 
make those decisions. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While I understand 
the intention and the motivation for this particular clause, I 
think when it’s looked at from the perspective of a larger urban 
area, it makes sense to open up the opportunity for them to 
make decisions that are in their own best interests, that would 
apply specifically to their larger urban area. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, there is another side to that coin and 
that is that there are many, many situations in this province 
where you have much smaller communities, much smaller 
urban centres, which when given this kind of leverage frankly 
would be able to be used by them to prevent competitive 
businesses of any kind moving into their community. They 
would have a legal tool to prevent any new, competitive 
business arriving in their town. 
 
And I think that’s maybe a scenario that has not been evaluated 
carefully in light of this particular clause. It can be used to 
loosen the rules and regulations and give autonomy to some 
areas but it can also be used to prevent new development, new, 
competitive businesses in some other instances as well. And I 
think that’s the element that concerns me the most here, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the intent again of that 
legislation is to allow local communities, local governance, to 
make the best decisions on behalf of the people that they serve. 
I have confidence that they would make the appropriate 
decisions. They would have that autonomy. 
 

And if there were decisions, as the member would know, if 
those decisions are contrary to the wishes of the people that 
those elected folks serve, then they will suffer the 
consequences. But I’m not sure how you build something in to 
prevent people from making decisions that their . . . Their 
electorate expects them to make decisions in their best interests, 
the best interests of the community. And I do believe that 
people who run for public office, who choose to serve, do so 
because they feel they can contribute and would serve in the 
best interests of not me, myself, or I, but the people that have 
put them in the place of authority to make decisions on their 
behalf. 
 
And the requests from the municipalities for the autonomy, for 
the authority to allow them to make some very, very critical and 
serious decisions, were asked for and responded to by giving 
those councils, mayors and councils, the right to make those 
important decisions. 
 
And again, with all due respect, I think people of public office 
that take advantage of their elected positions in the interest of 
something other than the people that they serve would 
jeopardize their credibility and naturally jeopardize their . . . 
you know, their opportunity for perhaps further confidence by 
people who expect them to make the proper decisions and not 
make them for . . . decisions that are not in the best interests of 
the community at large. 
 
And that’s I guess what I’m saying is that I have confidence 
that those folks out there who have the responsibility to govern 
their communities will apply the tools, the laws that they have, 
in a fashion which will reflect the best interests of the local 
businesses, the residents, and benefit of the community. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure that you 
would admit though that there are circumstances in which 
people will not make those decisions in the best interests of 
their community. I mean it’s conceivable in some circumstances 
the decisions will not be made in the best interests of the 
community as a whole, and in fact the community may not even 
be aware that the decision was made. 
 
And in that kind of a predicament, in that kind of a situation, the 
individual who came to a community and wanted to set up a 
business, and the local authorities deemed it to be competitive 
with one that’s already existing and felt that it wasn’t in the best 
interests of the existing business owner to have competition, 
could turn that business application down and many people 
would be none the wiser. 
 
What recourse does the offended or the aggrieved party have in 
a situation like that? What defence is there for that individual in 
a community and in a province that wants to encourage 
businesses of all kinds. We have here basically a clause that 
gives the right to municipal leaders, whether it be a small 
community or a large community, the full right to turn down 
that particular business operation. And I can’t see how that will 
advance the cause of business generally; in small-town 
Saskatchewan specifically. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I believe it would be extremely 
difficult to craft a law that would prevent people from . . . 
elected people who would not have the integrity to serve for the 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2043 

 

purposes that they were elected. 
 
And sometimes laws are put into place, which on occasion may 
even give certain people that those laws affect the feeling that 
that law’s in place because they don’t trust me. And I guess 
there’s a balance. You put laws in and then people in place to 
work within the framework of the legislation that may exist. 
You elect people to ensure that everyone gets fair treatment. 
 
I’m not sure how you could enclose the clause to protect anyone 
from unscrupulous — I don’t know if you like to use that word 
— or people who would choose to not abide by their conscience 
in ensuring that any decisions they made were not in a personal 
interest but were in the interests of the community that they 
serve, the people that elected them. 
 
So I can appreciate the member’s concern but I believe that we 
would have a difficult time building in this legislation 
protection against . . . and in effect . . . but there is in a way. 
Because if it came to pass that down the road it was found out 
that some decisions . . . and the public has access to meetings, 
to decisions, and can inquire and ask for reasons why certain 
decision were made. And if it was found that decisions are such 
that it’s for personal reasons or there’s personal intention, then 
the next time the election process comes around the results of 
that action is felt by those people in that position. 
 
But again maybe I have too much confidence in those elected 
people but I do believe that people in rural areas do have the 
best interests of the people that put them in place. They do the 
best they can within the framework within all the help that they 
can get to make sure that the lives of the folks in their 
communities are well looked after and any actions that they 
take are in their best interests and not any personal interests. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, to you through the Chair. I don’t 
want to ascribe unscrupulous motives to anybody, but it’s been 
my experience that there is a tendency to protect one’s own turf. 
 
And in a lot of smaller communities especially you don’t have 
people rushing to fill the vacancies on a town council at election 
time. Many of the people who serve there serve a considerable 
length of time, several terms and they begin to feel that that’s 
their own territory, that is their bailiwick and they have rights to 
make decisions that aren’t always in the best interests of their 
community. And I’m afraid that those decisions are made more 
frequently than we care to admit. 
 
I was a young news reporter or newsman for a radio station in 
British Columbia a number of years ago and covered town 
council meetings in a community that had a population of 4,500 
people. And it was a tourist town and there were a number of 
service stations in that community but the biggest one was 
owned by one of the gentlemen serving on town council. 
 
And when a company came and applied for a permit to establish 
another fairly large service station in that community that 
councillor was able to talk his mayor and fellow councillors out 
of granting that because they just didn’t need more competition 
in that town. 
 

Fortunately that alderman was defeated some years later and the 
town has actually blossomed. They’ve had a wholesale change 
in their council. 
 
So while I understand you believe in the purest of motives, I 
think that there is often opportunities for people to use their 
situations and abuse their situations of trust to protect their own 
self-interest. 
 
So what I would recommend if the minister is willing to take a 
recommendation from me, that we try and balance the two sides 
by accepting a small amendment that we will propose later that 
will address the issue. And without changing anything that is 
currently in the Act, we could add one more section toward the 
end of this particular clause that would read something like this: 
 

Notwithstanding the generality of subsections (1) and (2), a 
bylaw passed pursuant to this section shall not limit 
competitive interests. 

 
At least in that instance, Mr. Minister, the aggrieved party in 
any situation such as I have described would have some 
recourse. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I am reminded, and I 
should have known, I guess, when we got into this, that there is 
a conflict of interest, and if there’s evidence of that, then there 
can be a move in another direction through legislation to 
prosecute. If there is evidence that there is that kind of a 
conflict, then it gets serious. So there are already provisions to 
protect against that. 
 
And with all due respect to the suggestion of the amendment, 
what that would do then is take away the intent of what the 
municipalities have been asking us for and it’s their autonomy 
to make their decisions. So by saying, well, no we don’t trust 
you, I do not believe would be again in our best interest with all 
due respect. And it would be totally in opposition to what 
municipalities have asked for — some autonomy. Have 
confidence in them, give them credit that they know what they 
are doing, and if they overstep their boundaries then it moves to 
the conflict of interest, and if there’s evidence of that then they 
can be dealt with harshly. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. At this time 
that’s all our questions we have on the urban Bill, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Due to the length of the Bill, I’m 
wondering if the Chair could have leave to read the Bill out 
page by page, except for the pages where we have been served 
with notice of amendments. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. I would like 
to move clause 17 of the printed Bill: 
 



2044 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

Amend section 104 of The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, 
as being enacted by clause 17(2) of the printed Bill by 
adding the following subsection after subsection 104(3): 
 

“(4) Notwithstanding the generality of subsections (1) 
and (2), a bylaw passed pursuant to this section shall not 
limit competitive interests.” 

 
I so move. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 17 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 18 to 59 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 60 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, as I had pointed out earlier, 
the amendment proposed and submitted to subsection 60(2) of 
the Bill, and we’re proposing that this subsection be stricken 
and substituted with a provision that makes subsections 46(1) 
and (3), 47(2) and (3), 48(2) and 49(2) effective upon assent of 
this Bill and deemed to be enforced since January 1, 2001. 
 
It was, Mr. Chairman, our intention to provide cities with the 
authority to establish subclasses of property for the purposes of 
applying any of the municipal tax tools available to 
municipalities retroactively to January 1, 2001 to coincide with 
the 2001 municipal tax year. The amendment is to, Mr. Chair, 
correct an oversight in the initial draft of the Bill. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 60 as amended agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister. Do you have 
any new officials to introduce? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I have the same officials with me, Mr. 
Chairman. I’m very pleased to have them with me. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, we 
have very few questions on this. We’ll be through this very 
quickly. I just want to go back to . . . and I share the concern of 
the member for Cypress Hills on the urban Bill, and, Mr. 
Minister, I believe it also pertains to the northern Bill and we 
shall also be putting forward that same amendment at that point. 
 
You’d made the comment, Mr. Minister, that the conflict of 
interest rules are up to a council, but yet in your explanation 
you said well the conflict of interest rules — if I heard you right 
— would deal with the situation that we’re concerned about 
here. I don’t understand how that would work if the council 
themselves actually set up and deal with conflict of interest if 
conflict of interest was caused by the members on council. And 

I think there’s a bit of confusion there how there would be 
anybody to deal with the council themselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Those conflict of interest rules have 
always been in place for councils. If in fact what you’re 
suggesting that the council itself contravened their 
responsibilities and went ahead and ignored conflicts — which 
by the way, any member of a council and I’m sure, Mr. Chair, 
the member knows, that if there’s a decision to be made and it 
involves an individual’s interests, then he or she excuses 
themselves from that decision-making process. 
 
However, to get to the nub of what the concern is, an electorate, 
an elector, or any one of the electorate, if they seriously believe 
that the intentions of a council member, someone that’s an 
elected official or a group of elected officials are not acting in 
their best interests, then a voter can take those concerns to a 
judge and express that concern which would now create an 
investigation from another source to look into the conflict of 
interest situation. That’s my understanding of how that process 
would work. 
 
(20:30) 
 
The elected members, besides having to answer subsequently to 
the electorate, in the meantime could be subject to an inquiry 
initiated through another source. Those protections are built in 
and I’m not sure that they’re used that often, but they are there, 
for a voter, for someone — a voter in a municipality or in a 
district or in a city or wherever — to take their concerns. 
 
And I expect you’d probably have to get a lawyer and say, hey 
look, we don’t like what’s going on because we think it’s not in 
the best interests of the community or myself as an individual, 
who operates, wants to carry on with this, that, or whatever. 
There is a process that can be followed to bring to the attention 
of a higher authority that we have a problem with elected 
people who are making decisions for self-serving purposes and 
not in the best interests of the electorate. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I guess what we’re saying, Mr. Minister, is 
actually that it’s a conflict of interest for the people that have 
caused the conflict to be on the other side to deal with the 
conflict. So it’s a real conflict of interest is what we’re talking 
about here, because you have the same people judging 
themselves to see whether they created the problem. And I 
guess we know what’s going to happen there; they’re naturally 
going to say no, there’s no problem here, but it’s the same 
people dealing with this problem. 
 
Mr. Minister, we will have the same — and I think I’d 
mentioned this before — the same amendment to this Bill 
because it deals with the same thing. I share the concern of the 
member for Cypress Hills because many of us on this side, and 
I think on that side, have sat on councils of all sizes out there. 
 
And I think we can see, and it may seldom happen, but should 
you have two hardware stores in a town and a third hardware 
wants to move into that town say of 5,000 people, it would be to 
the best interest of the two hardware store owners, possibly 
even aldermen sitting on council, to not want the competition 
and to not want that business to enter that community. And I 
think it would be very self-serving on their part — may never 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2045 

 

happen but the chance is there — to not grant the permit for that 
business to come in. 
 
And I guess our concern, as the member quite aptly put it, is 
that competition is good for the public. And when we get to a 
point where we may have interference from a locally elected 
board that can prevent that from happening, I think that’s a 
concern for all of us. 
 
And I think our amendment was not passed tonight, but I 
certainly hope that you will take into consideration what we 
have both said here tonight and the concerns that we have 
brought forward, that we feel there is an empty spot in the 
legislation here and maybe it could be looked at and addressed 
at a later date. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’re dealing with the northern municipal Bill 
now, and I guess there’s very little that we haven’t asked on the 
other two Bills. I would just . . . would ask you what have you 
done in the northern Bill that maybe was different from the 
urban and the rural Bill? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, there are no differences in 
the northern Act and the urban Act. They’re both the same. 
Primarily they remove the government, big government out of 
the decision-making process in those communities. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 12 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to move an 
amendment to The Northern Municipal Act being enacted by 
clause 12(2) of the printed Bill by adding the following 
subsection after subsection 90.2(3): 
 

“(4) Notwithstanding the generality of subsections (1) and 
(2), a bylaw passed pursuant to this section shall not limit 
the competitive interests.” 

 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 12 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 13 to 24 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, to you and the members, I 
would like to introduce Mr. Ralph Liebel. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, and 
welcome to your official. We have very few questions on this 
Bill, but I guess the main question is, is what was the intent of 
the changes that you are proposing in this Bill? 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, this Bill, the changes make it 
easier for the planning committee to deal with subdivisions. The 
subdivision process in Saskatchewan is effective and responsive 
to development opportunities by providing the local authority to 
manage community interests, and it’ll make it that much easier 
for them. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 31 — The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to introduce — to 
you and to the members — Mr. Garth Pugh who will assist us. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, if I 
could ask you at this time, the same as the previous Bill, could 
you explain to us the intent of changes you’re making here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the essence of the Bill 
we’re dealing with is the legislative and regulatory changes 
which are necessary to establish a long-term strategy for the 
administration of The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Act 
of 1990, and that’s basically what it does is change some of the 
regulations to allow the Heritage Foundation to continue. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 9 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
report that the officials saw fit to stay with me that were here 
earlier. And I’m very pleased that they have. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, before 
we start on this Bill I just want to take the opportunity to thank 
your officials that we held onto tonight here for a very short 
time when they entered the floor of the legislature. I want to 
thank them for waiting and having the patience to wait for the 
questions that we had. 
 
Mr. Minister, SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) . . . we have a few more questions on this Bill. What 
changes I guess are you making or do you feel you’re making in 
this Bill to address some of the concerns that we’re having from 
municipalities, and for that matter from taxpayers, across the 
province? What are you doing in this Bill to address some of 



2046 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

those concerns? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the proposed amendments 
address these following issues. 
 
First of all the introduction of statutory requirements for the 
physical re-inspection of property; the enhancing . . . enhancing 
the disclosure and accountability requirements of the 
Assessment Management Agency of Saskatchewan, SAMA; 
changes to the composition of the SAMA board to include other 
members. 
 
And I’m just going to clarify. The amendments will also 
address issues regarding meeting requirements of the technical 
advisory committee; advancing the date by which the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency must provide 
its budget submissions to Municipal Affairs and Housing; and 
creating additional accountability and transparency of SAMA’s 
financial accounts. That’s basically . . . And there’s some pretty 
significant amendments that will impose some requirements on 
SAMA with respect to the reporting procedures. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’m 
sure you’re well aware of it and I think you get probably the 
same concerns we do, at least I hope you would. But there’s a 
lot of concerns out there with municipalities, with their 
dissatisfaction the way our assessment system seems to be 
working, and the satisfaction that municipalities have out there 
with the way the assessments have turned out in the last two 
reassessments. 
 
The one before I think we knew we could have problems there 
because it hadn’t been done for so long. I had hoped that a 
number of these issues had been cleared up. And I think we’re 
seeing a number of problems out there again, at least from the 
concerns that are being brought to us. 
 
Mr. Minister, how many municipalities have opted out of 
SAMA’s services since the last reassessment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I believe that the most recent 
ones, Swift Current and Ponteix, have given notice; Wilkie has 
opted out. The cities of course are on their own. But those are 
the only ones that come to mind at this point since the last 
assessment. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
yourself as minister, are you satisfied with the way the 
assessments have been done? And I know . . . the minister 
cringes; so do I when I get the calls. But are you satisfied with 
the way we are doing them? We can hold the status quo; we 
don’t have to make changes with the way our assessment works 
in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, as in all respects, and 
human nature being what it is, and I guess we live in the real 
world, that we continue to try and improve on whatever 
situations. And given the member’s comments and expressions 
of concern, those concerns as they are communicated are dealt 
with. 
 

And there will be a need, and I accept that there may be a need 
to review. And the member will appreciate that as with any 
other programs that appear to be giving some problems in some 
areas and the need to reassess and re-evaluate and do it in 
consultation with those that are carrying out the responsibilities 
and people that are affected by those responsibilities. 
 
So I will concur that there will be a need to review what’s 
happened, and where there are shortcomings to try and improve. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I realize, 
Mr. Minister, some of these questions probably do not pertain 
directly to the Bill. But I think this is a very important issue 
because the number of dissatisfied municipalities out in the 
province right now, I think this issue has to be addressed sooner 
than later. 
 
Is your department, Mr. Minister, looking at — and then again 
this is not really part of the Bill, although I think it pertains to 
some of the changes you’re doing here — looking at other 
jurisdictions, whether it be in Canada, North America, 
wherever, to see if there’s any way that we can improve the way 
that we do assessments, and when we have our reassessments 
out there, that bring in a more accurate value? Because I think 
this is where we seem to be getting the problem right now, the 
variance in values out there, and that’s where the problems 
seem to popping up all over — whether it’s hotels, motels, 
residential areas, where you know one house seems to be out of 
whack with what the others in the area are. 
 
Are we looking at other jurisdictions to see if we can improve 
this process once and for all? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, just a reminder that it’s 
SAMA that sets the policy. But no question, we’ll be looking at 
other options. 
 
And again, just to reinforce our serious attempts to assist people 
that are involved in this assessment process, one of the previous 
Bills where we submitted the amendment as the result of an 
oversight to ensure that municipalities had access to tax tools 
available to them, retroactive to January 1, 2001, so that they 
would at least be allowed to implement some of those tax tools 
in the course of the assessments that are going on. 
 
But I guess in answer to the member’s question, no doubt, I can 
assure the member that we are actively looking at and will be 
working with SAMA. And again to remind the public here that 
SAMA is an independent agency who set their own policies, but 
we will be working with all participants, stakeholders, in 
reviewing whatever areas need to perhaps be looked at and 
accept whatever suggestions that may be appropriate for 
positive changes — not just change for the sake of changing. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And I realize 
that SAMA is a separate entity unto themselves, but when 
there’s problems to the magnitude that we have in this province 
to do with reassessment and assessment, I think someone has to 
take a leadership role and the government is that leadership 
role. You’re the people in charge; the buck stops here. 
 
Mr. Minister, the Bill changes the meeting requirements of 
SAMA’s technical advisory committee. Can you tell us the role 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2047 

 

of this committee and who sits on that committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I must apologize to the 
member that I do not have the names of the members of that 
technical committee. However, that committee is struck to 
assist SAMA in providing, developing, and improving on 
policies and processes. That’s their primary purpose. And if the 
member wishes to have the names, I certainly can arrange to get 
those names to him. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. If you could at 
some point later in time get us those names, that would be fine. 
Mr. Minister, how often is this committee supposed to meet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — They are required to meet four times per 
year. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Minister, thank you. How many times 
did they meet last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, they’ve not met. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Did I miss something, Mr. Minister? In 
your previous answer you said they’re supposed to meet four 
times a year. In your last answer you said they didn’t meet. 
 
It’s getting late at night but I don’t think I completely missed 
that one. Could you, would you kind of elaborate on that a little 
bit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The technical committee was not called to 
sit, to meet because the other, the commercial committees and 
the city committees and other committees supplied the 
information for SAMA that they required so there was no need 
for the technical committee to meet. 
 
And some of those people on the technical committee were on 
some of these other committees. So that was the reason the 
technical committee as such did not meet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I appreciate that 
round of applause, Mr. Minister. What that tells me is I’m not 
the only one confused in here after that answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — At this time, Mr. Chair, I’d like to pass off 
to the member for Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. It’s going to be hard 
to be serious after that outburst. 
 
Mr. Minister, I believe that the member from Saltcoats went in 
this direction already and touched on the issue of the formula 
that SAMA uses to assess property in this province. And 
comparing it to other jurisdictions I’ve been told that 
Saskatchewan is the only jurisdiction especially — or certainly 
in the country, but maybe even in North America — that uses 
the particular formula that is employed here. That other 
jurisdictions have unified and codified their assessment in a 
very specific and unified way. 

What I guess I need to know is why would Saskatchewan stay 
out of step with other jurisdictions in the assessment process 
and the kinds of formula used to provide assessment in this 
jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the provinces vary from 
jurisdiction to jurisdiction. And I’m not sure which specific 
formula the member is referring to but there are different 
applications of levies from province to province for property 
assessment. 
 
There are various roles that the assessment agencies play in the 
different provinces and their participation on boards and their 
direction. There are provinces that have private assessment 
agencies completely. So it varies. 
 
And I’m not sure exactly which particular formula because 
there are different applications of market adjustment factors that 
may vary from one part of the province to the other. And some 
other tools that they use for their assessment process in the 
manuals that they put together for applying uniformity within 
the guidelines of what’s contained in that manual and has been 
put together by the assessors which are advisers and form part 
of the SAMA process. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you don’t understand my 
question and I don’t fully understand your answer, that would 
indicate pretty clearly why nobody understands the assessment 
procedures in this province. 
 
(21:00) 
 
And I guess what I’m . . . what brings me to this particular 
question is an interview I heard with Mr. Thompson on CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) some weeks ago 
concerning all of the different issues that have been raised with 
this latest reassessment. And he was on the radio talking about 
the procedures they use, and part of his response was that 
SAMA is unique in the way they approach assessment in 
Canada for sure, and as far as he knew, maybe in all of North 
America. 
 
And he alluded to the fact directly, in that particular interview, 
to the need for Saskatchewan to come on-line and kind of come 
up with a system frankly that is very similar or identical to 
assessment procedures used in other provinces. 
 
The thing, I guess, that caught my attention, Mr. Minister, was 
that in Mr. Thompson’s comment . . . was that there didn’t seem 
to be the political will or the political direction to achieve that 
type of uniform assessment approach. And you know we have a 
situation here where we as a province, whether we like it or not, 
are competing with every jurisdiction around us in North 
America — south of us in North Dakota and Montana, to the 
east and to the west — and if our property tax assessment 
procedures are not competitive with other areas, are not similar, 
there needs to be an explanation for that. What is the 
explanation that would make us unique or different, or the need 
to have us unique and/or different? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I hear what the member’s 
saying. I’m not sure exactly what Mr. Thompson’s interview 
entailed, but I can tell the member that there are differences 



2048 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

from province to province to province in many respects with 
regards to their approach to assessment processes and 
procedures and directions. 
 
Having said that, maybe Mr. Thompson in his remarks had also 
indicated, or if he did not, I’m disappointed to hear that he 
indicated that the government wasn’t onside to move in the 
direction of improving the process. Because I can say 
unequivocally that’s not true because there is a desire. 
 
But to pick the right system . . . and I’m not sure which one is 
going to be the best for our circumstances, and if our 
circumstances are similar to another jurisdiction, perhaps we 
can look at that. But as the member is well aware, our situation 
is different to that of British Columbia, and it’s different to that 
of Ontario in many respects. 
 
I agree very much that if there is, if there is a need to review the 
entire process, it’ll have to be done in consultation with people 
that are in the business, that have been there. And I appreciate 
and I would respect Mr. Thompson’s suggestions and ideas and 
anybody else’s that feels we can move in a direction that would 
ease some of the difficulties that have been brought to our 
attention or that people may feel they are experiencing. 
 
If the system is not perfect, we’ll work towards making it 
perfect. But I’m not aware of any systems that are absolutely 
perfect and I’m not sure whatever system they’re using in 
Alberta or Manitoba or British Columbia has everybody 100 per 
cent satisfied. It is a technical, a difficult process. 
 
But again, I want to assure the member that every effort will be 
made to look at what’s happening in other places, and apply, 
make changes, and suggest, recommend, do whatever is 
necessary to ensure fairness and make sure there’s equitable 
treatment, and that the application of whatever factors, 
adjustment factors, markets, or whatever it entails by the 
assessment people who are in the business and know far better 
what it entails than I, that we will improve the process to the 
best of our ability. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, I appreciate your answer but, you 
know, in view of the fact that there is so much consternation in 
this province as a result of reassessment, there must be some 
reason for that. Now we’ve had huge anomalies — we’ve had 
large increases in some areas, we’ve had minor decreases in 
other areas — and nobody seems to understand what the 
rationale for that is. That suggests to me that if nobody can put 
their finger on the reasoning specifically, that the system is 
simply too complicated. 
 
Now, as an example, I mean I have several examples, and they 
have been brought to my attention repeatedly lately, especially 
by hotel owners in the constituency of Cypress Hills and just 
outside. You know the market factor adjustment for facilities 
like that in the Swift Current area is a certain rate. But you get 
to a community like Leader, 100 miles away or less — maybe 
less, quite a bit but nevertheless out of the city — and the 
market adjustment factor is such that the taxes there are at least 
50 per cent higher. And yet you have a situation where a 
community the size of Leader is significantly smaller than a 
community like Swift Current. You don’t have anywhere near 
the traffic or the volume of visitors there. What accounts for 

such drastic differences in assessment in two communities like 
that? 
 
And as you can appreciate, Mr. Minister, when you have those 
kinds of differences you really end up putting those particular 
businesses in serious financial jeopardy to the point where 
many of them are laying off staff, and some of them are 
threatening to close their doors. 
 
When you close the doors of a hotel in a small town they don’t 
come back. And it’s a . . . there’s an act of finality there that 
simply cannot be tolerated in small communities. And I think 
with those kinds of inequities and those kinds of situations 
developing we haven’t got time to look at possibly considering 
changes in the future. We need some action on those inequities 
today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the member will well know 
that some of the concerns were addressed. I had attended 
meetings in southwestern Saskatchewan and I know that SAMA 
did respond to some of those concerns. 
 
So yes wherever there were problems identified there was some 
attention paid to those, and yes we need to determine the 
answers to all the questions that the member has raised and 
there is a review. I mean it’s not something that can just 
suddenly be changed overnight. But there is . . . those concerns 
will be addressed and those areas where there is serious 
concerns, there has been a response to by a reassessment, 
re-evaluation and I’m sure the member will know that there 
have been people sent back to areas to re-evaluate, reassess, to 
ensure that proper processes, procedures and the proper 
formulas whatever they might be were applied when the 
individual assessors were carrying out their assessments in 
those areas, and I share the concern. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Minister, I would agree that there 
were, you know, attempts to look at those situations and that 
proper procedures were followed and, you know, the 
consideration of the Act was met to the letter. But that still 
doesn’t ameliorate the impact. 
 
The assessment resulted in significantly higher . . . or the 
reassessment process resulted in significantly higher assessment 
for many of those facilities that we’re talking about. And their 
tax notices are going to based on that new assessment. And 
those taxes are going to be due and payable soon. 
 
Now when the appeals procedure is launched, when individuals 
that are uncomfortable or unhappy with their assessment go to 
appeal, they can’t appeal just because they don’t like the cost 
they’re going to incur, they have to have some substantive 
reason on which to base their appeal. And so far almost all the 
appeals have been denied out of hand. 
 
So while the process has been followed the results have not 
been satisfactory and the impact remains. And I think that in 
terms of what’s happening in rural Saskatchewan . . . Well the 
Minister of Rural Revitalization is here; it should be of real 
concern to her as well. I mean these are not situations that we 
can just allow to go on and look at because the impact is now 
— it’s today. And we’re really concerned about the commercial 
operations in a lot of these small communities in rural 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2049 

 

Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to bring one other issue, sort of a parallel to this, that I 
believe has occurred as a result of reassessment. And that is 
land, farm land, agricultural land on the east side of the 
province, from what I understand, has not seen a significant 
increase in the assessment; in fact there may have been 
decreases in the assessment. But on the west side of the 
province, the assessments are substantially higher. 
 
Would somebody be able to explain for me why that is? What’s 
the difference between the two farming regions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Basically, Mr. Chair, it reflects the local 
market values, and by that market index and factor that’s 
applied. So land in one part of the country is worth more than in 
another, and those factors that are applied. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that but you 
see local market values today are impacted by immediate 
conditions. Conditions next year could change; I mean if you 
don’t have flooding on the east side and you don’t have drought 
on the west side. I mean market conditions change rather 
rapidly depending on circumstances at any given time, and yet 
your assessment or reassessment only happens periodically. I’m 
not sure if it’s a consistent four-year period or not. 
 
But nevertheless we’ve got a situation now based on current 
market conditions and market conditions that have existed over 
the last couple of years that are going to impact taxes for at least 
the next four or five years. I don’t know that . . . You know I 
don’t know that that’s a proper way to evaluate properties. And 
unless there are factors like that worked into the formula to 
compensate for those kind of short-term influences on the 
market. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I guess that’s difficult to 
determine in the long term. You base your assessments on 
certain time, and in this case, I believe it was 1998 and you go 
with that until the next assessment. I’m not sure if there’s a real 
perfect way to do assessments and then apply market factors 
that will satisfy everybody. There has to be a process where by 
you carry out . . . some people will have their assessments or 
values or taxes go down. Others, because of circumstances in a 
particular area will cause them to go up. And there has to be a 
baseline and that’s what the assessment agency uses. That’s 
your jump-off point and that’s what they apply their 
assessments based on certain values at a certain time in the 
various areas. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the 
amendment, I believe, requires SAMA to appoint an auditor to 
ensure it’s funding is being spent on what it was designed and 
intended to be spent on. Who is overseeing the books to this 
point if an auditor is just now being appointed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — SAMA has always had to have an auditor 
and they have had to hire a private auditor to do that. So their 
books have been audited. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Why wouldn’t 
this fall under the Provincial Auditor then? Why wouldn’t this 
be one of his responsibilities to oversee this as he does all other 

departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — It doesn’t fall within the scope of The 
Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, then what is the reason for the change here? Is there 
an indication that there’s been problems with the way money 
has been spent by SAMA? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — No, it’s not an indication of any problems, 
not at all. It’s to improve the transparency of the entire 
operation. It’s merely to make it more transparent. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, but I don’t 
seem to be . . . I might be a little slow tonight but I don’t seem 
to be able to understand what’s going on here. You said that 
they had to have an auditor before in place, and now you say 
you’re making changes in this Bill where they have to have an 
auditor in place now after the Bill passes. What change are we 
actually seeing here then? According to what you’re saying is 
nothing’s changing, everything’s staying the same. And yet 
you’ve got this included as an amendment in this Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, the amendment will require 
SAMA to appoint an auditor to audit its records and to prepare 
a financial statement in accordance with generally accepted 
accounting principles. 
 
Now the expenditures that are mentioned as well will require 
that auditor to be familiar with The Management Accountants 
Act, certified general accountants and The Chartered 
Accountants Act. 
 
This amendment will allow government and stakeholders to 
more effectively analyze the financial accounts and 
expenditures of SAMA in the interests of openness, 
accountability and determining appropriate revenue resources. 
 
And in addition to require SAMA to appoint an auditor, the 
amendment . . . which they’ve already done. There’s nothing 
untoward about what’s been going on. This is just to strengthen 
the accountability. So SAMA will be required to appoint an 
auditor. 
 
And the amendment also provides the minister with the 
authority . . . This amendment will provide the minister with the 
authority to direct the Provincial Auditor to conduct an 
examination or review or audit of that particular agency. Up 
until now that hasn’t been there, but this amendment will now 
give the minister the authority to do that. 
 
And it will require a greater degree of accountability. Its just 
reinforces what’s already in place and maybe makes it a little 
more stringent, basically. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
last question. The manual that SAMA goes by — the rules, the 
regulations, the procedures. Who sets up that manual? Who 
initiated what that manual actually contains? 
 



2050 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — It is prepared by the SAMA staff in 
consultation with the cities and then taken to the SAMA board 
for approval. And the SAMA board is made up of 
representatives from the different governance bodies. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now you talked 
about . . . I believe North Battleford has its own assessment 
procedures and people. You said Swift Current. I think I missed 
the second one. Wilkie’s thinking about going out. Do they 
have to abide by the same manual then that SAMA works with 
now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, they do. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well I’m not sure 
that we’re going to gain anything then in these communities. I 
know there’s a lot of dissatisfaction out there. But if they have 
to abide by exactly the same rules that SAMA’s using now and 
they get independent assessors to come in and use the same 
manual, I’m not sure they’re going to gain a whole lot. But they 
must . . . those communities, Mr. Minister, must think and have 
a deep dissatisfaction with SAMA to be opting out. 
 
In your estimation how do you think these communities are 
actually going to be able to gain anything when they have to go 
by the same manual? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The importance of consistency has got to 
be a consideration. Primarily if there are different rules, then 
there would be, it would create greater chaos and 
inconsistencies in the application of the assessment process. So 
there needs to be that assurance that, regardless of whether a 
community’s in or out, there is that manual that they have to 
follow. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s the 
end of my questions on here. But I would like to once again say 
— and I think the member for Cypress said the same thing as 
I’m saying — is that there’s a tremendous amount of 
dissatisfaction with the way we’re reassessing in this province 
and the number of problems it seems to be creating. 
 
And I would suggest and I would hope that your department 
would maybe look at some way of studying every other 
municipal entity and body in this country. And for that matter, 
let’s take a look in the US (United States). Maybe they’ve got 
some ways down there of improving our system up here 
because with the amount of dissatisfaction we have here, there’s 
got to be a better way of doing things. 
 
When people, municipalities, pay their requisition and the 
dollars they’re spending . . . and it’s not cheap. I’m sure you 
know what I’m saying. There’s got to be a better way to do this. 
 
Let’s take the initiative and get out there and have a look, Mr. 
Minister. And even if it costs, I believe some money, I think it 
would be well worth it to look at all the other in jurisdictions in 
North America for that matter to see if we can improve our 
system. 
 
So I want to thank you for your answers, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to thank 

members of the opposition for well thought out questions and 
the suggestions and the concerns, the expressions of concerns. I 
hope they will accept my assurance that they will be addressed, 
and I want to thank the opposition for being diligent and 
expedient in addressing these matters. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I want to apologize to Mr. Chair; I thought 
I was finished. I forgot. I would be remiss if I didn’t thank your 
officials, Mr. Minister, for bearing with us tonight and the 
quality of the information you gave, although at times we were 
wondering. Thank you, Mr. Minister, and thanks to your staff. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I move that the 
amendments be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — When shall the Bill be read a third 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — By leave, now, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Planning and Development 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2051 

 

Bill 31 — The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that this Bill 
be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Municipal Affairs and Housing 

Vote 24 
 
Subvote (MG01) 
 
The Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m pleased to 
introduce to you and to the members, Brij Mathur, who is acting 
deputy minister; Peter Hoffmann, who is the assistance deputy 
minister of housing; John Edwards, who is the acting assistant 
deputy minister of municipal and community support services. I 
also have here Lana Grosse, who is the executive director of 
protection emergency services, Larry Chaykowski, immediately 
behind me, is the executive director of finance, administration, 
and facilities. Mr. Doug Morcom, to my right, who is director 
of grants administration. And also this evening Ms. Benita 
Richardson who is the chief financial officer Saskatchewan 
Housing Corporation, and Mr. Nick Surtees who is the 
executive director of licensing and inspections and chief 
inspector. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening to the 
minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, I have a concern 
brought forward to me from the municipality of Wolverine and 
it entails some concern that might have, I guess, be brought 
forward to the minister of CIC (Crown Investment Corporation) 
particularly SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) as well 
as to yourself as the minister responsible for municipalities. 
 
Recently, in fact it was around February, the municipality was 
advised by the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities that the personal injury protection plan review 
had recommended changes to the plan in regards to allowing a 
torte action for all losses be available against institutional third 
parties whose negligence was approximately related to the 
accident. 
 
Now what this means and it is the understanding of the 
municipality of Wolverine that if this recommendation is 

adopted it would mean that anyone that sustains bodily injury in 
a motor vehicle accident on a rural municipal road could sue the 
rural municipality which was the case prior to the 
implementation of that personal injury protection plan. 
 
The municipality makes it quite clear that they would like to 
voice their objection to this recommendation. Because if the 
recommendation is approved it could prove to be very costly for 
rural municipalities throughout the province and it’s a cost that 
would inevitably have to be passed onto the taxpayers of the 
municipality. 
 
The municipality of Wolverine goes on to point out that at a 
time when the agriculture sector in this province is in a crisis 
situation and tax revolts were taking place in many rural 
municipalities, a deteriorating provincial highway system that 
they’re dealing with, and reduced funding for municipal road 
construction, that they say it is difficult to understand why this 
type of recommendation would even be considered. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I ask you if you could respond today to this 
concern put forward by the municipality of Wolverine. And is 
their take on this recommendation, the change to the personal 
injury protection plan by the review board, is that being 
considered? And what in fact do you think of it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I thank the member for that 
serious question. And with all due respect, that is the 
jurisdiction of my colleague, the Attorney General, the Justice 
minister, and I would have to direct that question to him before 
a response. That is within the jurisdiction of Justice. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Okay, well I am really quite surprised with that 
response, Mr. Minister, because the Minister of Justice really 
hasn’t got any obligation or supervisory role as far as I know 
over a change to the personal injury protection plan. That would 
be, I believe, the minister responsible for SGI or Crown 
Investments Corporation. 
 
It seems to me that it would be under your purview or the 
minister responsible for SGI. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — It is my understanding that expanding the 
rights to launch a legal action would come under the purview of 
Justice as opposed to Municipal Affairs. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. You know it’s 
really very difficult sometimes to know which department that 
one would address these questions to because it is simply my 
feeling that this is an issue brought forward by municipalities 
and that certainly your department and your cabinet should be 
conversing with one another so you’re all informed on what’s 
happening when in fact there’s overlap in some of these 
concerns. 
 
So I’m just going to ask you, do you have any knowledge of 
whether or not this change is going to take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I don’t, and I would 
respectfully, again to the member, suggest . . . which might be 
more expedient if there could be correspondence directed to 
myself, and I will ensure that the department responsible 
responds accordingly to the concerns. 



2052 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, I certainly will then I 
guess take it to the Minister of Justice the next time we have 
Justice estimates. And I do thank you and will turn the 
questioning over to my colleague. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the last time 
we discussed Municipal Affairs estimates, I raised some very 
serious concerns with you that dealt with the protection and 
emergency services branch. We discussed a letter that was 
signed by six inspectors of the boiler and pressure vessel 
inspection unit. We got through most of the concerns raised in 
that letter and you had indicated during the course of our 
discussions that you would provide me with some written 
answers to some of my inquiries, and I thank you for them. 
 
I received them earlier this evening and I didn’t take time to 
count them, but I estimate there’s about 50, 60 pages and I did 
look through them briefly. And again I would like to thank you 
for the information. 
 
Now as you will recall, there were some very serious concerns 
expressed by these inspectors about the quality of inspections 
being done and the lack of experience by the remaining 
inspectors. This had to do with . . . The concerns centred around 
the resignation of an inspector with 21 years of service, who 
appears to have been a person that acted as a resource person 
for many of the inexperienced inspectors. 
 
And I think what I’d like to do just for the record is read the last 
paragraph of that letter dated December 16, 1999 and was 
addressed to the executive director of protection and emergency 
services within your department. And it deals with the 
resignation of a Mr. Henry Bergey. And I’m quoting now from 
the letter: 
 

We recognize that no one person is ever indispensable. 
However, due to the high turnover of staff in the branch, 
only Henry has been here long enough to ensure the smooth 
operations of the branch. Without him things will get 
missed and at times there is absolutely no one for the 
inexperienced inspectors to turn to for assistance. The 
consistency of the branch is already in jeopardy because of 
the lack of experience in its workforce. However, with 
more training and a few more years of experience we will 
eventually be able to absorb the loss of someone with 
Henry’s 21 years of service a little more gracefully, 
provided the majority of the current staff remains. We are 
not in that position to do that now. 

 
So that pretty well summarizes those concerns, Mr. Minister. 
And I had asked in the previous discussion of estimates and you 
had indicated that there were people within the department, 
within that unit to provide guidance to the inexperienced 
inspectors and you said you would provide me with a list of 
those people. And I’d looked . . . As I indicated there is a lot of 
information here and I looked through it. I may have missed the 
list of names of those people who have experience, but I didn’t 
see it. Is it in fact in here, Mr. Minister, and could you provide 
us with those names? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, to the member, in the document 
there are titles only; there’s not a list of names. But I want to 
give the member some assurances this evening on the concerns 

that he raised. The chief inspector who takes care of and 
oversees the operations has something like . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Your mic is not picking up. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — My light wasn’t on, Mr. Chairman. Well 
thank you very much. Do I have to go back to the beginning 
again? I guess so. 
 
I just want to respond to the member opposite saying that, no, 
the names are not in that document but the titles are. And I 
wanted to give the member the assurances that the chief 
inspector for the operation has up to 27 years of service — 
that’s the chief inspector who oversees the operations within the 
department. 
 
And all the inspectors within the department have the 
qualifications that have been established through the Public 
Service Commission classification process. They have, to meet 
those qualifications, they have an engineering degree and one 
year of related experience; first class power engineer certificate 
and a one year of related experience; second class power 
engineer’s certificate and three years of related experience, or a 
mix of the above, or a diploma in mechanical engineering 
technology and three years of related experience. And the chief 
engineer is a professional engineer. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that answer. So then 
you feel confident that the inspectors are properly trained and 
have adequate resources to draw on if they run into a problem, 
and that we can assure the public that we don’t have a problem 
in boiler and pressure vessel inspection in this province. Is that 
what you’re saying, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, Mr. Chair, to the member, yes that’s 
exactly what I’m saying. And just to add to that, and again to 
give the assurance and the comfort that five of the six inspectors 
who signed the December 16, 1999 memo continue to be 
employed as boiler and pressure vessel inspectors I’m told. 
 
So these inspectors have been working with the branch for 
several years now, have considerable practical experience in 
inspections, and in addition many of these employees had 
considerable experience in industry prior to coming to 
Department of Municipal Affairs. 
 
So I trust that we’ll give the member the confidence that I have 
in the qualifications and expertise and dedication of these 
employees to their responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, it was those inspectors who you say 
have considerable experience were indicating that there is a 
problem there. And I wonder if you could precisely tell us what 
has been done within the unit to address their very specific 
concern, particularly as I outlined in the last paragraph of their 
letter. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member, the 
inspectors — just to go over again — expressed concern that 
there appeared to be no one available who was fully trained. I 
believe that was the concern, to deliver the well testing process, 
the boiler and pressure vessel safety units. 
 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2053 

 

Now we have 13 that have their National Board commissions. 
Only the two most recently hired employees that did not already 
have their commissions have yet to obtain it and these are the 
two recent additions to try and maintain the demands. Ten of 
those people have their National Board A endorsement and five 
have their National B endorsement. So I guess over that period 
of time additional training is provided on an ongoing and 
continuous basis. And at least two of those additional inspectors 
that we have now are expected to challenge the A commission 
endorsements for this year. 
 
So it’s an ongoing . . . while you work you learn, you gain 
experience. It’s not unlike through other occupations where as 
you progress in your experience in any particular service, 
you’re recognized for your competence and then promoted. 
 
With the technical expertise that’s required to meet the 
challenges of those particular responsibilities, that has to be met 
as well to the satisfaction of the commissions, the endorsements 
that they strive for to achieve recognition and gain those 
certificates. 
 
(21:45) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, then were those inspectors who felt 
they didn’t have the proper training and experience, since the 
time of that letter, since December 16, 1999, did those 
inspectors, did they receive additional training? Were they sent 
on some additional courses? How exactly did this wealth of 
experience and training arrive in that unit? Did you hire some 
new people that had greater qualifications? Can you explain 
exactly how this expertise is now made available in the unit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Two years ago, there was an organized 
welder testing program so that a full-fledged boiler and pressure 
vessel inspector would deliver the program. Three inspectors 
were trained, developed a welder-testing manual, and provided 
the testing. 
 
More recently the responsibility for welder testing program was 
assigned to the design officer to allow other inspectors to spend 
more time on the road performing boiler and pressure vessel 
inspections. And this program continues to operate effectively 
and with those that are trained, they are now in a position to 
train others and ensure that specifications are met and 
qualifications are maintained. 
 
It is taken seriously. And a serious responsibility such as 
insuring quality and safety under those circumstances are not 
taken lightly and it’s not considered to be a trivial matter. And it 
would not be delegated to someone who . . . people in authority 
that would be responsible ultimately for any problems, they 
would have confidence in those people having the ability and 
the knowledge to go out and carry out their duties. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, these six inspectors were not the 
only ones who expressed concerns about the operation of that 
unit, the boiler and pressure vessel inspection unit. There was 
another inspector, Ron Russell, who . . . I have a copy of his 
letter of resignation dated February 24, 2000. And it’s 
addressed to Tim Wrubleski, in your Saskatoon office I believe. 
 
And I think for the record, I would like to read — it’s a very 

short letter — and I would like to read this letter into the record. 
It states: 
 

This letter indicates my wish for early retirement to become 
effective on March 31, 2000 at 5:00 p.m. While I still have 
approximately three and a half years until I reach 65, I 
enjoy my work and job but I find the stress level 
unacceptable. I believe this stress is caused by the lack of 
leadership, direction, and common sense by management. 
The established policy of the branch changes at the whim 
of the manager. Hiring practices are unacceptable. The 
stakeholders have been short-changed by not receiving 
quality inspections which puts an extra burden on some. I 
find that I cannot work under the above conditions any 
further and this is the reason for my early retirement. 

 
Now these are some very serious concerns raised by this 
individual, and one might say that if it’s only one letter by one 
individual, it could be a personality conflict, all those sorts of 
things. But this letter on top of the December 16 letter, Mr. 
Minister, indicates that there are some very serious . . . there 
was some very serious concerns in the boiler inspection unit. 
And I still am not convinced that those concerns of these people 
have been fully addressed. 
 
The same Mr. Russell wrote another letter to Ms. Grosse, the 
executive director, outlining some . . . on the same date 
outlining problems within the branch, talking about abuse of 
travel and those sorts of things, concerns being raised at staff 
meetings that were just simply brushed aside by management 
and so on. 
 
And I guess what I’d like to do is perhaps read a paragraph 
from this letter that Mr. Russell sent to Ms. Grosse that perhaps 
summarizes the concerns. And I quote again: 
 

It concerns me greatly as a government employee and also 
a taxpayer when I see the lack of common sense being used 
by our management. It is unfortunate that my concerns 
seem to fall on deaf ears and no one has the courage to 
correct the problems. 
 
In closing I wish to make it perfectly clear that I loved my 
job and my work. I found a great deal of satisfaction in 
dealing with various problems encountered. Unfortunately, 
I cannot endure the stress due to the lack of leadership and 
questionable management style. I would like to have retired 
from my job in a more satisfactory manner, happy to be 
retiring and not happy to be getting out. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, again these are some very serious concerns 
and I feel that I think you have to have a very close look at that 
unit and address some of those serious concerns. And what has 
been done to address some of Mr. Russell’s concerns? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I have a little bit of a concern. I 
regret the contents of the letter, but I have a little bit of a 
concern that here the member is bringing to our attention of this 
House and the public, conflict that existed between an 
employee and a manager — what I gathered from the letter. 
 
I’m not so sure that that’s something that should be discussed in 
a public forum. I’m prepared to address those concerns. And I 



2054 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

know that no one likes to hear about unhappiness or conflict, 
but when it is brought to a department’s attention, it should be 
attended to. And I know that there have been efforts made to — 
since that time — to improve communications in the workplace 
and relations in that particular unit. I’m told there have been 
efforts made. 
 
I can’t believe that anybody would intentionally want to make 
an employee’s life miserable in their place of employment. I 
don’t think they’d do that intentionally. And there are . . . As we 
know this is human nature. Occasionally conflicts do arise and 
it’s unfortunate. And I regret, I regret hearing what you read me 
in that letter. 
 
But I am told that senior management involvement and 
meetings with inspectors has increased a better communication 
to ensure that these kinds of things don’t happen again. And I 
can respect what the individual is saying. When you work and 
you reach retirement, you want to leave under happy 
circumstances. 
 
I guess what I’m saying is that there has been a serious effort 
made to ensure that those kinds of situations don’t occur on an 
ongoing basis. 
 
And it’s important perhaps, from time to time, that these things 
do come to our attention and we do deal with them, because it’s 
important to ensure that we care for the well-being of 
professional people, of civil servants, of people who serve the 
public or work in any department of public service. And I guess 
in this day and age it doesn’t matter where you work — 
whether you’re in a department store or whether you’re a civil 
servant or whether you work in government — there’s one 
person that you serve and that’s the people, that’s the public, 
that’s the folks that rely on you to serve them, to meet their 
needs and requirements. 
 
So I’m suggesting to the member, Mr. Chair, that efforts have 
been made to create an open communication opportunity for 
members who have concerns to address those concerns and to 
ensure that there is a comfortable workplace for individuals, 
and to allow them if they have some problems, to allow them 
opportunities for training, to allow them opportunities to discuss 
their concerns in an open manner so that the workplace can 
have an amiable environment and still meet the responsibilities 
of whatever positions are required to be filled. 
 
So I hope that addresses the member’s concerns. And the other 
assurance I want to give is that that ongoing effort to ensure the 
well-being of employees will continue. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I’m certainly happy to hear that 
there are efforts ongoing that are directed at solving some of 
these concerns and problems that have been raised. 
 
Some of the concerns that were raised dealt with the travel 
policy of the unit and within the branch. I wonder, could you 
tell me how many trips the chief inspector of the inspection unit 
made outside of Saskatchewan, and also how many trips outside 
of Canada that that person made in the last fiscal year? Would 
you have that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I don’t have the specific numbers of trips 

to whichever destinations, Mr. Chair. Criticizing the travel of 
the chief inspector is a concern because there’s no way 
government would condone waste of taxpayers’ money on 
attending wherever on government travel if it was not 
necessary. 
 
But Saskatchewan has benefited from participation with 
agencies such as the Canadian Association of Chief Boiler 
Inspectors, and it would be beneficial for the chief inspector to 
attend an association meeting at that level, at that calibre. The 
National Board of Boiler and Pressure Vessel Inspectors as well 
is another opportunity that the chief inspector would participate 
in. The Canadian Standards Association and the American 
Society of Mechanical Engineers, which as I mentioned the 
chief inspector is a professional engineer. 
 
These agencies, Mr. Chair, they establish and administer the 
codes and standards that the province of Saskatchewan adopts 
and enforces. So it would be appropriate for the chief inspector 
to attend and get updates and ensure that the provincial body 
was in fact in step, in tune, and following the standards that 
we’re guided by. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, could you — I realize you don’t 
have that information at your fingertips here this evening — but 
could you provide us with a list of the trips that the chief 
inspector took both within Canada and outside of Canada and 
the purpose for those trips. 
 
The reason why I ask for that . . . I’m asking this line of 
questions is because I have in my possession a departmental 
memo that was written by one of the inspectors who felt that 
perhaps some of the travel by the chief inspector was not 
beneficial to the branch, that there was very little information 
was passed on to the inspectors in the field. 
 
And so I wonder if you could provide us with a, as I said, a list 
of the trips, their purpose, and what information was passed on 
to the inspectors. Would you, could you do that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, Mr. Chairman, we can supply the 
information with respect to the trips taken and the purposes and 
the reasons. 
 
And I just want to once again express a concern about getting 
one side. We have a letter here from an employee. We don’t 
know for what reason, maybe in conflict or is suddenly being 
critical of a person who is not in a position to defend himself or 
herself. I mean, it’s . . . and I don’t . . . there’s one side of the 
story here. And we don’t have the total side of the other story. 
 
(22:00) 
 
So I, again if it’s a conflict between individuals, I’m not sure if 
it’s fair to be debating it here in the Legislative Assembly. I 
mean if it’s a personnel problem, then it could be attended to in 
other ways because those people are not here to be questioned 
directly and to be able to give their direct responses. I don’t do 
. . . with all due respect, I don’t think this is the forum for that. 
 
Their concerns have been expressed with respect to safety 
concerns and so on, which have been addressed. If there are 
personnel conflicts in a workplace, I’m not sure this is where 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2055 

 

we should be discussing it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I don’t think that these concerns are 
of a personal vendetta. These concerns were raised by an 
inspector in a memo to UMC (Union Management Committee) 
committee co-chairs, and these concerns were raised and there 
was a number of other concerns. And I would think that if the 
trips are all just legitimate trips and have value, I don’t think 
there’s a problem with that. I certainly condone the trips that are 
of value and bring information and training back to inspectors 
and to that whole branch. 
 
So if you have indicated that you will provide us with that list, 
we would be happy to receive it. And we would like the 
information, Mr. Minister, before the end of, by next week if 
possible. 
 
I would like to now turn to some of the information that you 
surprised me with. I had asked you for the job description of the 
executive director of the protection and emergency services 
branch and you provided me with that, and also the resumé of 
the executive . . . the current executive director. And I have a 
couple, at least one or two questions with regards to that. 
 
In the area titled job knowledge, there’s one paragraph that says 
the incumbent must establish a vision for an appropriate level of 
protection services to the public and consider the most effective 
regulatory environment for protection services that consider 
technological advancements and public safety needs. To me that 
says that the executive director should at least have a 
background of some technical experience, some engineering 
experience, and that sort of thing. 
 
When I look at the resumé of Miss Grosse, I see her education 
is Bachelor of Arts in public administration and a Bachelor of 
Arts in advanced certificate, and advanced certificate in 
political studies. There is no technical experience in this 
resumé, Mr. Minister. And I’m just wondering if perhaps that 
isn’t a bit . . . a source for some of the discontent in that branch. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Minister, but it seems to me that the present 
. . . the incumbent doesn’t meet all the requirements of the job 
description. And I think that’s a very serious concern to the 
public that we have the person who is responsible for safety 
protection of the public and doesn’t have the proper 
qualifications. How do you answer that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — An executive director, to create a vision, 
includes participation by all the people that are responsible . . . 
involved in that vision, which includes the chief inspector and 
the inspectors who work in that environment. 
 
I think we talked about this before and you know, as an 
conductor you don’t need to know how to play all the 
instruments but you have to be able to create a melody, and that 
melody is created by input from all the participants within that 
group who are able to read the music. 
 
So I mean it’s not . . . there are many instances that I’m sure the 
member could think of where a person does not have a specific 
degree in a particular area but has served as an executive 
manager. 
 

As a matter of fact I think if you recall, I think it was Mr. Lee 
Iacocca that didn’t know a thing about building a car, but 
created a tremendous industry or was involved in reviving an 
industry and yet he didn’t know how to build a car. 
 
So I use that as an analogy, not necessarily to be a technician to 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, he didn’t build a Mustang. I 
know that he was involved with Chrysler, and he did a pretty 
good job of that without having to know how to build a 
Chrysler. 
 
So I just offer that, that there is a need for executive 
management people to be able to orchestrate the visions and set 
goals and objectives. But you don’t do that individually without 
input. Certainly, you use the people, you include the people that 
are involved in those visions and those goals and objectives. I 
mean that’s the way business operates. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, you used the analogy — and I 
believe we’ve talked about this the last time — about the 
conductor doesn’t have to play all the instruments and I agree. 
But certainly the conductor has to be able to read music. 
 
And in this case when an executive director is dealing with 
technical information, and if you don’t have any practical and 
background and education in that area — at least an exposure to 
that, of some sort of thing, whether it be an engineering degree 
but not particularly related to this area — but at least when 
you’re presented with technical reports and those sorts of 
things, I would imagine it’d be very difficult if you don’t 
understand what’s on the paper in front of you. 
 
And I would suspect that in some cases that this may be the 
case here, Mr. Minister. And I’m just wondering if that, as I 
said earlier, if that isn’t at least in part the cause of some of the 
problems within the inspection branch. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would urge you to look carefully at the 
administration of this protection and emergency services branch 
to ensure that the public is adequately protected. 
 
And I guess one other question I might have that just occurred 
to me: do the people who have boilers inspected, whether it be a 
board of education or a health district or whatever, is there a 
charge for these inspection services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes there is a charge on a sliding scale as 
well. That’s an answer to that question. 
 
I want to go back to what the member continues to persist with 
respect to qualifications of individuals, executive managers. 
There are occasionally, in a variety of situations, conflicts 
within those people who you are referring to as technicians, 
amongst themselves. And on occasion there is a need to bring in 
someone as a manager of the operation to make sure that that 
orchestra starts playing together to create a melody. 
 
So I just want to go back to that and I’m not sure, Mr. Chair, if 
that line of questioning is really . . . continues to be appropriate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Point of order. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I recognize the Government House 



2056 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

Leader on the point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order, 
with respect to the line of questioning as it refers specifically to 
an individual who is unable to protect himself or herself, I want 
to quote from Beauchesne’s, 6th Edition, Rules and Forms, and 
it’s on page 151. And I’m quoting from Beauchesne’s: 
 

The Speaker is traditionally protected from attack a group 
of individuals commonly referred to as “those of high 
official station”. The extent of this group has never been 
defined. Over the years it has covered senior public 
servants, ranking officers of the armed forces, diplomatic 
representatives in Canada, a Minister who was not a 
Member of either House, and the Prime Minister before he 
won a seat in the House. 

 
And under section 4 on that same page, it goes on to say: 
 

The Speaker has cautioned Members to exercise great care 
in making statements about persons who are outside of the 
House and unable to reply. 

 
And I want to as well quote from the House of Commons 
Procedures and Practice, Robert Marleau and Montpetit, and 
this is from page 524, and it’s under the title of “Reference by 
name to members of the public:” 
 

Members are discouraged from referring by name to 
persons who are not Members of Parliament and who do 
not enjoy parliamentary immunity, except in extraordinary 
circumstances when the national interest calls for the 
naming of an individual. The Speaker has ruled that 
Members have a responsibility to protect the innocent, not 
only from outright slander but from any slur directly or 
indirectly implied, and has stressed that Members should 
avoid as much as possible mentioning by name people from 
outside the House who are unable to reply and defend 
themselves against innuendo. 
 

I’ve listened very carefully to the dialogue and the discussion 
and I want to say that, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, it’s 
becoming a much more common practice in this House than I 
think we would like to see. 
 
I think I’ve made my case and I would ask, Mr. Chairman, that 
you consider my point of order and respond. 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the member from Saltcoats on 
a point of order. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to respond 
to that point of order if I may. 
 
Mr. Chair, we’re not pointing a finger at any one person or any 
official in any department. But what we are doing is bringing a 
concern, in fact not one concern but a number of concerns that 
have been brought forward to us by employees and past 
employees of that department. 
 
And I think we would be remiss as the official opposition if 
these were brought to us and we did not bring these forward. 
And again, Mr. Chair, I repeat that we’re not pointing the finger 

at any one person or any number of persons within that 
department. But we just wonder if the problems that have arose 
in that department have been dealt with or are being dealt with, 
and I think that’s the questions we’re asking tonight, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Could the committee please 
come to order. While considering the Beauchesne’s, 6th 
Edition, I find that the line of questioning is appropriate to the 
point that it discusses in general the qualifications required for 
certain positions. 
 
However I believe that the point of order is well taken in that 
the Speaker has traditionally, under Beauchesne's, 6th Edition: 
 

The Speaker has traditionally protected from attack a group 
of individuals commonly referred to “as those of high 
official station”. The extent of this group has never been 
defined. Over the years it has covered senior public 
servants . . . 

 
And to that extent I would find that the point of order is well 
taken to the extent of questioning a specific individual’s 
qualifications for a specific position. 
 
However, generally or to a certain extent that that individual 
does not hold the qualifications of a specific job, but as if it 
pertains specifically to a position, I think it would be in order. 
But in this case I believe that you were talking specifically 
about an individual, so I find the point of order well taken. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. A follow-up question to 
my last question. How many dollars does your department 
collect in these inspection fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, while there is some additions to 
the amounts being carried out, I again want to just reiterate 
what I said earlier about addressing . . . having addressed the 
concerns that were expressed by employees in the past. 
 
And I think I’ve indicated that there have been efforts made to 
increase the opportunity for communications. There have been 
plans to create a much better working environment. And that’s 
involved all employees of the working unit and with the 
addition and some help from the Public Service Commission as 
well. So again I believe I said it before, that those concerns did 
not go unnoticed. 
 
And with respect to the qualifications for the individuals 
involved, they have been upgraded; they have been trained. We 
have a chief inspector with I believe it’s something like 27 
years in total service — some 13 in the private sector and 14 
with the department. Those qualifications, with the overseer, 
those qualifications to ensure that people working in the 
department, the subordinates, do carry out their responsibilities 
effectively and efficiently. 
 
It would not be in the best interest of the chief inspector, or the 
department, to accept performance otherwise. 
 
Collection of fees, the total is approximately $1.5 million. 
 
(22:15) 
 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2057 

 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I have one other issue that I would 
like to discuss with you unrelated to the topic that we have been 
talking about. I have a letter in my possession that . . . from the 
Echo Lake Bible Camp at Fort San and I believe, Mr. Minister, 
I believe that is in your constituency. 
 
They are very concerned about their taxes, that their last, I 
believe their 2000 — their letter states — that their 2000 tax bill 
was $11,658. They are having a great deal of difficulty in 
generating enough revenue to pay their taxes and that sort of 
thing. And they have some concerns as to why they themselves 
— because they are a Christian camp. I’m not sure, it doesn’t 
tell me whether they are associated with one of the existing 
mainstream Christian churches and that sort of thing — but they 
did ask me to get some information on their behalf. 
 
What is the department’s policy on charitable church 
organizations? Which church organizations are taxable and 
which ones aren’t? Could you explain that, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, church property is exempt. 
Camps are not. And there was a tax review committee made up 
by all the responsible departments — SARM, SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association), and the 
department — in reviewing the taxation of a variety of 
properties, and it was concluded that properties of the nature the 
member’s talking about not be exempt. But since the member is 
so close from Last Mountain-Touchwood perhaps we should 
discuss it closer. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, the letter indicates that a sister 
organization in Alberta and BC (British Columbia), they’re not 
taxable. So their camps . . . I would assume that there are 
different policies in effect in Saskatchewan versus Alberta and 
BC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Yes, different provinces have different 
exemptions and you may go to another province other than 
Alberta and find, you know, they have a different approach to 
this. But having said that, if that group, that church group, feels 
they’re having some problems, they should perhaps approach 
the RM. I believe that’s the RM of North Qu’Appelle unless 
that’s further west, and I’m not sure. But they may, they may 
approach the RM to discuss their concern. 
 
The RMs, as the member’s aware, Mr. Chair, they do have tax 
tools that they could apply in consideration of an approach by 
these people. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, the camp falls within the 
administration area of the village of Fort San. And the letter 
states that up until 1997 Fort San gave us a 50 per cent 
reduction in our taxes. But it goes on to say, but since then they 
feel they have not been able to grant us this because of 
government policies in decline of grant revenues. 
 
And what they are specifically requesting, they said, we would 
ask you to help us. And they have two requests: to be exempt 
from this tax as the Prairie Christian Training Centre is, and the 
second one, or be permitted to only pay the municipal tax and 
not the school tax. 
 

And the reason that they ask this is because their support comes 
from donations from individuals and churches, and they feel 
that they’re not in a commercial enterprise and they don’t 
generate revenue on that basis, and they really are struggling, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I would if I . . . I would respond 
to the letter by, by suggesting that the community approach the 
village of Fort San and express their concern. That falls within 
the purview of that resort village, and they also have tax tools 
that they’re eligible to apply. So I humbly suggest that that’s the 
direction that perhaps that group should pursue. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, this is my final question for the 
evening, I’m sure you’re happy to hear that. Is your department 
looking at this whole area of charitable organizations that don’t 
fall within the existing guidelines, and are you looking at 
perhaps doing something to help these people? Because I know 
what the answer is going to be. They’re going to go to the Fort 
San and Fort San is saying look, we need the money, we can’t 
afford to give you a tax break, and go to the province and see if 
there’s something that can be done, it’s the province that’s 
going to have to help you. At least I suspect that’s going to be 
the answer when they go to Fort San. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Again, I go back to . . . the decision not to 
exempt those properties was made by the committee made up to 
review property tax exemptions. And that was representatives 
from the various organizations — SARM, SUMA, SSTA, and 
so on. And there’s no review planned in the immediate future to 
carry that out. 
 
The only suggestion again I would have is that they approach 
the village and see if they may be able to apply some tax tools 
that would ease their concerns, at least at this time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you, Mr. 
Minister, and to your officials. 
 
My questions are on the infrastructure program, 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. I know that the 
decisions that are made on this with regards to who’s going to 
be receiving the money from this program is decisions that are 
made by your government, and most towns and villages do 
make out an application every year. 
 
I believe the last time we had an opportunity to speak you 
relayed the information to me that most of the applications for 
water and sewer were the ones that were received. Can you tell 
me what percentage of them were received that were to do with 
water and sewer this year, and if that was indeed where most of 
the money was spent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, about two-thirds of the money, 
about 16 million out of 24 million was spent on water and 
sewer projects. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that because 
of the problems with the water systems in many of the small 
towns there was a number of them had made applications for 
enhancements for some of their infrastructure and many of them 
had been waiting and banking on this. 
 



2058 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

I heard on the news, and I’m sure that most people around the 
province heard the same thing, that there was money spent on 
projects like cable TV that were approved ahead of 
infrastructure money for water and sewer. Can you give me an 
idea of how much money was spent on things like cable TV? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m glad to have the 
opportunity to clarify the question, what the member is alluding 
to, and I believe you said you heard it on the news. Now the 
projects that that news report referred to . . . and I’m very 
pleased to have an opportunity to clarify because sometimes we 
get again only one side of the story. Now those projects that 
were referred to in that CBC report were funded under the old 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program. 
 
That was between 1994 and 1998. Under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program, funding at 
that time was per capita based. Each community could 
determine its own infrastructure priorities as long as the projects 
were eligible under the program guidelines. So more than $86 
million was spent on water and sewer projects through that 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program. 
 
Now, about $7 million was allocated for water and sewer 
projects in northern Saskatchewan in addition to the northern 
water and sewer projects. Each northern municipality was 
allocated a per capita amount, which could be used for local 
infrastructure priorities. This per capita allocation was at the 
request of the communities. So this is beyond the programs that 
are in place now; this is prior to. 
 
So I just want to clarify that. There were different programs and 
people had different priorities earlier. When the problems now 
that were surfaced, SERM’s (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) list of communities with potential water 
infrastructure problems had not been released when this 
particular Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program 
was in place. 
 
So I believe that there may have been some confusion by the 
report that indicated to the public that we have this 
infrastructure money and it’s being spent on what people might 
have suggested as frivolous projects in some remote 
communities. But what those communities decided was that 
there were projects that they felt would enhance their lives in 
those small northern communities. 
 
Unfortunately sometimes those stories make things look out to 
be like, well it was just a waste of money because they bought 
cable TV and whatnot or tried to improve their standard of life 
when they should have been spending it on something else, 
which at that time was not indicated or believed to be a priority 
in those particular communities. 
 
So this new program, Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program was designed as a project-based program so that senior 
governments could target high priority infrastructure needs and 
water and sewer projects — for which a serious health or 
environmental problem has been identified — are the highest 
priority for this particular program that’s in place right now. 
And presently more than $13 million has been allocated to the 
sewer and water projects in 56 communities. 
 

Under this particular program . . . and I appreciate the 
opportunity to say that under the current program which 
addresses some serious concerns, no cable television, no curling 
rinks, golf courses, or similar projects have been approved 
under the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. And 
each project that’s applied for is scrutinized by representatives 
who respect the best interests of the communities on behalf of 
whom those applications are presented. 
 
Most of the projects as I mentioned, and particularly those 
people that have had boiled-water advisories, any of those 
communities that had applied for help; they were given the 
highest priority. And they were responded to and received that 
kind of help. And whatever help was available in those 
situations will continue to prevail. 
 
So I hope that clarifies the concerns that may have been raised 
by a report that may not have been totally complete with respect 
to the targeted projects for which infrastructure works programs 
were qualified and to keep those two programs separate. 
 
(22:30) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in the 
new program I believe that there has been a number of 
communities that were given . . . whose grants were approved 
and then at the end of the year the work was never completed so 
they weren’t allowed to carry the program forward till the next 
year. 
 
Can you give me an idea of how much money last year was 
allocated and now not spent because the project was never 
completed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, there was about a half a million 
dollars that was not able to be used because of the lateness in 
the applicants notifying the department that they would not be 
able to complete those projects. 
 
People that informed the department of earlier completion had 
. . . would indicate or a release of some of the monies that were 
not in fact committed. However when there were some of those 
communities that notified the department they weren’t able to 
complete the project, so that money was not used. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I know that there was a number 
of communities that were not able to complete their project 
because paperwork, holdups through environmental concerns, 
and they’d started a project and then were not able to complete 
it. And then the next year, because the funding wasn’t there, 
they left them in a real bind. 
 
And even though the money was allocated by your department, 
it must have been thrown back into the General Revenue Fund 
to be re-spent again the next year, which did not help these 
communities at all. 
 
Is there any way that your department is looking at this so that 
if the money is allocated and then given a reasonable 
opportunity to finish it the next year, why isn’t the funds carried 
over so that they are actually able to complete the project 
instead of leaving them in the bind. 
 



June 21, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2059 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I believe the member is 
referring to the provincial-municipal infrastructure program 
which . . . there is a difference from that one to the one that’s 
currently been announced: the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program. 
 
But going back to the provincial-municipal program, whatever 
money is not used is lost. I mean we couldn’t roll it over. It was 
not allowed to be carried over. But under the current program, 
there are opportunities to apply for ongoing projects. 
 
I’m not sure if that’s clear enough, but under that 
provincial-municipal program, any monies that weren’t used 
could not be carried over within the department. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand what 
you’re saying, is if there’s . . . as of this year then, if there’s an 
application approved and they’re not able to complete the 
project, then there is an opportunity to carry it over to the next 
year so that they can complete a project. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I understand that applications can be made 
for multi-year projects. So if a project can’t be completed 
within the first year, they can apply into the second year. So it’s 
. . . well the multi-year project would be acknowledged. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not going to ask 
you to repeat it. I’m just going to say . . . what you’re telling me 
is that if somebody applies for a program this year and they 
don’t get it completed, then even if they haven’t said this is a 
multi-year program because they think it’s going to be 
completed in one year, the money is allocated. I’m hoping what 
you’re saying is then they can finish spending the money next 
year. 
 
As long as we’re on the same wavelength, then we’ll just stop 
there and I’ll ask you one short question in which I hope I 
receive one short answer and then we can go on. 
 
I have a letter from the village of Spalding and they had 
submitted a grant to Municipal Affairs in December and they 
hadn’t received an answer as of April 18. And when they asked, 
phoned in and asked, they were told very rudely they didn’t get 
any money for their project. So they’re asking for information 
on how the grants are decided and why applications were not 
considered? 
 
So I am wondering if you can give me a response to their letter 
to me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, I wonder if the member would 
share that letter with me. We could respond to them for any 
reason, specific reasons they may have been denied. It’s the 
village of Spalding, I believe the member said, and we don’t 
have the record here as to what the project was they applied for. 
 
But I think there was a question earlier about how are these 
projects reviewed. There are representatives from SARM, 
SUMA — SSTA I believe is also in that particular . . . only 
SARM and SUMA, I’m sorry — and the federal and provincial 
representatives who sit in the decision-making process on 
which projects fall into the criteria. 
 

So I hope that responds to a concern that was raised earlier with 
respect to how are these projects viewed and it’s a body of 
people that have the best interests of those communities at heart 
as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. And I’m not 
going to hold you another hour. But I actually want to do a 
quick follow-up to the bible camp situation here. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are number of camps throughout the 
province that are actually finding that it’s becoming more and 
more difficult for them to operate and you may or may not be 
familiar with how a lot of these bible camps operate. It’s strictly 
charitable donations. 
 
Many of the camps provide a real opportunity for young people 
through the summer to give them something to do in the 
summertime — a good camping experience. And they 
supplement the costs of those campers. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you mentioned about talking to the RMs, 
local RMs, or towns, whoever might be responsible. It would 
seem to me, Mr. Minister, it probably would be more 
appropriate to have a provincial policy versus having one RM 
make an exemption and another RM charging the full amount 
of whatever tax might be available or might be constituted 
against that property. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I would ask of you and your department to 
give some thought and some consideration to a provincial 
policy that at least creates some equality so that one camp isn’t 
treated differently simply because they happen to live in an RM 
or a rural council that they may view their presence as 
something positive and good to their RM and equality of life 
within the RM because of their presence. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, in response to the member’s 
concern, and I do appreciate it and respect that concern. I am 
informed that the committee reviewing tax exemptions 
provincially has recommended that the province does not create 
any more tax exemptions. That those should be issues in matters 
that are dealt with on a local government basis. 
 
However, having said that, I am certainly pleased to take the 
suggestions and the comments under consideration. However, I 
wanted to clarify the fact that it’s in response to the 
representatives of local governments that the province has 
responded to in not meddling in what they see is their 
responsibility and should be their considerations with respect to 
properties they wish to exempt or not, and that the province 
should refrain from becoming involved in that . . . you know, 
not usurp their authority in those respects. However again there 
will be consideration given from our part on that particular 
issue. 
 
Subvote (MG01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (MG02), (MG07), (MG17), (MG03), (MG15), 
(MG05), (MG18) agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 



2060 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2001 

 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Municipal Affairs and Housing 
Vote 24 

 
Subvotes (MG03) and (MG05) agreed to. 
 
Vote 24 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It being now slightly past 5 p.m., this 
House now stands adjourned until tomorrow at 10 a.m. Have a 
pleasant evening. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:47. 
 
 
 


