















































Hansard: March 22, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 47 
 March 22, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon on behalf of 
the citizens of southwest Saskatchewan who have raised 
concerns about the implications of the Saskatchewan EMS 
(emergency medical services) development project. And their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

This petition, Mr. Speaker, was signed by residents of Swift 
Current, Gull Lake, Tompkins, and other communities in the 
southwest. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the good citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency who are concerned about the EMS service in their 
area. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And it’s signed by residents of Pangman, Ogema, Kayville, 
Viceroy, and Bengough. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today to do with ambulance services within 
the province. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of 
Eastend. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present today dealing with the EMS development project, and 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

And the signatures to this petition come from the community of 
Gull Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by the good 
citizens of Saskatchewan in regards to the EMS report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 

And the signatures on this petition are all from the good centre 
of Gull Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
oppose the centralization of ambulance services; and 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly 
regarding a request for a new hospital in Swift Current. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Monday next move first reading of The Whistle-blower 
Protection Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 8 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: what were the official and 
specific reasons for the termination of Lynn Kuffner, Ken 
Dusselier, Colette Wilks, and Stan Abrahamowicz from 



48 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

their positions with the Saskatchewan Workers’ 
Compensation Board; and how much severance did each 
receive or agree to upon their termination? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to introduce to the Assembly 
today many friends of mine in the west gallery, if I could just 
take a few moments. They are friends from the Onion Lake 
First Nation and also a number of people who I haven’t met, 
actually, from the Little Pine First Nation who are walking . . . 
or who have walked, I should say, to Regina in an attempt to 
raise awareness around the elimination for racism. 
 
Now we had a nice meeting just a half an hour or so ago with 
the Minister of Northern Affairs, the Minister of Environment, 
and the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs. And they tell me that 
coincidently they didn’t actually know or weren’t aware that 
actually yesterday was the day for awareness of elimination of 
racism. So this is just a wonderful coincidence that they’re 
actually here today. 
 
The group started their trek on Tuesday morning from the 
Onion Lake First Nation. And if anybody knows where that is, 
that’s way up north of Lloydminster, so it’s quite a distance. 
What they did though is they stopped in every community on 
the way to Regina and walked through every single community, 
starting one kilometre on the boundary . . . one kilometre out of 
each community, walking through the community for another 
kilometre. So they’ve seen a lot of people on the way down. 
 
A couple of things that I just did want to highlight as well. 
Their efforts are for the following: to show their children that 
there are healthier ways of handling racism and discrimination 
instead of using violent methods. Racism and discrimination is 
a social issue. It affects all people, not only First Nations 
people. Racism and discrimination is seen in First Nations 
bands as well. As human beings, they do not have the right to 
hurt another human being for the colour they were born in 
whether it be red, yellow, black, white . . . red, white, black, or 
yellow, I should say. So that’s just several of their themes that 
they have in their literature that they gave to me today. 
 
I understand that they will also be trying to meet with Premier 
Calvert and he’s told me that he would try and meet with them 
for a few minutes, I suspect following question period. 
 
And I do want to mention as well that I will be giving to several 
of my cabinet colleagues posters that speak to the issue and 
concern of racism. 
 
Now I don’t . . . I very rarely get guests from this far away so I 
would ordinarily just introduce the group as a whole, but they 
all would like to see their names in Hansard so I’ll quickly run 
through and then at the end ask them to stand up. 
 
We have with us, actually the person I believe who coordinated 
most of this, Darlene Chocan, Delia Waskewitch, Marlee 
Chocan, Rosalie Chocan, Vera Cardinal-Trottier, Sara 
Waskewitch, Arlene Lewis, Brenda Kam, Amanda Lameman, 

Dallas Lameman, Vivian Littlewolfe, Marcella Pahtaykan, 
Brian Waskewitch, Kelly Whitstone-Dillon, Doris Bull, Arlene 
Bull, Bertha Kennedy, Jace Bull, Larissa Kennedy, Janess Bull, 
Daren Bull-Waskewitch, Laurie Bull, Deidre Bull, Dayton Bull, 
and Ursla Baptiste-Bull. I would like all of my colleagues in the 
Assembly to please join me in welcoming these guests who 
came so far to join us today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, but I 
would remind you that when you’re referring to other 
colleagues in the legislature that you should refer to them by the 
riding or by their ministerial responsibility. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take this opportunity on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition to welcome today all of the members of the Onion 
Lake First Nation. We welcome you here. 
 
We’re happy to have you here with us today and we certainly 
commend you on your efforts to raise awareness on the 
elimination of racism. Racism is a totally unacceptable thing 
these days and always has been. We certainly concur with all of 
the efforts that you are putting into to ensure that there is peace 
and harmony in our society and appreciation for every one of 
us. 
 
So I welcome you today and I welcome too members of the 
Department of Aboriginal Affairs that are here and on behalf of 
the official opposition again, welcome and good luck. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree). 
 
I would like as well to join the members from the Saskatchewan 
Party to welcome the people from Onion Lake and from Little 
Pine as well. 
 
For the people who may not know the names, Onion Lake is 
Weecheguskoseehi- Saguhiguneek, Mr. Speaker, and 
Wuskichooseek is the word for Little Pine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important as we are looking at respect 
amongst all people, I would like to say a couple of words in 
Cree in addition to what I have said. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
I guess, Mr. Speaker, as I said, it gives me great pride in this 
legislature, as I watch people stand up to the issue of racism, 
walk many miles to leave a message that the essence of this 
legislature and the essence of this province has to be based on 
pride and respect amongst all people. Haw egosi. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
introduce to the Assembly my office manager here in Regina. 
 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 49 

 

And may I say to my former colleagues in cabinet that one of 
the problems when you leave cabinet is you have to learn to 
carry your own briefcase and open your own car door again. 
But fortunately my transition into private life has been eased by 
Mark Cooper, and he’s joined today with his friends Sarah 
McQuarrie, Shawn Stibe, and Chris Eatrides. 
 
I’d ask you to please join me in welcoming them to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the other members of the Assembly two 
guests sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker — Mr. Gordon 
Boychuk who is a constituent of mine, and a good friend of his, 
Mr. Chris Wagner, who is a resident of Prelate, Saskatchewan. 
 
And I’d like all the members to join me in welcoming them to 
our Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
also want to join my colleagues on both sides of the House to 
welcome the Onion Lake people. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So I just said to the folks that Keith’s Cree is from the east side 
and we’re from the northwest, and I wanted to correct a few of 
his Cree mistakes, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Swift Current Broncos in Western Hockey League Playoffs 
 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, there are many Saskatchewan 
realities attendant with the arrival of spring in our province — 
the retreat of the snow, preparation for seeding, a disappointing 
NDP (New Democratic Party) Throne Speech, and the Swift 
Current Broncos finishing first in the WHL’s (Western Hockey 
League) east division. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the WHL playoffs about to get underway, I 
thought I would try to help out other members in this Assembly 
who may represent WHL communities by giving them a way to 
help their team be successful in the playoffs. 
 
We tried to provide this help in the past. We pointed out to the 
government in ’97 that the ’Riders have never won a Grey Cup 
while they were in office and asked them to temporarily resign. 
And last year I pointed out that the only WHL team to advance 
in the playoffs was the one represented by a Sask Party MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
This year the Regina Pats and the Moose Jaw Warriors are also 
in the playoffs, along with the Broncos, and so I wanted to 
encourage the members for Moose Jaw and Regina to do the 
only thing they could possibly do to help ensure their teams’ 
success in the playoffs. Mr. Speaker, I implore the members for 

Regina and Moose Jaw, if they want to help their teams, cross 
the floor. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Cross the floor, Mr. Speaker, and give them a 
fighting chance. 
 
On a serious note, Mr. Speaker, I do want to take this 
opportunity to wish the Swift Current Broncos — the coaches, 
the players, the volunteers, all the staff — the very best in the 
WHL playoffs. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina and Saskatchewan Economies Look Good 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, let me be the first government 
member in this session to steal a line from the member from 
Regina Dewdney — more good news for Saskatchewan. Front 
page stuff in The Leader-Post too, Mr. Speaker. “Regina’s 
economy looks good,” reads the headline. This, and according 
to the Conference Board of Canada, and I quote: “. . . you can 
expect good things for this year.” 

 
How good, you might ask. Well the board says: 2.5 per cent 
economic growth; 2.1 per cent employment growth — in real 
people, not numbers — a growth of 2,100 jobs. 
 
And here’s a line I really like, Mr. Speaker, and I quote: 
 

Spurred by tax cuts at the federal and provincial level, 
disposable income . . . will rise . . . 5.1 per cent . . . 
 

So we can expect people to hit the stores, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the Leader of the Opposition was present at 
the luncheon yesterday when these figures were announced. But 
he must have been away at the dessert table during the 
presentation because yesterday he told this Assembly a whole 
different story. 
 
So quickly, Mr. Speaker, retail sales in Saskatchewan have 
improved 6.5 per cent January over January. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so much good news and so little time. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Condition of Highways 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as it was 
mentioned by one of the other members it’s spring time and 
thoughts in Saskatchewan often turn to things like potholes. 
 
In my particular constituency, one of the things that’s happened 
with spring is really a rather sombre thought because there’s a 
lot of individuals have placed crosses in memory of individuals 
that have died on some of the highways in that area. And as the 
snow leaves we see more of those sort of coming back to light 
and it’s a very sobering sort of a thought. 



50 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

I want to commend this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, the individuals 
and the committees from my constituency that continue to work 
on behalf of the people of the constituency and other 
individuals that use those particular highways to try and get 
them improved. And I know we had one of the activists from 
the area met with the Minister of Highways recently and I 
appreciate that visit that was given to reinforce some of the 
concerns and the hardships that are caused by that highway and 
commend those people for working for continued dividing of 
Highway 11. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ownership of Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure to 
stand in the House again now that we’re back in session and to 
bring to the attention of the Assembly some of the things which 
have been happening across my city and have been appearing in 
the local paper. 
 
In particular I want to bring to the attention of members, 
although I’m sure the members opposite know about it, 
comments by a fellow from Regina named Richard Truscott. I 
think a former executive assistant of the Leader of the 
Opposition when he was in Ottawa, speaking about the Crown 
corporations. 
 
The opposition, as we know, have a bit of a confused approach 
to the Crowns these days. Mr. Truscott seems to be one of the 
gurus in this effect. In the paper it says the government could 
open up private ownership of the Crowns without necessarily 
losing control. An interesting question as to how you would do 
that and I’m sure the members opposite as we move through the 
debate will do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The fact is, is that this article, and I want to bring to the 
attention of people, shows clearly the Saskatchewan people do 
not support that. A poll done by The Leader-Post shows that 
between 50 and 60 per cent of Saskatchewan people favour 
retaining Crown ownership of every single Crown asset we 
have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting to note that the 60 per cent roughly 
corresponds with what the member for Elphinstone and the 
member from Riversdale got in the by-elections and the 
members opposite might take note of that. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prud’Homme Priest Featured in Documentary 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s with a 
great deal of pride and a sense of excitement that I make this 
announcement today to the members of the Assembly and to all 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
A documentary film on French clergymen, Constant Jean 
Baptiste Bourdel will receive its world premiere March 24 at a 

community banquet in Prud’homme, Saskatchewan. Pioneer 
Priest, directed by Donna Caruso, airs March 31 on the History 
channel as part of its series, A Scattering of Seeds: The Creation 
of Canada. 
 
Shot in Prud’homme and produced by Toronto’s White Pine 
Pictures, the documentary pays tribute to the courage and sense 
of duty of Monseigneur Bourdel who established the 
community’s first parish. It explores the development of the 
town, the parish of St. Donatien and St. Rogatien, and the 
arrival of the nuns of the Daughters of Providence, who helped 
finance the church, presbytery, and the convent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a great deal of congratulations should go to the 
museum committee who are . . . certainly have made sure that 
this documentary has come to fruition in Prud’homme, 
Saskatchewan. And so I congratulate them, and I invite all the 
members of the Assembly to be at the Silver Age Hall in 
Prud’homme on March 24, at 6:30 p.m. to see the screening of 
the video. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Humboldt Host City for 2002 Saskatchewan Winter Games 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to congratulate Humboldt, which has been proclaimed the 
host city for the 2002 Saskatchewan Winter Games. 
Congratulations to Humboldt Mayor Dennis Korte, Mark 
Mulatz, chairperson of the Saskatchewan Games Council, and 
the 2002 Humboldt Saskatchewan Winter Games Committee. 
 
The Minister of Culture Youth and Recreation and Mr. Mulatz, 
also presented a cheque for $220,000 to the host committee. 
This represents the government’s commitment to the games 
funded through lottery proceeds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Humboldt is ready to meet the challenge of the 
games. It has an excellent organizing committee and a strong 
community of volunteers in place to help the athletes have a 
successful sporting event. 
 
The winter games provide a wonderful opportunity for the 
youth of this province to showcase their athletic ability and 
talent. 
 
Sporting events are just one of the many ways we can stand 
behind our youth. More than 2,000 athletes, coaches, managers, 
and officials will participate in the games next year. 
 
Once again, way to go Humboldt! 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cost of Ambulance Service 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, we must protect the integrity of 
one-tier, quality medicare which is accessible to all. In the 
recent Riversdale by-election the Saskatchewan Party offered 
voters in one of the province’s poorest constituencies the 
prospect of superior health care if they could afford it. 
 
Ambulance service is another example of two-tier medicine. At 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 51 

 

present both the charges levied to patients and the pay given to 
workers depends on the district in which they live. The cost of 
the new EMT (emergency medical technician) contract is 
covered in those districts that operate their own ambulance 
service, but not in others. Workers in other districts did not 
receive an increase. In some districts there is no charge for 
inter-facility transfers. In others, such as my own, it can cost 
over $200. 
 
Rural residents are particularly hard hit. Residents in the large 
cities rarely have to leave their home in order to receive health 
care. Rural residents are routinely charged a thousand dollars 
and more to go to the city by ambulance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, adopting the changes which have been 
recommended of one-tier health care, flat rate ambulance 
charges no matter where the patient lives or what district in 
which he lives, will go a long way towards ensuring one-tier 
health care. If the government does not adopt the 
recommendations of the emergency measures services report, 
they will be going down the same road as the Saskatchewan 
Party to a two-tier system where ability to pay and where . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has expired. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Alleged Comments by Aboriginal Affairs Minister 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Madam Minister, the First Nations Party of Saskatchewan 
issued a news release today demanding an apology from you. 
John Melenchuk the First Nations Party candidate in the recent 
Saskatoon Riversdale by-election is alleging that you made the 
following statement to him on Monday night at an NDP 
by-election party: Mr. Melenchuk, you should go home and lick 
your wounds like the rest of your people. 

 
Madam Minister, Madam Minister, did you make those 
comments to Mr. John Melenchuk on Monday night in 
Saskatoon? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the member 
from Humboldt and to all members in this House I will say, 
categorically, no, I did not make that statement. 
 
And if you will give me a moment I will clarify exactly what I 
did say because I believe very strongly that I must, and I will, 
accept responsibility for dumb things that I say. And people in 
this House will know that on occasion I have said some things 
which I regret and for which I have apologized. 
 
However, while I will accept responsibility for things I did say, 
I will not accept people attributing false statements to me. It is 
absolutely not what I said, and there was a witness to my 
conversation who can corroborate my story. 
 
At the victory party, after the Riversdale by-election this 
Monday, Mr. Melenchuk approached me. He was talking to me 
in a very angry and confrontative manner. He was demanding 
. . . 

The Speaker: — The member’s time is up. 
 

Financial Assistance for Farmers 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, my questions are for the Premier. 
Mr. Premier, yesterday you rejected our proposal to go to 
Ottawa to press for more farm aid, and we’re very disappointed 
at that. But at the same, it must mean that the Premier has a 
plan, his own plan, to deliver this message to Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Premier, we would like to know from you what your plan 
is. When do you plan to meet with the Prime Minister and how 
many hundreds of millions of dollars of federal dollars do you 
expect delivered to Saskatchewan farm families, and how soon 
do you expect that money to be available? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows, I 
think as all members know, the ministers of Agriculture of the 
five provinces that contribute the largest contribution to 
agriculture production across Canada, added now by Prince 
Edward Island, have been regularly meeting and talking almost 
on a daily if not a weekly basis. 
 
As the premiers of these provinces, we are taking good counsel 
from our ministers of Agriculture. Earlier this week, as we all 
know, a motion was debated in the House of Commons, which 
the federal government wouldn’t pass. We then, as premiers, 
began the process, as I have done, of writing directly to the 
Prime Minister. Other letters have gone from other premiers to 
the Prime Minister. 
 
Yesterday, in this House — and I appreciate the support offered 
by members of the opposition and all members — we passed 
the unanimous resolution in this House. Those resolutions are 
being delivered from Houses across the country to the federal 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, 
yesterday, you said you had everything under control. You 
didn’t need our help. All you needed was a strongly worded 
resolution and you would be able to deliver that message to 
Ottawa more effectively than 58 MLAs. Today the Premier 
doesn’t seem so sure of himself. 
 
Mr. Premier, you’re the one that said you could deliver the 
message effectively. It’s time for you to deliver, Mr. Premier. 
When will you be talking with the Prime Minister, how much 
money do you expect to get for Saskatchewan farm families, 
and when will this money be available for Saskatchewan 
farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before the Premier answers the question I 
would just like to remind members once again to address their 
remarks through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Quite the contrary, quite the contrary to the minister . . . to the 



52 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

member’s opening remarks, I said yesterday and I’ve repeated it 
again today, I appreciate — I appreciate — that members 
opposite stood with us in this emergency resolution to call on 
the $1 billion from Ottawa. I appreciated that. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is the most effective voice in Ottawa 
will come from a unified position of the provinces, will come 
from a unified position of farm groups, producers, and 
representative organizations, and if I may say, Mr. Speaker, will 
be most powerful if we have a unified voice from this House. 
 
Last year we had a very bad experience, Mr. Speaker. We went 
with a unified voice. When we returned to the province, that 
group of men and women went somewhere else. So, Mr. 
Speaker, I plead with members opposite to work with us, stand 
with us in this unified voice from across the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Premier, we’ve been waiting a long time for you to come up 
with some kind of agriculture policy. Well this morning it 
finally happened. The minister announced his grand scheme for 
agriculture. He’s going to pay $15 per acre to convert cropland 
to pasture land to a maximum of, get this, 50 acres — 50 acres, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
Is this your farm plan or is it a plan for people to help seed their 
lawns? Brought to you by the same government who wants 
farmers to haul their own grain in the wintertime. 
 
Mr. Minister, what were you thinking? What difference do you 
expect that type of program to make when it’s capped at 50 
acres? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — When we talked to producers, farm 
organizations across the province today, they said to us that we 
needed to put some money into this kind of a program, and we 
have. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, I say to the member 
opposite, where have you been for six months of this province? 
Where have you been? We have a crisis in Saskatchewan for 
farm aid and haven’t seen you on one occasion anywhere — not 
anywhere. The invisible member from Kindersley — not seen 
him anywhere. 
 
And then we have the Alliance Party of Canada, Mr. Speaker, 
who comes to Saskatchewan, of which the leader from the 
opposition supports, and we asked that government to 
participate in a program in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And we 
don’t get one iota of support from the member opposite or from 
the leader. Those fellows there have abandoned farmers in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — abandoned farmers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, the only 
thing that’s invisible in this province is any kind of farm policy 
coming from you or your department. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — And when you do put forward any kind of a 
program it turns out to be totally insignificant, and not only that, 
it may be potentially dangerous in terms of foreign trade. 
 
The Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association oppose this 
kind of cover program because they feel it opens us up for trade 
sanctions from the US (United States) and other markets. So 
you may be jeopardizing millions of dollars of trade as a result 
of your actions this morning, for a program that will deliver a 
maximum of $750 per farmer. 
 
Mr. Minister, have you looked into this possibility. Could you 
table for us today, any opinion you may have as to whether or 
not this violates any trade sanctions from the United States? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we’d be happy to provide the 
member opposite with the program’s design and its insurance of 
countervail. We’ll provide that to the member opposite so that 
he can stay restful in terms of this issue. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that on that side of the House 
when we talk about developing agriculture policy we have a flip 
and a flop — a flip and a flop. And I want to tell you why. 
 
Just a couple of days ago the member opposite said to me . . . 
yesterday in his speech, he said, flop says to us, have you talked 
about the cost of production formulas? — is what flop said. 
 
And then what does flip say? Flip says, the day before that, he 
says, the Saskatchewan Party wants the province to participate 
in the Canadian Farm Income Program but it does not support 
the massive program of pay out farmers, at least the cost of 
production is not on — is what the Leader of the Opposition 
says. 
 
And then just a couple of day ago, on the Sheila Coles program, 
the flop was asked here whether or not . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Farm Safety Net Program 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Minister of Agriculture. For nine long 
years farm families have been waiting for you to develop a 
safety net program. In 1992 your government created the Farm 
Support Review Committee to make recommendations about 
the development of a new farm safety net program. This 
committee exists to this day. In fact, it was reappointed by you 
in October of last year. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you please table the most recent set of 
recommendations that this committee made regarding a new 
farm safety net program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, for the 
opportunity to complete my remarks. 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 53 

 

I want to say that just a couple of days ago on the Sheila Coles 
show, there was a question asked about whether or not this 
province supports CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program). And 
the member from Kindersley says we support — Mr. Flop there 
says — we support the Canada Farm Income Program. And on 
March 16, in a newspaper article, in a newspaper article in The 
Leader-Post, the Leader of the Opposition here, he says, Mr. 
Flop, he says we now don’t support the Canada Farm Income 
Program. Doesn’t support the Canada Farm Income Program. 
 
So we’ve got the minister of . . . the critic on Agriculture saying 
we support CFIP; we have the Leader of the Opposition saying 
we don’t support CFIP. And you ask me the question about 
what the policy is? I say to you, we have a Canada Farm 
Income Program that on this side of the House we think doesn’t 
support farmers. Why are you saying you support Canadian 
farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, since you 
obviously didn’t understand the question, I actually do have a 
copy of the last report that was tabled in the House. 
 
It lays about three different proposals for a new farm safety net 
program for your government. It was recommendations given to 
your government. And I was wondering if you could tell us, in 
the House today, what those three proposals are and which one 
your government is leaning towards for this time? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite to that, in this province today and in Canada today, we 
have a safety net structure that’s been put together by provinces 
and the federal government. 
 
And this is what the programs are. You want to know what they 
are? They’re a national crop insurance program, they’re a 
national NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) program, 
and they’re a national farm safety program called CFIP is what 
we have. 
 
And on this side of the House, Madam Member, we’ve said 
this. We said, our committee says this, that the Canada Farm 
Income Program does not work for grains and oilseed 
producers. Does not work. And we support that. 
 
And you have on your side of the House, a leader and a critic of 
Agriculture who flip and flop everyday, who flip and flop 
everyday, who say . . . And we say we don’t support the Canada 
Farm Income Program. What is your position, Madam Minister, 
on this? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I take the next question I would also 
request the members on both sides of the House to make their 
remarks to the Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s sad to say that the minister 
doesn’t even seem to know what’s in his own . . . the report 
from his own committee. It’s odd because you know you’ve had 

a long time to study it. In fact, the committee’s most recent 
report that was tabled was tabled in January. The problem is it 
was January 1994. 
 
Mr. Minister, this speaks volumes about your commitment to a 
farm safety net program in this province and your commitment 
to our farm families. It’s been over seven years since this report 
was tabled. 
 
Mr. Minister, what have you been doing? What has your 
government been doing about a safety net for this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to you that the 
member opposite should know, but she doesn’t, but I’m still 
going to explain this. 
 
Over the last several months I’ve met with the farm safety net 
review committee on several occasions. And the farm safety net 
review committee has said this, they said, that the AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program was flawed 
and we should fix the administration AIDA program. And that 
the new Canada Farm Income Program is deficient, Mr. 
Speaker, is deficient as it relates to the grains and oilseeds. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that she on her 
side of the House has a leader and an Ag critic who don’t know 
what their policy should be. And I say you have a flip and you 
have a flop. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, you have a chance to break the tie. You 
have a chance to break the tie. So you decide which way this ag 
policy that your minister . . . your two members should be 
deciding on. You should decide that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to remind both members that they 
are to direct their remarks to the Chair and through the Chair — 
to the Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Minister, people who fail 
to plan, plan to fail. And your government keeps going back to 
Ottawa, and you keep saying we need more money and you 
keep saying that the current programs aren’t working. And we 
agree with you. 
 
But you have never once put forward your ideas. It’s your 
responsibility. You are the government. And it is not an excuse 
to look at the opposition and ask what their plan is. Your last 
report has been sitting on the shelf collecting dust for seven 
years while thousands of farm families have gone under. 
 
What are you waiting for? Why have you never acted on any of 
the recommendations in this report? And why have you done 
nothing with the recommendations that you were handed back 
in 1994 by your own committee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . the member opposite that in Canada, 
agriculture policy is developed by all of the provinces and the 



54 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

federal government. That’s how agriculture policies develop. 
 
And today, Mr. Speaker, we have a crop insurance program of 
which we put significant dollars into on an annual basis. We 
have a NISA program which we put national . . . where we put 
substantial provincial money into. And we have a Canada Farm 
Income Program that we don’t support. And we had an AIDA 
program which those members of the House did support. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, when we tried to change the policy, 
when we tried to change the policy, those members on that side 
of the House aren’t supporting us. In fact, they’re busy fighting 
with each other about knowing whether or not they should be 
supporting us, supporting the program. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, we bring into this Assembly a package 
for change and enhancement of $5 million today in forage 
conversion — $5 million. And what happens? The critic from 
Agriculture stands up and says that it’s a joke, that it’s a joke. 
 
So when you try to do something in Saskatchewan to help 
agriculture producers, they don’t support it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Whistle-blower Legislation 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the last set of 
questions to the Minister of Agriculture obviously went to the 
bin for an answer, but the bin was empty. So we’ll try a 
different minister. So this question, Mr. Speaker, is for the 
Minister of Justice over there. 
 
There’s a great controversy, Mr. Speaker, at the University of 
Regina after a woman named Lana Nguyen passed herself off as 
an engineering professor. The man who discovered the truth 
about the phoney professor believes the university 
administration is now preparing to reprimand him for tarnishing 
their reputation. 
 
Professor Ron Palmer did the right thing in exposing Ms. 
Nguyen. He did his professional duty, Mr. Speaker, and now 
he’s facing retribution from his employer. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party plans to introduce the 
whistle-blower protection legislation to provide protection for 
members of the public service or any publicly funded body 
from retribution. 
 
This legislation will protect people who believe they should . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member put his question. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Minister, will you and your government 
support that legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
let me advise the member and indeed the House that these are 
issues that we have always treated seriously, the matter of 

freedom at work to express concerns of all types, including 
where there are errors of judgment and where there are errors 
on the part of qualifications and so on as the member mentions. 
 
I look forward to receiving his legislation on whistle-blowers 
and we look forward to considering it with haste and with due 
regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That was a fine 
answer, Mr. Speaker, and maybe that member should be one 
row nearer the front than he is. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, back in 1997, the 
hon. member from North Battleford over there introduced a 
private member Bill entitled government whistleblower’s Act. 
It was supported by the entire Liberal caucus at that time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The present Minister of Municipal Affairs was a member of the 
Liberal caucus in 1997 when the member from North Battleford 
introduced that Bill. The minister is also a former member of 
the Royal Canadian Mounted Police and spent his career 
upholding the law, as he likes to reiterate in most of his 
speeches. So I would like to think it would be very important 
for that minister to support the legislation that would help 
ensure the laws of the land are followed and enforced. 
 
I would like to know whether the Minister of Municipal Affairs 
has abandoned all principles when he joined the NDP or, Mr. 
Minister, will you support the whistle-blower legislation as you 
have in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I take it that the member’s thrust here is to have us consider 
properly his whistle-blower’s legislation when he introduces it, 
and we will do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was a good 
question. It’s a good piece of legislation and we’re definitely 
very concerned about the kind of support we’re going to get. It 
seems the Minister of Justice is interested in looking at it but we 
need to know what other support we have. So again, for the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs, he was sitting with his Liberal 
colleagues on this side of the House four years ago supporting a 
piece of Liberal private member legislation, Mr. Speaker. Now 
he’s sitting on the NDP government side of the House saying 
he’s not sure or he’s not allowed to speak or he’s muzzled. 
We’re not sure. He still claims to be a Liberal to his party 
members. The minister claims to have a lot of influence in the 
NDP cabinet. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, will you support this legislation that you 
supported so enthusiastically back in 1997? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 55 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member raises an 
important issue, a serious issue, of how one addresses within 
one’s place of employment difficult questions of this sort, of 
identifying problems and raising those problems with 
employers and being free of sanctions as a result. 
 
I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, and I don’t think anybody in this 
House would think that the person involved with the University 
of Regina would be pleased at the member opposite playing 
politics with this very serious question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Municipal Affairs probably knows better than anyone else what 
this legislation’s all about because he, Mr. Speaker, helped to 
formulate this legislation. He spoke in favour of it and he also 
voted in favour of it every opportunity he had. 
 
So this afternoon again, Mr. Speaker, I ask the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs what his position is. Yesterday, Mr. Speaker, 
the Minister of Municipal Affairs had no problem getting up in 
this House and taking a position totally contrary to his NDP 
colleagues in agriculture. He said agriculture in his home 
constituency was great. The farmers were doing fine; they 
needed no help. So he’s obviously prepared to take a position 
that is unique to himself. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is today that minister has another 
opportunity. Today this legislation needs his support and today 
you can show where you actually are at. Today where are you at 
on this piece of legislation, Mr. Minister of Municipal Affairs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the member opposite has his answer. We have said now, on 
many occasions, just today, and I confirm it again for the fourth 
or fifth time, we will look seriously at the legislation he 
introduces. All members on this side will look seriously, as I’m 
sure on the other side, and we’ll ensure that we do everything 
we can to do the right thing in this regard. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order I 
would like you . . . Today I’ve listened very carefully during 
question period to the line of questioning of the member from 
Rosthern with respect to the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
My understanding of question period is that this is an 
opportunity for opposition members to question members of 
Executive Council with respect to their roles and their duties as 
ministers. 
 
I would ask you, Mr. Speaker, to rule . . . review Hansard and 
rule as to whether this line of questioning is appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Also on the 
point of order as raised by the House Leader for the 
government. 

Mr. Speaker, the question was directed to the Minister of 
Municipal Affairs, a member of Executive Council. The 
whistle-blower legislation that my colleague was talking about 
would include third party, government-funded organizations 
which would include municipal governments, Mr. Speaker. 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, it’s our contention that his portfolio is 
as relevant as any other to that legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the members for their comments and I 
will be bringing back a ruling. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as you will recall I began my response to the Throne 
Speech yesterday and focused primarily on agriculture. Today I 
want to deal with the remainder; the remaining issues of the 
Throne Speech which I feel are most relevant to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It certainly was a bit of a debacle yesterday though, I must say. 
There was certainly a lot of talk on the other side. There was a 
lot of finger pointing on the other side but when there was . . . 
when the time came for action, when the time came to actually 
do something, this government — as is its way, as is its habit — 
decided to vote no to the only part of the resolution that had any 
meaning and that would require action on the part of their 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my father, whom I have a great deal of respect for 
— I think he was the hardest working man I ever knew in my 
life; very, very typical of the people of Saskatchewan — had a 
wonderful work ethic. He said that his motto in life was to wear 
out instead of rust out. Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has 
not taken that motto for their own. They are now a rusty wreck. 
What they are doing is not working any more at all on the 
problems facing Saskatchewan. 
 
And we might as well go right into the area of the economy. 
Mr. Speaker, how do you measure whether your economy is 
strong and vibrant? Well you look at the indicators. You look at 
job creation numbers. That’s a very good place to start. 
 
Job creation numbers in Saskatchewan have been pathetic ever 
since I became the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party back in 
the spring of 1998. Consistently, we were either in last place or 
second-last place amongst 10 provinces every time Statistics 
Canada came out with their report. Sometimes we had a slightly 
positive number. Sometimes we got right around zero. 
Occasionally we would drop below zero. We actually saw fewer 
jobs over a 12-month period. 
 



56 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, what did the NDP say their goal was? They 
said their goal was to create 30,000 jobs. First of all, it was 
going to be over 10 years. And then in the last Speech from the 
Throne back in 1999, they said, I believe, that they would create 
30,000 jobs over about a four-year span. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I look in this Throne Speech, I don’t see a 
commitment to create 30,000 jobs. I think that the NDP 
government saw the Statistics Canada report — which said that 
over the last 12 months we’ve actually lost 13,000 jobs —and 
they realized they’d lose all credibility, even more than they’ve 
already lost, if they put a 30,000-job increase into the Speech 
from the Throne. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is this government backing away from 
previous commitments? Is it because they’ve changed leaders? 
Have they changed direction? Or are they looking at their 
performance? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that change of leadership means a 
small cent in regard to this government. I think that they just 
realized that they can’t deliver and they’re backing away from 
their promises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the one area that they did discuss job creation was 
in the forestry area. They said that they would create 10,000 
jobs. This was a promise that was actually made earlier. It 
wasn’t new to this Speech from the Throne. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Excuse me. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — To ask leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank 
the Leader of the Opposition for allowing me this opportunity. 
 
And I want to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all the 
members of the House, Mr. Don Hallam, who is sitting in the 
west gallery there. Mr. Hallam is a long-time constituent of 
Regina here, a long-time friend of mine. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there must be something very special about 
today because I see Mr. Hallam is wearing a tie, and that’s 
something — for those of us who know him — is a very rare 
occasion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all the members to offer him a very warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. So we’re talking 
about jobs in northern Saskatchewan — 10,000 jobs. Well what 
is the evidence? 
 
The evidence is that, for instance, the OSB (oriented strand 
board) plant in Hudson Bay has been closed — jobs have 
actually been lost. And so while the rhetoric in some areas 
continues on the NDP side of the House, the facts differ with 
the statements made in the Speech from the Throne. 
 
I want to speak a little bit about the taxes fiasco of this 
government. I remember the budget last year when the Finance 
minister got up in the House and said this was a historical, 
tax-cutting budget. Well, Mr. Speaker, we hear about a 
government that talks about lowering taxes, and then we watch 
them raise taxes. 
 
A few weeks ago it was discovered that Saskatchewan residents 
started paying, in some cases, higher income taxes at the 
beginning of the year 2001, as compared to December of the 
year 2000. The Finance minister said oh, this is just an 
anomaly. Yes, an anomaly that affected about 30 per cent of 
Saskatchewan taxpayers — most of whom earned less than 
$30,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard the NDP rhetoric. They say oh, you 
guys over there, you’re just out to protect the rich. Well, as we 
all know, there are hardly any rich people in Saskatchewan 
because the NDP have chased most of them out of the province. 
We have the fewest number of high-income earners, I would 
bet, of any of the Western provinces and perhaps any of the 
provinces in Canada. 
 
So what do they do, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, when they’re 
introducing their tax cuts, which were so minimal to begin with, 
what they did is they made them have the least impact on 
lower-income earners. Those who were in there earning around 
20 to $30,000 saw little or no tax relief when they got their pay 
cheques in the year 2001. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the rhetoric again goes one way. The talk is 
one way, but the walk is in the absolute opposite direction. Mr. 
Speaker, this government, this NDP government does not care 
about low-income people. Mr. Speaker, if they did, they would 
have provided real tax relief. 
 
(14:30) 
 
What did they do when they lowered income tax so marginally 
that it doesn’t even affect lower income Canadians? They 
turned around and increased the amount of PST (provincial 
sales tax) they had to pay. So, Mr. Speaker, the average 
taxpayer, in particularly the lower-income brackets, are paying 
more taxes to this government instead of less taxes. It’s become 
a horrible tax grab rather than a historical tax break. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to deal briefly with the issue of health care. 
What we see in this Throne Speech leads us to believe that there 
will not be an improvement in health care under the NDP 
government. We see nothing there that really excites us at all. 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 57 

 

The NDP has been in power for about a decade now, and I 
don’t think there’s a person in Saskatchewan — I haven’t found 
them anyways — that would argue that health care is better 
today than it was 10 years ago. I hear lots of evidence, lots of 
complaints, lots of very, very sad stories, about where health 
care is worse today than it was 10 years ago. 
 
So what did the NDP say in the Speech from the Throne? Well 
let’s first of all look at what they said in 1999. 
 
In 1999 they promised to reduce surgical waiting times. That 
was laudable. I don’t think they heard the official opposition 
criticize them for wanting to reduce surgical waiting times. We 
applauded that; we said that’s the way to go, that’s what we 
want to see as well. 
 
Well what’s happened since the ’99 Speech from the Throne? 
Since then the waiting lists in Saskatoon have increased from an 
average of 9,300 to over 13,000. And we see the same problems 
here in Regina. 
 
So again, we have the talk going this direction; we have the 
actual results going in the exact opposite direction. The 
government talked about decreasing waiting times for surgery. 
The facts are that the waiting lists have increased. And the time 
they wait is even longer than it was a year or a year and a half 
ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this was . . . if we were talking about how long 
it took to build an automobile or to, you know, to construct a 
toothbrush or even perhaps to finish the overpass on the north 
side of Regina, that wouldn’t be so bad. But we’re talking about 
people’s lives, their health, their well-being. And this 
government shows no care, no compassion, and now no 
credibility by saying one thing and doing exactly the opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re now talking about highways — that’s the 
big buzzword over there. We’ve talked about highways for two 
years on this side of the House. And my colleague from 
Cypress Hills has raised the issue many times in the House. 
Well now the members on the other side are finally, finally 
talking about highway construction — talking. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I hope that I don’t have to stand up here a year 
from today. I hope I don’t have to stand up here and again point 
out to the people of Saskatchewan, that the talk went one way 
but the results went the other way. I hope we don’t have to deal 
with the same pothole mess in the spring of 2002 that we’re 
having to deal with in the spring of 2001. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the members opposite a 
story that happened during the 1999 election campaign where 
the Saskatchewan Party won the popular vote. I was at a 
medium-sized town in Saskatchewan — a medium-sized town I 
would say to the member from Regina South if he’ll listen to 
me — and I asked the tourism person in that town, as I was 
asking for her vote, how are things going? And this young 
woman was crestfallen. She was totally deflated. She said to 
me, do you know what happened to me this morning? She said, 
I’ve spent the entire morning dealing with a pair of American 
tourists in a motorhome, and we’ve been pouring over a map of 
Saskatchewan, and I’ve been trying to show them the quickest 
way they can get out of Saskatchewan and do the least amount 

of damage to their motorhome. 
 
Did the members on the other side hear that? They seem to be 
visiting over there rather than listening about the problems that 
are facing Saskatchewan people, the people that are trying to 
provide tourism opportunities and build a tourism industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So here were some American tourists who wanted to spend 
their dollars in Saskatchewan, help our economy. They wanted 
to see the beauty of our province. They wanted to intermingle 
with the wonderful people in Saskatchewan but yet because the 
roads were so bad, the highways were so bad, they had to 
change their strategy and plan how they could get out of 
Saskatchewan as quickly as possible. 
 
Well can you imagine what they’re saying back home. Can you 
imagine what they’re saying to their friends who are planning 
their holidays for this year. They’ll say, well if you go to 
Canada, don’t go to Saskatchewan; the roads there are terrible. 
Go spend your money in Alberta; go spend your money in 
Ontario and Manitoba. Go out to British Columbia. But 
whatever you do, don’t go to Saskatchewan. It probably is a 
nice place; unless you really want to rough it out, you know, 
unless you’re prepared to expend a lot of money on repairs for 
your vehicles, that’s not the place to go. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, what do we see in the Speech from the 
Throne? Well we see a commitment to accelerate the twinning 
of the No. 1 Highway west of Swift Current. We applaud that. 
In fact I think that was our idea. I think the member from 
Cypress Hills presented that very idea in the House last year. 
And I think I heard the other side scoff at the idea. I thought I 
heard them hoot and holler like they usually do when one of our 
members makes a suggestion. 
 
Well lo and behold, lo and behold, here our idea finds its way 
into their Speech from the Throne. Well right now it’s still talk, 
but I hope and I ask and I plead, and we’ll share the credit with 
you if you complete that construction ahead of schedule as you 
have committed to in this budget or in this Speech from the 
Throne. 
 
But the other thing that you’ve said that really concerns me 
when it comes to roads, you’re talking about — and we’ve 
heard some evidence that the talk has also gone to the planning 
stage — of making municipalities . . . and I hope that the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs is listening to this because this 
affects him. Municipalities are being asked by the province of 
Saskatchewan, by the Highway department to build grid roads 
alongside existing highways so that the trucks can drive on the 
grid roads so they don’t have to fix up the highways as well for 
everybody else. 
 
Boy that sounds like a real winner of an idea. I think the last 
time I heard a better idea was when the old minister of 
Highways suggested farmers only haul their grain in the 
wintertime. Who’s coming up with these ideas, Mr. Speaker? 
Who’s the brain trust over there that has these crazy notions at 
how we should be more effective in providing transportation to 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about northern 



58 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan. I had an opportunity over the past few months to 
visit in northern Saskatchewan a few times. Mr. Speaker, the 
more I’m in the North, the more I love the North, the more I 
love the people of the North and the more affinity that I feel 
with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recently I was up in the northwest part of 
Saskatchewan. We drove up through Meadow Lake all the way 
up to La Loche. And, Mr. Speaker, we’re talking to community 
leaders in northern Saskatchewan particularly up in the 
northwest. And I said what are the barriers to you moving 
forward? What are the barriers to advancement? You know, is it 
the taxes? You know, is it lack of skills? And there were a lot of 
concerns that they raised. 
 
But you know what the number one and the number two 
identifiable barriers to growth in northern Saskatchewan were 
from the community leaders of that part of our province? 
Number one — number one . . . I, the minister’s not here, sorry. 
I hope the minister hears this. 
 
Number one: SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management). SERM was the number one hindrance barrier to 
economic development in Northern Saskatchewan. There he is. 
 
And you know what the number two barrier to economic 
development in northern Saskatchewan was: Municipal Affairs. 
Two government departments were the two primary barriers to 
economic development in that part of the North. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I was in the Minister of the Environment’s 
riding and that was quite an eye-opener. I went into the hospital 
in Ile-a-la-Crosse. Well, Mr. Speaker, they have outdated 
equipment. They have equipment in that hospital that they’re 
ashamed of. But this government won’t provide them with any 
better health care equipment. They’ve got Third World health 
care equipment, facilities, in a very, very, very old hospital. A 
hospital with cracks in the walls. You know I thought I was in 
eastern Europe at the time when they were in the bottom of 
their economic cycle, Mr. Speaker, but it was here in 
Saskatchewan. It was in the minister’s . . . minister for SERM’s 
riding. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard about housing in La Loche. And I 
heard about the fact that I think it’s an average of 15 or 16 
people or maybe it was even 18 — I can’t remember the exact 
number — people living in each house in La Loche. And the 
housing conditions there were terrible. The social problems that 
associate themselves with overcrowding and poor housing were 
manifesting themselves in La Loche. 
 
And they said, our minister doesn’t care about us. They said, we 
never see our minister. After he left the Liberals and joined the 
NDP he deserted us. He never shows up. He doesn’t come to 
the riding, he doesn’t talk to us any more. He used to make 
promises to us. He used to tell us about all the good things he 
was doing for us — how he was pulling for us, how he was 
going to make a difference if only he could be in the 
government. Well then he ended up in the government, not even 
as a backbencher but as a minister, and he doesn’t show up any 
more and he doesn’t care any more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re wondering about their representative. 

They’re disappointed with their representative. They know their 
representative is out of touch. And you know how I found out 
that he was out of touch with his constituents? It was amazing. 
 
I went . . . I was in Ile-a-la-Crosse and I saw the sign on his 
office. It was a big . . . guess what the colours were? The 
colours were red and white. Liberal red colours, sort of, you 
could tell that’s what it was. 
 
You know what the address was on that sign, Mr. Speaker? It 
was the sign from my office. It said room 265, Legislative 
Assembly. This minister hadn’t been to his office to even 
change his sign since the days he was in the official opposition 
as a Liberal. That’s how out of touch this guy is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no wonder his constituents are asking questions 
about him. Well obviously the North is not in good hands in the 
case of this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move on to education because time is at 
a premium. And I won’t spend a lot of time when my colleague 
from Kelvington-Wadena will talk at more length about 
education later on. 
 
But I am shocked that this government is not ringing the panic 
alarm when they recognize that their department is suggesting 
that in the next few years we will lose 30,000 students. 
Enrolment will decrease by 30,000 people in Saskatchewan. 
Think about that. That’s our future — 30,000 fewer students in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think I heard the Minister of Education say, oh well, 
enrolments are decreasing all over the place. That’s not good 
enough for me. Alberta, of course, is increasing their enrolment, 
so not all provinces are decreasing. 
 
So he decides it’s fine to be . . . if some provinces are losing 
enrolment, losing students, let’s belong to the losing category. 
Let’s be in there with the losers. That’s fine with him. He 
doesn’t want to be in with the winners. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to be a winner. I want Saskatchewan 
to be on the winning side. I want to see enrolments not even 
hold their own but actually increase. Mr. Speaker, I want to see 
people come to Saskatchewan. I want Saskatchewan to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what kind of a message is this government giving 
to young students that are looking at education for a future 
career? They’re not going to be staying in Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, if we have young people, if we have students leaving 
Saskatchewan, we’ll have fewer teachers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re cutting our own throat if we continue to 
follow the path of the NDP government. 
 
And then the other thing that I want to say in regard to young 
people is in regard to their student summer employment 
program. I couldn’t believe my eyes, couldn’t believe my ears, 
when I heard it announced. The student employment program to 
provide summer employment for young people, primarily 
people that are trying to get their education, was only available 
to students who are prepared to take a job in the public sector. 
The private sector was totally excluded. 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 59 

 

So what does that mean, Mr. Speaker? Well for one thing it 
means if you’re a farmer, don’t bother applying. 
 
I think we lost a lot of jobs in the farm sector. I think I heard the 
government say we lost 16,000 jobs in the farm sector — 
16,000 jobs. The member for Kindersley just confirmed that it 
is 16,000 members. 
 
And so what does this government say to producers, to farmers 
in Saskatchewan? Don’t hire a student. We won’t let you do 
that. You may need help, but no, we’re not going to include you 
in the program. 
 
What does this government say to small-business people in 
Saskatchewan? You don’t count. You don’t count. You’re not 
important. We don’t care about you. The jobs you provide are 
not important. 
 
The only job that’s important in Saskatchewan is a job where 
the pay cheque is signed by the Government of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. And they wonder why young people are leaving 
Saskatchewan. They wonder why in droves they’re going and 
leaving the province. Because they’re finding jobs where 
they’re wanted and where they’re welcome. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk just briefly about the other 
highlight in the Speech from the Throne. I think it was entitled, 
open and accountable government. Well that’s a good idea. 
That’s something that I’ve been talking about for quite a lot of 
years. We want open and accountable government. We’re in 
favour of open and accountable government. We’re in favour of 
open and accountable government. So let’s move in that 
direction. 
 
(14:45) 
 
However, if they really mean it, if they really mean it, let’s see a 
little more than talk. You know the talk is fine — it’s easy, it 
doesn’t cost anything. You don’t need to make any decisions, 
don’t have to introduce any Bills to talk. But to do something 
you’ve got to have something concrete; you’ve got to have a 
piece of legislation that you pass in the legislature; or you have 
to have a decision made by the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year, as in other years, we’ll be introducing 
various pieces of legislation that will make government more 
open and accountable. We will introduce bills that give more 
voice to individual members in this legislature, that will give 
our constituents the right to determine whether we as members 
deserve to continue to serve them between elections. 
 
We will introduce a Bill that will take the power of 
manipulating the election date for the benefit of the party in 
power, away from the Premier. We’ve seen that abused by the 
former premier, Mr. Romanow. 
 
I mean, Mr. Romanow called an election in harvest, and he also 
called it during holiday period — it was called in August. What 
insensitivity! Trying to shorten the election period by calling an 
election when many people are taking their holidays. 
 
I remember being out door knocking in 1999 on Labour Day, 
you know, a week and a half or two weeks into the campaign. I 

knocked on a door and the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education will be interested in knowing that teachers — 
teachers, instructors of post-secondary education — came back 
to Saskatchewan two weeks after the election was called, and 
they didn’t even know there was an election. 
 
That was exactly what they wanted. They didn’t want the 
people of Saskatchewan to know there was an election. They 
didn’t want to have to defend their record for a full 28 days. So 
they called the election in holiday time and then they thought 
. . . then the election will actually occur in September when the 
farmers, who we’ve abandoned, are busy taking off their crops 
— they won’t show up to vote. So we’ve won on both sides. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t quite turn out the way they wanted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re committed to fixing election dates at a set 
time so everybody knows what’s going on. The government has 
a set time to introduce and implement their plans, and the 
people of Saskatchewan know how long they have to evaluate 
the government. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, is we intend and would introduce 
legislation that would make all Crowns, including Crown 
subsidiaries, accountable. They would all be under the same 
onus to be open and accountable. 
 
Now if our new Premier, who has a chance to put a new stamp 
on things . . . he’s starting from a bit of a fresh page, at least as 
a Premier. He’s got some baggage when it comes to health care; 
he’s got lots of baggage when it comes to social services. But at 
least as a Premier, this is a fresh start, a new start for him. 
 
Let’s see if he will allow his members to support these private 
members’ Bills. He can set a new . . . He can actually do 
something. He can set a new course of action here if he takes a 
different road than his predecessor, Mr. Romanow, took. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, a lot of my colleagues want to speak to the 
issues of the Speech from the Throne, so I’ll wrap up my 
comments. But I want to say that there are errors in this 
document. And it would not be proper unless I pointed out the 
errors to the government so that they can fix them. 
 
First of all, the first one was rather insignificant. It just showed 
a bit of shoddiness in which they say springtime is right around 
the corner, of course, the day that spring had actually occurred. 
I know, I mean the people that are writing the Speech from the 
Throne, you know, I guess they don’t look at the calendar a 
whole lot and perhaps that’s forgivable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you would hope that the numbers were right. 
That’s kind of important. You hope that they get the numbers 
correct. Well, Mr. Speaker, they say they’re spending $170 
million on infrastructure spending. 
 
Well we just happened to do our homework as we always do, 
Mr. Speaker. This has already been announced. This is old 
news. Not only is it old news, but a lot of the $170 million are 
not provincial dollars, they’re . . . This government is 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan to think that they are 
implementing a $170 million infrastructure program. 
 
Well, you know, I made a comment. Maybe I shouldn’t have 



60 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

made it, but I said it sounded almost like this Speech from the 
Throne was written on the plane by the Premier, you know, 
coming down from Saskatoon the day after his by-election win. 
But when I looked closely at the Speech from the Throne, I 
think maybe not only did he write it on the plane coming down, 
but he perhaps used the Premier’s laptop. 
 
Because it looked like he just, you know, used the same file, 
opened up the same file and just changed a few sentences 
around a little bit, particularly when it came to announcing the 
Partnership for Prosperity program. Look at that paragraph 
there and look at the paragraph in the 1999 Speech from the 
Throne. It’s announced twice. Same words, you know, a few 
words changed here and there. You can do that with word 
processors. Not a whole lot of reason to have confidence in this 
document, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the last mistake, major mistake, and it 
was a huge blunder, a huge gaff by the Premier. You know it 
takes a lot to make me blush for the NDP, but I was actually 
blushing for them when I read and heard about the 
accompanying circumstances where the Throne Speech 
announced that there’s $73 million for early childhood 
development program. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in the news conference that was held prior 
to the actual delivery of the speech, the Premier was asked, and 
he says, this is my government doing this. That was the 
wording. My government is introducing this program. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the media asked the Premier, is this new 
money and is this provincial money? And the Premier said, 
absolutely; I guarantee it, absolutely, stake my reputation on it 
— that kind of a strong statement. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, he was categorically wrong. It was money 
that was already introduced, and what’s worse, it was federal 
money and he was taking the credit for it. Just a total blunder, a 
horrible error. Simply a man that had no idea what was in his 
document, and that kind of mistake really causes one to lose 
confidence in this new Premier and his administration. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we can’t afford any more mistakes in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier made some mistakes when he tried to 
rig the choice of Speaker, and I’m glad he wasn’t able to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. I think it was a better outcome. But, Mr. 
Speaker, he made an error there. 
 
And then he said that he was going to drop a cabinet minister so 
that he could make room for another member that wasn’t going 
to be the Speaker, it looked like, and then that person could 
come into cabinet. I’m trying to be careful and not use names, 
Mr. Speaker, because I want to be consistent with the rules of 
the legislature. But I think we know, I think we know who these 
people are. 
 
So we have the minister, we have the minister for the Crown 
Investments Corporation filling that role for a grand total of 
about two weeks. What kind of leadership is that? What kind of 
a Premier would appoint a member of his cabinet for two weeks 
and then either she had had enough of him or else he had had 

enough of her, and they decided it wasn’t going to work out so 
he’s going to take one of the candidates for Speaker and put 
them in his cabinet. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, he didn’t do it. He gave that cabinet 
portfolio to another member. Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t make 
sense. What’s happening behind the scenes over there? 
Certainly, certainly it causes more questions to be asked than 
answers delivered. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, the last goof, the last blunder by this 
government was witnessed last night when we had a vote in this 
House. And we had a vote, Mr. Speaker, whether we were 
going to actually act, whether we were actually going to do 
something, or whether we were just going to keep talking and 
do the opposite. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government stood in opposition to an 
amendment that would have required them to do something, to 
do something for one of the most important industries in 
Saskatchewan. They chose to vote no, Mr. Speaker. First vote 
in the legislature under the new Premier and they made a 
horrible, horrible mistake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan cannot afford 
any more mistakes. Please, please, Government of 
Saskatchewan, don’t make any more mistakes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud of our province and I’m 
going to continue to work hard on its behalf as are all my 
Saskatchewan Party colleagues. And I’ve had the opportunity 
over the last few months — since you know it has been quite a 
few months since we’ve actually sat in the legislature — and 
I’ve shared this story with many people outside of this 
Assembly. I want to actually share it with the members 
opposite. I know all of my colleagues have heard the story 
before, but I’m sure that if these members follow current events 
and follow international events, if they would just take a minute 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 15 months since we’ve sat. 
 
The Minister of Post-Secondary Education doesn’t know how 
many months it’s been since we’ve sat in the House — 15 
months since we’ve had a 15 months since we’ve had a Throne 
Speech debate. The minister for Post-Secondary Education, I 
think, needs to go back to school himself. And I can actually 
tell him about some good places. Maybe SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology) would have some 
courses that would help him in memory or something. Maybe 
there’s some memory courses that he can take. But anyways, I 
want to get to the story if the member would listen for a minute. 
And I want to be a little more serious. 
 
I watched the Summer Olympics in Sydney, Australia, and I 
think one of the proudest moments that we as Canadians 
enjoyed was when we won our very first gold medal. You know 
it was in the triathlon event and there was a guy, a Canadian 
fellow by the name of Simon Whitfield, and he was a 
contestant. 
 
He wasn’t really well-known. I mean we’ve heard of, you 
know, some of the other more famous Canadian athletes; we’ve 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 61 

 

had some of them in Saskatchewan. But Simon Whitfield was 
never on the list of best-known athletes in the world. Certainly 
not in the world. Certainly not even in Canada. 
 
Well Simon Whitfield entered this race and he did the 
swimming portion and he did the bicycling portion, and he was 
in 21st place — 21st place — a long ways back. And he started 
running. 
 
And you know all the commentators, all the experts, well 
probably all the university professors if they were tuning in had 
written off Simon Whitfield. He just wasn’t part of the action. 
He wasn’t considered as a real contender. 
 
Well Simon Whitfield didn’t know that. And you know this hot 
Australian sun was beating down but he kept running. And his 
goal was that before the end of the race he wanted to see the 
jersey of the front runner. He wanted to see the jersey of the 
front runner. 
 
Well Simon Whitfield gradually, through the course of the 
running portion of the triathlon, moved up through the ranks 
and with 500 metres to go Simon Whitfield was in second 
place. You know he’d gone from twenty-first to second place. 
And finally, you know, some people were starting to take note. 
This Canadian might actually make the medals if he didn’t 
falter, if he didn’t stagger, if he didn’t run out of gas before he 
got to the finish line. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know a whole lot about sports 
psychology. It’s something like understanding Saskatchewan 
Liberal psychology. That’s even harder to understand. But in 
sports psychology, you visualize things. And Simon Whitfield 
was told that if he could ever see the front runner in this race, he 
should visualize that he was lighter, stronger, and faster than the 
front runner. He was going to visualize that that’s who he was. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with 500 metres to go, Simon Whitfield 
went into a sprint. And I saw it on TV. I think most of you saw 
it as well. And he actually passed the German runner with about 
200 metres to go and he did not slow down. He kept going. He 
looked like he could run forever as he crossed the finish line, 
and we were so proud that we had finally won a gold medal at 
the Sydney Olympics. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think Saskatchewan’s a little bit like Simon 
Whitfield. Lots of people write us off. You know, I used to be a 
Member of Parliament and lots of people would say, oh, you’re 
from Saskatchewan. And I’d say, well, I’m proud to be from 
Saskatchewan. It’s a great province. And they said, well maybe 
it is — I’ve always flown over it, never really stopped, never 
really gone there. I really don’t know what you have to offer. 
 
And then you look at the statistics where Saskatchewan’s 
always near the bottom, nearly in last place, way down the 
ranks, way down in the order. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think 
Saskatchewan is a winning province. I think we’re going to win 
our gold medal. I think we’re going to start catching up to other 
provinces. But I think we have to get rid of this NDP 
government that just talks rather than acts if we’re going to do 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, right now the jersey of 
Saskatchewan is orange. And I don’t really care about colours, 
but I’d rather see those Saskatchewan colours. I’d rather see the 
green and gold running in Saskatchewan. I want to see a 
Saskatchewan Party government. I get excited about the fact 
that we can move up. We can get ahead. We can catch up. We 
can win. We can be a gold medal performer if we do things 
right. 
 
Right now we’ve got these NDP army boots on and we’re just 
not doing very well. Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s time to put on some 
Saskatchewan Party runners. It’s time to start performing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for that reason I cannot support, I cannot support 
the motion to adopt the Speech from the Throne. So therefore, 
Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by my colleague, the 
member for Melfort-Tisdale: 
 

That the following words be added to the end of the 
motion: 

 
but regret that the government’s Throne Speech fails to put 
forward any new vision for the future of Saskatchewan and 
does not put forward any innovative ideas to deal with 
challenges facing Saskatchewan in various areas such as 
health care, agriculture, education, or economic growth. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with great pleasure that I rise to speak in this Throne Speech 
debate in favour of seconding the motion put forward by the 
Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this is always an important 
part of the legislative series in terms of it’s an opportunity for 
us to speak in general terms about what we think is important 
for this province of Saskatchewan, and I certainly would like to 
take my time in order to add my voice to this debate. 
 
But before I do that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to offer you my 
congratulations on your election to the office of Speaker, and I 
would also like to extend to the member from Regina Sherwood 
my congratulations on his elevation to the role of Deputy 
Speaker as well. I’m sure that both of you hon. members will 
conduct your office very credibly and we look forward to 
working with you into the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first, I would like to talk a little bit about my 
constituency. Melfort-Tisdale is a constituency that is 
sometimes referred to as Albert Street North. Unfortunately, it’s 
279 kilometres north, as I’m well aware on the many trips that I 
travel up the highway or Albert Street North to go home for the 
weekend, or weeks, or to spend time with my constituents, who 
are among the finest people in this province and the finest in the 
world. 
 



62 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, our area of the province is blessed with a very 
mixed economy, a very rich and fertile ground and agricultural 
base. But even with the fact that, over the last number of years, 
our area of the world has enjoyed bountiful harvests, I am 
detecting an ever increasing concern about the future of 
agriculture. And in an increasing way, I hear day after day after 
day their concern about the fact that there is a distinct lack of 
vision and commitment by the federal government and this 
provincial NDP government to the future of agriculture. 
 
And when I think about what that means in terms of a 
comparison to some of the areas of this province in agriculture 
that aren’t so blessed, I realize very clearly, that while many of 
the folks in my area are facing hardships, some people in this 
province in the agricultural community must be absolutely 
burdened with the great deal of difficulties that they have. And 
so I think that that’s an important issue. 
 
But yesterday, Mr. Speaker, I was quite encouraged to hear that 
the constituency of Melville is absolutely an island in the 
province radiating bounty and goodwill due to the coalition 
government, and particularly the Liberal members of it. And I 
didn’t know at all, Mr. Speaker, that the bounty of the Liberal 
coalition members were going to be able to make sure that none 
of the farmers in their area, none of the businesses in their area, 
that no one was suffering any difficulties at all, and that it was 
all sunshine and joy in Melville. And I certainly congratulate 
the farm families in the Melville constituency for their good 
fortune. 
 
But I suspect when they hear what their member said on their 
behalf, they’re going to be ringing those phones and letting him 
know exactly what’s going on in their lives because the member 
seems to be living in some kind of a never-never world that 
doesn’t relate to the constituency of Melville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my community, people are operating under a 
continuing commitment to this province. It’s not a commitment 
to this government; it’s a commitment to their families and to 
each other, and the advancement of the important priorities of 
their communities and of this province and of this country. 
 
And I think that that’s the same all over the province, that 
people are seriously and unconditionally committed to their 
province, but they’re starting to despair, they’re starting to give 
up hope. And increasingly, and increasingly I hear of families, 
not just young people who are free and footloose, who have 
their education degree or their professional degree, who are 
considering moving to other places, but I am increasingly 
hearing of established families who are considering leaving our 
area of the province and moving to other locations. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it troubles me dramatically. 
 
When I read the other day the HSURC (Health Services 
Utilization and Research Commission) study that was done by 
the Department of Health, all the minister could do in response 
to the question yesterday is make a joke about citrus fruit 
instead of dealing with the serious problems that are implied in 
that study, a study that says over the next 15 years the 
population of this province will only go up 7,000 people. That’s 
about 500 per year. That’s nothing, Mr. Speaker. That’s no 
growth. That’s no solution. It’s no direction. 
 

In fact, Mr. Speaker, when you look at that study which was 
done by an agency of the provincial government and 
Department of Health they also said that in the age group of 
young people, the 25- to 40-year olds, there was going to be a 
drop of 40,000 people. And, Mr. Speaker, you obviously 
understand that that is going to be dramatically important to the 
future of this province. Because that age group are the people 
who look after the health care system. They’re the people who 
look after our communities. They’re the people who raise 
families. They’re the people who have jobs and pay taxes. 
They’re the people that volunteer and are involved with the 
Kinsmen and Knights of Columbus and the Rotarians and all 
the service groups and agencies in our province that make this 
province work. 
 
So the whole statistic out of this study that’s even more 
devastating than the fact our province is only going to grow by 
7,000 people is that it’s predicting we’re going to lose 40,000 
people in the category that should be the heart and soul of the 
future of this province. And all the Minister of Health could do 
yesterday in response to that is come up with citrus jokes. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it simply is not good enough. It simply is 
not a statistic or a projection that is going to be something 
anybody in this province should be complacent or flippant 
about. It is serious, and it was done in a way that is professional 
and responsible and the results are very serious, Mr. Speaker, 
for the future of our province. And people in my constituency 
are concerned about those very trends that are occurring. 
 
And it doesn’t matter. There’s communities in my constituency 
that are moving ahead and are trying to progress. In the major 
centres like Melfort and Tisdale are communities that have a 
vibrancy and a dynamism of their own, but there’s a lot of 
smaller communities that are very fearful about where their 
future’s going to be. And the statistics that we saw yesterday 
are not the kind of things they want to see and that gives them a 
lot of confidence about where we’re going. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I hear everyday: where’s the plan, where 
is the plan for Saskatchewan? What are the things that are going 
to be done and the conditions we’re going to create in this 
province that are going to create an environment that’ll make 
this study wrong? Where are they? Where are they in economic 
development and taxation? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, they’re not there. All that we 
do is try to play second fiddle to our neighbour to the west and 
we do a very poor job of trying to play that melody. 
 
We don’t have any job at all, any vision at all about where 
we’re going. All we hear from the government opposite is plans 
to increase the size of government, to increase the dependency 
of people on the institutions of government, and nothing that 
will liberate people to do for themselves as Saskatchewan 
people have always tried to do when they’re given brief 
opportunities, an opportunity of freedom to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite simply do not understand 
what’s needed in order to build a plan. They don’t understand it 
in taxation and economic development; they don’t understand it 
certainly in agriculture. You heard what the answers were 
yesterday in terms of the debate, and today. You know, it’s 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 63 

 

been 20 years since I lived on the farm in the area of 
Kelvington, and I can tell you that I would have been really 
happy about their new forage program because it allowed me to 
probably put in the lawn that I normally operated out there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is something that’s come up with by some 
urban cowboy that thinks five acres is a lot of ground. And I 
would be pleased if a urban cowboy doesn’t understand what an 
acre is. I’m sure the member from Arm River will be pleased to 
explain it again in the House because he did a very good job last 
year. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important to understand the 
magnitude of the situation and the need to have a plan in 
agriculture. And we don’t have it. Mr. Speaker, we don’t have a 
plan in regard to the revitalization of our communities. We have 
a minister now running around talking about building a plan. 
She doesn’t have a department; she doesn’t have officers or 
anything else. She’s just running around. 
 
And she’s the same minister that ended up for the last year 
telling the health care system we don’t have a plan either, but 
we’ve got some guy going around the province called Fyke. 
He’s going to build a plan, we hope; and if he does, we’re not 
sure if we’re going to accept it. But in the meantime no 
decisions are going to be made, no budgets are going to be 
approved. Everybody’s on their own. Let pandemonium reign 
supreme, and somehow or another if we shake the bag, some 
good things are going to fall out of it. Well, Mr. Speaker, if 
that’s going to be the plan for rural revitalization, we’re never 
going to change those statistics that HSURC talked about 
yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is important in the whole field of this 
province’s future that in the event and in the factual reality that 
this government is not going to develop a plan any time soon, 
that it is incumbent upon us as the official opposition to provide 
that plan not for this government but for the people of 
Saskatchewan because they desperately need something to hang 
on to. They desperately need to see something that they can 
believe in and that will move this province forward. 
 
And so myself and my colleagues have been working diligently 
over the last month since the last election, realizing the vacuum 
that has been left by the government opposite in terms of the 
future of this province that something has to be done and it has 
to be put on the table sooner rather than later. And so, Mr. 
Speaker, I feel that it is important that we build a plan. 
 
You know the government has said in the last while that we are 
going to do nothing while we await Ken Fyke’s decision. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, what has resulted from that decision? We can see 
that we’re ending up with a situation where the government 
promised in the last election that there would be a decrease in 
the waiting times, that it has gone the other way, and then they 
have decreased dramatically. So what are we going to do about 
it? 
 
Well when the minister would be asked in the last session 
repeatedly, she would just say, we can’t do anything, we’ve got 
to wait until Mr. Fyke gives his report. So in the meantime the 
waiting lists have gotten longer and longer and longer. 
 

And that’s not just a statistic, Mr. Speaker, that’s the thing that 
involves people. It involves people who are in pain because 
their hips or knees are hurting. It involves people who are 
waiting for critical tests and scans, and while they wait for those 
scans and tests they’re concerned about how serious their 
situation may be. We’re talking about not statistics, but we’re 
talking about real people with real concerns all over this 
province. It isn’t just in rural Saskatchewan, it’s in urban 
Saskatchewan, it’s everywhere. People are the real result of 
these kinds of lack of decisions. 
 
We see that health districts and specialists are complaining 
about the fact that this government has provided no budget for 
capital equipment replacement over the last years; and we hear 
time and time again where specialists stand up and they say that 
the equipment that they’re forced to deal with is just not 
working. People come into a health care centre where they need 
a test to be done — they’ve fasted all night, they’ve driven in 
long distances — and they’re told that there’s been a problem 
with the equipment and they’ve got to go home and we’ll try 
again another day. 
 
That’s the reality of what’s happening in this province because 
there has been no vision by this government for a program of 
appropriate capital equipment replacement. What’s happened in 
the health districts, they’ve robbed whatever reserves they’ve 
had to do the best they can, and they’ve actually taken money 
out of their operating budgets to try to provide the minimum 
amount of equipment replacement while this government has 
done nothing. 
 
What are they doing with retention and recruitment? Mr. 
Speaker, as we’ve travelled around this province we’ve heard 
time and time and time again that this government is absolutely 
taking everybody who works in the health care system in 
Saskatchewan for granted. They absolutely just expect them to 
stay here under these conditions forever and ever and ever. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And Mr. Speaker, there was a time in this country when that 
was probably true. When we went through the early ’90s and 
the Government of Canada backed out of funding their share of 
health care and there was a great deal of concern about the 
ability to continue to fund it, there was nowhere to go. In no 
jurisdiction was there expansion of money and investment into 
health care, so there were no new positions. And people were 
basically forced to make do with where they were. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that’s changed pretty significantly in the last 
couple of years, as there’s been a reinvestment across this 
country into health care. And now there are literally thousands 
of unfilled positions across the country that people from this 
province can go to. 
 
Just the other day, in Melfort, there was a conversation among a 
few nurses at a social event that compared the settlement in 
Alberta to the settlement they just received. And they’re asking 
themselves, why would we stay here? And it’s a good thing that 
many of those people have family connections and other issues 
that are involved with keeping them here. But, Mr. Speaker, we 
can’t build a wall around this province. 
 



64 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

And we see our young people that are graduating, not only 
leaving Melfort for our neighbouring provinces; they’re leaving 
this country. And they can go anywhere in the world. Medical 
professionals, doctors and specialists, they’re in a situation now 
that they’re being actively recruited, day after day after day, to 
come to other jurisdictions where there’s positions. 
 
And so how are we going to deal with that? We can’t just 
continue to say we’re not going to make any decision, we’re not 
going to put any plan in place because Fyke’s going to come 
down with his report next month. We have to build a plan. 
There has to be some vision that has to be brought forward. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we said that if in the vacuum that’s been 
created by the government opposite, we’re prepared to put a 
plan forward, and we did that in a presentation to Mr. Ken 
Fyke. The whole result of our effort . . . and our effort was 
based on a great deal of travel and a great deal of discussion by 
ourselves with health care groups in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We met and travelled widely across the province, spent long 
days touring the Saskatoon Health District facilities, spent long 
days touring the Regina Health District facilities. We toured the 
Yorkton Health District facilities, the Prince Albert health care 
facilities in your constituency, Mr. Speaker. We talked with 
health districts around the province. 
 
We met with agencies that represent professional associations. 
We met with doctors through the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons and the Saskatchewan Medical Association. We met 
with nurses through the Registered Nurses’ Association and the 
Registered Psychiatric Nurses’ Association and the Licensed 
Practical Nurses. We met with agencies that represent advocacy 
groups and the Alzheimer society, and those kinds of agencies; 
we met with them to get their insight. We met with the 
Pharmaceutical Association. And we’ve tried to meet with 
everyone that we possibly could in order to harvest their ideas 
and their perspectives at what are the priorities for health care. 
We spent a great deal of time to talk to district health boards, to 
SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), 
the board of SAHO, and member agencies. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, out of that exercise, we brought forward 
and presented to Mr. Ken Fyke on February 15th, our policy 
paper and our position paper, if you like, on what we think are 
the priorities for health care in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think that it’s important that we put that result 
on the record, so that people of this province will be able to 
understand exactly what our vision for health care is in the 
reality that there’s a vacuum been created by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve said that it was important that we deal with 
health care in a very responsible way. We’ve said that the 
current challenge for health care is really twofold. First of all 
we must identify the reasons for public dissatisfaction. And I’ve 
outlined some of the reasons for this dissatisfaction in the past. 
And we also said that we have to design a new model of 
publicly funded health care that addresses those dissatisfactions, 
and delivers high quality health care throughout Saskatchewan, 
no matter where you may be. 
 

And we’ve said that any reform that occurs has to be consistent 
with the principles of the Canada Health Act. We’ve said that 
what we have to recognize is the NDP government’s efforts at 
reform of the health care over the last 10 years have fallen 
short, and have largely been mismanaged in recent years, and 
there really has to be a real commitment to a plan for health 
care in Saskatchewan. 
 
As you know, in the last campaign we called for a 
value-for-money audit, that would look at what was needed in 
the health care system, and we have expressed our hope that the 
Fyke Commission . . . the Fyke Commission on medicare will 
indeed address many of the issues that we expressed concern 
about. And we said that our hope is that Mr. Fyke will realize 
that in order to deliver quality care in the long term, 
value-for-money of the service delivery has to be an important 
consideration. 
 
And I believe in listening to Mr. Fyke; he is in fair agreement 
that in order to have quality health care, you cannot ignore the 
value-for-money component of it, because if you do, it’s going 
to end up evolving into a system that quite frankly is 
unsustainable. 
 
We said if we were going to do this we should focus in a least 
five major areas. And those areas are as follows: empowerment 
of citizens; health care district reform; emergency medical 
response; recruitment and retention of health care professionals; 
and long-term care for seniors. And I’d like to dwell briefly on 
each of those components so that members opposite will 
understand what a plan really is when they see it, since they’ve 
been operating all these years without one. 
 
Under the empowerment of citizens, we said that a very 
important component that has to happen is there has to be a 
relationship established between the people of this province and 
the health care system. And we believe that the way to do that is 
through the enactment of a health care Bill of rights and 
responsibilities that is consistent with the principles of the 
Canada Health Act. 
 
We said that this Bill should clearly identify a number of things. 
It should identify what the responsibilities of the health care 
system is. It should identify what the responsibility of acute 
care and emergency health care providers are. It should deal 
with the commitment of long-term care. And it should deal with 
the responsibility of citizens, of families, and patients to the 
health care system. 
 
It should really define a relationship between the health care 
system and the people of this province that is consistent with a 
fair, responsive, and caring support system that takes care of the 
people in this province when they’re in need. 
 
In order to make sure that this system is lived up to, we said 
there should be an independent health care commissioner that 
will see to it that this relationship is respected and lived up to. 
This health care commissioner would be an officer of this 
legislature and not of any government or any political party and 
would act as an advocate, a mediator, and a guardian of the 
rights and responsibilities that are outlined in the health care 
Bill of rights and responsibilities. 
 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 65 

 

I think that that is a fundamental thing that has to be done first 
because it has to focus on the delivery of health care services in 
this province. It has to refocus what health care delivery is all 
about. It has to refocus on that relationship and a trust 
relationship between the people of this province and the health 
care system that has been badly eroded by the fact there has 
been no plan and no commitment to health care by this 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also said in a second area that we have to talk 
about, is that we have to talk about health district reform. And 
we’ve said that there should be a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Jones: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly, a friend of mine sitting in your gallery, Ms. Kaitlin 
Stocks. Good to see you here Kaitlin, I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — While taking advantage of the other 
member’s intervention, with leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, 
Mr. Don Hallam. And anybody who’s been involved in any 
kind of efforts to help people obtain their rights would certainly 
know Don Hallam. I’ve seen him many times on various picket 
lines helping people keep their spirits up while they fought for 
their share of the results of their labour. And I just would want 
the members to join me in welcoming one of my constituents, 
Don Hallam. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and welcome to 
the guests introduced as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second area of our five-prong policy paper 
deals with health district reform. Mr. Speaker, if I could briefly 

retrace the development of health districts in the province, I 
think it’s an important background to what we’re suggesting. 
 
In 1992 when the Minister Simard of the day proposed health 
district reform and moved from approximately 400 volunteer 
districts to a new health care service delivery model, the 
unfortunate problem with the lack of leadership that was 
exhibited on her part is that these health districts were formed 
based on inter-community competition and rivalry, rather than 
on looking how could health care services be best delivered to 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our point in this is, is that what we have to do is 
look at how is the best service delivery model going to provide 
the best level of health care to people of this province. And I 
think that that’s the objective that I hear expressed by SAHO. I 
hear that objective expressed by the Medical Association. And 
quite frankly I think what everybody is articulating is that they 
want a model that meets the challenge of health care delivery in 
this province. And I think that that’s what we’ve got to focus 
on, is health care service delivery, rather than on community 
co-operation. 
 
The second thing that people are saying is they don’t want some 
arbitrary plan that’s dreamt up by this government and the 
Department of Health rammed down their throats without any 
consultation and any involvement in terms of meeting the 
challenge of the service delivery. 
 
We believe in principle that a district model is the best service 
delivery model. But we know inherently that the way those 
districts are formed and organized, they’re going to be done on 
the advice of the people who live in those districts and who are 
done on a basis of some important principles. 
 
The first one is, is that members who serve as members of the 
board of that district will be fully elected people, and they’ll be 
elected on the basis of a community ward system to make sure 
that every community and geographic area of a district is 
represented. They will be done on the basis of the fact that each 
of those wards, there’s going to be a health care advisory body 
that makes sure that all of the hopes and aspirations and 
challenges of the local area are being represented and 
articulated. 
 
And they’re going to be done in a way that is designed to give 
everyone the maximum opportunity to participate in the 
democratic process. 
 
This government when they elect board members, they set the 
election up at some cockamamie time that has no relevance to 
anything else and almost designed it to fail so they could just 
appoint people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we believe in the democratic process and we 
say that it’s going to be done at the same time as school board 
and municipal elections so that there’s a maximum amount of 
participation at the least cost to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — People who sit on these boards, Mr. 
Speaker, people who sit on these boards have to know that they 



66 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

represent the communities in the area of the province that they 
come from, that they have a volunteer advisory body behind 
them to make sure everyone in those areas are fully involved 
and engaged in a meaningful way with the delivery of health 
care services in that district. 
 
How many should it be? Mr. Speaker, quite frankly, we don’t 
know. But quite frankly we think that people of this province, 
when they see our idea of a structural model, will understand 
that service delivery is an important component and not some 
arbitrary system set up by the government that’s designed to 
fail. 
 
And we believe that this will result in ownership for health care 
service delivery to go back to the communities that health care 
service delivery is designed to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that once you establish these districts 
that you got to make sure that they have a clear mandate. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — With all due respect to the hon. member, 
leave to introduce a guest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
hon. member for Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you and to my colleagues here in the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, Wally Pregizer who is a resident of the 
community where I live. And Wally and I are acquaintances. 
We see one another in sort of like ships passing in the night. So 
I’m very happy to see that he took the opportunity to come to 
the Assembly this afternoon and watch the proceedings. 
Welcome, Wally. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Sutherland on his feet? 
 
Mr. Addley: — With leave, to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale for giving me this opportunity. 
 
I’d like to introduce to you a constituent of mine and the former 
minister of Finance — one in the long line of NDP ministers of 
Finance that balanced the budget and helped pay down the debt 
— Mr. Elwood Cowley. Please welcome Mr. Elwood Cowley. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too am pleased 
that there’s a number of new guests in the Assembly. I didn’t 
realize my speech would attract so much attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I said one of the important things that needs to 
happen when we establish these new districts is they have to 
have a clear mandate in terms of what their roles and 
responsibilities are. In the past, in fact SAHO when it made its 
presentation to the Fyke Commission, said that what they 
needed was for the Minister of Health to stop micromanaging 
the system from Regina. 
 
And so these health districts have to be empowered and they 
have to be trusted to do their job and do their job professionally. 
They have to be challenged to do it right. They have to be 
challenged to the Bill of rights and responsibilities that we will 
set up, and as moderated by the health care commissioner to 
live up to those challenges. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is not a role for the Minister of Health 
to micromanage and second-guess all their decisions. We have 
to respect their ability to do the job that they are going to be 
mandated to do. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, coupled with this long-term mandate 
there has to be long-term funding. Mr. Speaker, what has 
happened in the past and this current situation is a good point 
where health districts actually went through 10 months of their 
budget without any approval. How in the world can any agency 
be asked to function when you actually go through 10 months 
of your budget year and you still not had the budget approved 
by the Department of Health? 
 
Mr. Speaker, that situation is intolerable, and health districts 
have asked for long-term funding commitments and we believe 
that that’s necessary to make so they understand where they’re 
going. So they can understand that there is a plan and there’s 
going to be the financial resources to meet that plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s leadership, that’s a plan, that’s what’s been 
missing by this NDP government, and that’s the kind of plan 
and commitment a Saskatchewan Party government would 
make to the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, a major challenge in the whole 
exercise of organizing the health care system in Saskatchewan 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 67 

 

in a proper way is to define some fundamental responsibilities. 
And they are firstly to define the role of primary health care, 
secondary health care, and tertiary health care. And finally 
we’ve got to decide how we’re going to deliver what I call as 
advanced tertiary health care services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, primary health care are those kinds of services that 
clearly every citizen needs on a regular basis, and has to be 
delivered as close as possible to where they actually live. It’s a 
kind of service that deals with looking after newborn babies and 
to counsel mothers who have just had children. It has to be able 
to talk about immunization programs. 
 
It has to talk about healthy lifestyles and helping people to quit 
unhealthy lifestyles, like smoking or excesses of eating or drink 
or anything else. It has to do with taking care of and monitoring 
people’s vital statistics, like blood pressure and diabetes and 
blood sugar counts. 
 
It has to deal with all of those services that need to happen on a 
daily basis close to the home community. It has to be able to 
respond to those kinds of things in an appropriate, timely way 
wherever people live in this province. To deal with the primary 
health care issues that everyone needs to have focused on, and 
also focuses on the indicators of health care so that we can help 
people build a healthier lifestyle for themselves, so that 
somewhere down the road they’re not going to have as much of 
a need for the acute care system, that no one wants to 
voluntarily go in but has to be there. 
 
We also have to sit down and talk about what secondary health 
care services can be delivered in all of the districts of this 
province. And I think of those things in terms of the core 
speciality areas that are either provided by resident or itinerant 
specialists to our communities. 
 
We have to say, how can we do a better job of kidney dialysis, 
not just in Saskatoon and Regina, but in the Melforts and the 
Yorktons and the Swift Currents and the North Battlefords of 
the world. How can we provide for cataract surgery and 
advanced tests, like MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) or CAT 
(computer assisted tomography) scan tests. 
 
Can we do that in a logical way in the secondary services 
because, quite frankly, in the secondary centres, there are some 
opportunities to build on the infrastructure that’s already there 
and take some pressure off the waiting times in the tertiary 
centres. 
 
Right now what we have is — because there is nowhere else to 
go — everything is piling on Saskatoon and Regina that are our 
tertiary centres and there is no opportunity to use pretty 
sophisticated facilities in the regional areas in the districts that 
we’re talking about. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that needs to be defined and organized so 
it’s done in a co-operative, logical way instead of a way based 
on community competition. I believe that the people of this 
province understand that by working together they can actually 
have enhanced services in the rural communities if we work 
together. And we need a plan that this government has not 
provided and that we are prepared to do. 
 

Mr. Speaker, we have the tertiary centres of Saskatoon and 
Regina. And we have to make sure that those centres are 
equipped with the appropriate equipment and capital equipment 
replacement budgets so they can do the advanced services and 
the advanced procedures that are needed. And we have to make 
sure that that happens in a logical, planned way that’s going to 
make sure that they have the capacity to respond to the needs of 
the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we also have to recognize that 
in this competitive world, there are probably some very 
advanced speciality services that we’re not going to be able to 
provide in every city in the Western Canada. And so I think it’s 
important that we set up prairie centres of excellence that take 
advantage of the fact that it is better to have a service provided 
in Winnipeg or Calgary or Edmonton or Regina or Saskatoon 
than nowhere at all. 
 
So it was interesting to me, Mr. Speaker, when there was the 
smelter explosion a year or so ago in, I believe, it was Flin Flon. 
And when I was listening to the news reports of that incident, I 
thought it strange initially that the people that were most 
severely burned in that accident were flown to Regina and 
Edmonton. They weren’t flown to Winnipeg in the province 
where they . . . you would think it logic to happen. And the 
reason for that, Mr. Speaker, is that the very best burn units in 
the Prairie provinces are in Regina and Edmonton. 
 
And so there’s a centre of excellence in that field in those two 
centres that are recognized across the Prairie provinces, and I 
believe that by co-operating with our neighbours we can build 
on that rather than sending people to the Mayo Clinic or other 
jurisdictions if we try to make sure we identify our strengths 
and make sure that happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the third area that I want to talk about is 
emergency medical response. First of all, we said it is almost 
criminal that it has taken this government almost a decade to 
implement a province-wide 911 emergency call system. I 
recognize that it’s coming, but it is coming so slow that people 
are almost despairing that it’s ever going to get here. 
 
In this day of technology you tell me how many people 
understand in rural Saskatchewan that the emergency number is 
310-5000. I bet you can’t find a handful. But everybody knows 
that you phone 911 when you’re in trouble — every child, 
every student, everyone in this province understands that. So 
what’s the problem about getting this system implemented in a 
timely way? And we say it’s got to be done and it’s got to be 
done immediately. 
 
The next step of that puzzle is to make sure that there is an 
emergency measure dispatch system that coordinates with the 
911 system. Now the EMS report that has come out has said, 
we’ve got have this super high-tech system set up in Saskatoon 
and Regina with all the monitors and screens so the Minister of 
Health can go there and feel good by looking at all this 
high-tech stuff and kind of visualize that she at the time — and 
he now — is in some cyber-centre that is going to make them 
feel good. That’s sort of, kind of, like the high-speed Internet 
reality that we have. 



68 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, currently in the province there are five EMS 
dispatch systems that are doing the job quite adequately, thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. But I do believe, and the system believes, 
that there can be some enhancements made to it so that the 
equipment is such that it automatically coordinates with the 911 
system. And we believe that’s the way to go. 
 
We thirdly believe in EMS that what we have to do is to work 
with the community-based ambulance systems that are in place 
today and to help them build an even better service in the future 
than what they have provided in the past. 
 
You know that report of the government’s that said, we don’t 
have 24-hour, seven-day-a-week emergency measures system 
responses — it’s just nonsense. It doesn’t matter if it’s in small 
town Saskatchewan, that the EMS provider works in the Co-op 
service station during the day. When they’re on call and an 
emergency call comes in, they’re at their ambulance in five 
minutes and on the road because they provided for that. They 
are on call seven days a week, 24 hours a day, and it’s a 
disservice to these people that that report implies that they’re 
not. 
 
And we believe that by working with the EMS system as it 
currently exists to help them improve their equipment, their 
response time, and their training, we will have a better ground 
ambulance system and it’ll be based on the people who are 
providing and have provided excellent care over the years. 
 
We also think that we need to enhance the current fixed-wing 
air ambulance system with a rotary-wing helicopter system that 
will be in place to back up the emergency care needs that are 
going to happen right across this province. 
 
You know people say well, why do you need a helicopter, it’s 
expensive. Well yes it is. But if you can tell me what the price 
of a human being life is, I’ll tell you if it’s expensive or worth it 
or not. Because in other jurisdictions and certainly in looking at 
the STARS (Shock Trauma Air Rescue Society) program in 
Alberta, we’re getting excellent advice about saying we need a 
system that has the advanced trauma capabilities to deal with a 
severe accident no matter where it happens or no matter to who 
it happens. 
 
It’s just not for rural people. It’s for anybody that travels in 
rural Saskatchewan. And urban people go to the lake, they go to 
neighbouring towns, they travel in that environment as well. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we believe that this will be a significant and 
important backup to the current ambulance system, and we 
would definitely implement such a system. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, in the emergency system, we believe 
there has to be a communication support system for people 
who, quite frankly, don’t know where to turn when something 
happens. It might not be the kind of emergency that requires 
911, but if I’m at home and I’m a single parent and my child is 
running a fever, I have to understand if that’s serious or not. 
There’s very few family physicians that give everybody their 
phone number to phone them at home any more. 
 
And so many times mothers or fathers are coming into the 
outpatient or the emergency room of a major hospital and their 
situation is such that it could have been dealt with in a more 

appropriate way, but they have nowhere to turn for advice. 
 
And so we believe a telephone support centre, province-wide 
based so that . . . being staffed by well-trained health care 
professionals — nurses, advanced clinical nurses — and 
established on the basis of a clear health care protocol would be 
a major support system for people who currently are accused of 
abusing the system but really do not have an alternative to use, 
to provide them with the service and the advice that they need. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we think this is a comprehensive plan about 
dealing with the issues of emergency medical response. 
 
The fourth area that we want to talk about is the recruitment, 
retention, and training of health care professionals. The first 
thing we said in this area, Mr. Speaker, is that we simply have 
to recognize that the status quo is not acceptable. 
 
Here’s a few facts, Mr. Speaker. The Saskatchewan Medical 
Association estimates that approximately a hundred physicians 
leave active practice in this province each and every year. Some 
of them retire, some of them leave the province, but we 
basically lose about a hundred physicians a year. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The College of Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan 
trains 55. Five of them are foreign and 50 are domestic students. 
They have increased their retention of people graduating from 
that college in recent years, and that’s to their credit. A lot of 
programs by the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) and 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons at the University of 
Saskatchewan are resulting in some significant improvement. 
 
But if you’ve got 50 potential graduates and they got it up to 80 
per cent, that still is only 40 physicians. That means we’re 60 
short every single year, Mr. Speaker. We’re 60 short. And we 
cannot no longer, and continue, to rely on countries like South 
Africa to provide those 60 short positions. Just recently the 
Consul General of the country of South Africa expressed his 
concern in Canada about the fact that we are raiding, we’re 
poaching, their health care professionals and they need them 
desperately as well. And so what we need to do is see to it that 
we provide more training opportunities for physicians in this 
province. 
 
The Minister of Post-Secondary Education chirps from his seat 
and says, oh isn’t this wonderful? We up to 80 per cent — 40 
people. Well I’m sorry, Mr. Minister, it isn’t enough. You are 
coming short. We’re falling short each and every year and we 
have to do something about it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what we’ve said is it’s not just family 
physicians and specialists but it also is nurses, registered nurses, 
advanced clinical nurses, licensed practical nurses, members of 
the technologists group, radiologists and laboratory techs. We 
are graduating 16 radiology techs and 16 lab techs a year that 
the Regina Health District says they’ll hire 10 to 12 of them 
each and every year. How in the world is this going to meet our 
needs currently and into the future? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the environment of where the world out there is 
willing to purchase our highly-trained, young graduates, our 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 69 

 

best chances of having the people that we need to service in the 
future are the people who have grown up, who were born and 
raised here, who are trained here, who have family here, and the 
only way to do that is increase the commitment to training of 
these young people. And I challenge the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education to disagree with that fundamental 
principle. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have said that in addition to making 
the commitment to these training seats, because it absolutely 
has to happen now because it takes time to train people, we are 
making the commitment to be supportive of our share as a 
provincial government of the proposal by the University of 
Saskatchewan for an integrated health sciences facility that they 
are planning. We believe that this is absolutely essential. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one of the problems and challenges of 
training young people is to make sure there’s going to be an 
environment where professionals — the instructors — are going 
to come to train them, because again there is great competition 
for these individuals. 
 
When you deal with someone who is a doctor at the College of 
Medicine you see that these people aren’t just in here to make 
the big bucks. They’re here because they are the very best at 
what they do — they’re right at the advanced edge of their 
profession — and they want to show other people how that is 
done, and they’re proud of what they’ve learned and what they 
know. So they have the teaching component of their mandate. 
 
But they also have the clinical component because it isn’t just 
enough to talk about what you know; you have to be able to 
show them in a teaching environment. And hence the very 
special role of not only the Royal University Hospital, but of 
the whole Saskatoon District Health in terms of providing that 
teaching environment. They need that. 
 
But they also need an opportunity to do research because 
without research they can’t advance their skill; they can’t 
advance themselves beyond the status quo. And that’s an area 
where we need to pick up our socks, quite frankly, because right 
now if you hire a new medical instructor they don’t know where 
they’re going to find laboratory space for them. And an 
important part of the integrated health sciences facility proposal 
is for increased research facility opportunities, not only in the 
College of Medicine but of all of the health sciences. You have 
the opportunity for the College of Pharmacy, of dentistry, of 
nursing, of physical therapy, or kinesiology I guess is they call 
it now. All of those areas need that research component. 
 
And the further thing that we have going for us right now, Mr. 
Speaker, is the opportunity created by the synchrotron, the 
Canadian light beam. Many of these medical issues and many 
of the scientific exploration of these issues are going to be 
really made an opportunity because of this light beam facility in 
Saskatoon. And if we miss the opportunity, all is we’re going to 
do is provide a facility in the synchrotron where teams of 
medical professionals, teams of scientists, drop into Saskatoon 
for two weeks, run their experiments, and leave to do the 
advanced research and analysis of their study somewhere else. 
We definitely need that commitment if we’re going to build a 
core of health care professionals that are going to be needed to 
serve the health care system in the future. 

But, Mr. Speaker, we also have to look in addition to this single 
facility, we have to look at the opportunities at SIAST, to look 
at nurse training programs. They currently exist in Regina and 
Saskatoon. We have to look at Prince Albert as well. And I 
think there’s a real opportunity to look at that campus as 
potentially a site to look at rural medicine or rural nursing 
practice. And I think we should look at the Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College as an opportunity as well to develop 
nursing programs, focusing particularly on the needs of 
Aboriginal people in this province. 
 
We have to look at all of our resources to provide the capacity 
for the training that is going to be needed to see to it that we’ve 
got the health care professionals that we need in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need as well to make sure we tell the people, 
when they’re training for these professions, that they’re needed, 
they’re appreciated, and they’re valued and we want them to 
stay and practise in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I know that there are efforts made in that field but, quite 
simply, we have to redouble our efforts to make sure that every 
single student studying in the health care fields in this province 
knows that they’re going to have a job in this province, it’s 
going to be a full-time job, and it’s going to be an important job 
and it’s going to be a job that we respect and appreciate them 
for. And we cannot simply tell them that often enough to 
enforce that point. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we have to talk about the long-term care 
needs of our seniors. As I travelled around this province looking 
at facilities, I have seen some facilities that, quite frankly, are 
absolutely amazing. They’re wonderful places that are 
institutions that have been designed to provide a family, homey 
atmosphere, and one of them, Mr. Speaker, is in your 
constituency in Mont. St. Joseph. 
 
When I went there, I went there on the day when they brought 
the huskies in to visit the folks. And to see these dogs come 
with their high school student people that were training them — 
because I believe there’s an active program between the grade 
12 class at Carlton and Mont. St. Joseph where they kind of 
adopt each other and is part of a program — it sort of made you 
feel almost humble to see the beautiful relationship that was 
developed between these young people and these seniors. 
 
It is beautiful for me to see how they designed the facility so it 
provided neighbourhoods and areas that didn’t seem like 
institutions. It was the kind of facility that made you very proud 
of being a part of the population of this province, to see the way 
our seniors were cared in that environment. And I just use that 
as one example, but there are many others. 
 
But I’ve also travelled and seen institutions, Mr. Speaker, where 
quite frankly I don’t think people like Karla Holmolka would be 
kept in. They are almost like prisons for people that have 
nowhere else to go. And the health districts that have these 
facilities are crying desperately for replacement programs for 
those facilities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we simply have to make sure that we look 
into this into the future in a way that provides a proper plan for 
replacing those facilities for our seniors. Mr. Speaker, they’re 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

the people that built this province. And the other reality for 
most of us here is, soon they’re going to be for us. And if we 
don’t make a plan to provide the proper care for these people, 
we’re going to end up with a situation that our seniors, when 
they’re at their time of need, are not going to be looked after in 
an appropriate way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think there’s other opportunities to make sure 
that we have appropriate housing for our seniors. We have to 
look at enriched housing projects. We have to look at personal 
care homes and make sure that they maintain adequate 
standards in the service care delivery field. We have to look at 
all of these options. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is our plan. This deals with all of the areas 
that we believe that need to be talked about in a general way. 
We don’t pretend for a moment that it is the last word in health 
care delivery, or that it’s going to be a model that’s going to be 
appropriate forever. But we have to also recognize that it is a 
plan. It is a vision for the future about where health care can and 
should go in this province. It’s a responsible plan. It’s a plan 
that will challenge all of our people to be a part of it. It’ll 
provide all of our people with an opportunity for a meaningful 
role in the plan, and we believe that it’s a plan that will move us 
to the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this plan is available . . . there are members 
opposite saying, well, why don’t you table it. Well, I’d be 
pleased to do that. But I would also say that it’s listed on our 
caucus Web site which is www.saskcaucus.com — saskcaucus, 
one word. And if you click on it there, it’s all there and you can 
download a written copy for yourselves. I’d be pleased to give 
copies to any member who doesn’t have access to a Web site so 
that they can look at, and I’d be pleased to hear any comments 
that members and individuals may have about this plan. 
 
I’ve had many already from members of health boards, from 
medical professionals; and they say that it’s a good plan. It’s a 
plan that’s worthy of support and consideration, and we 
presented it to Mr. Fyke. 
 
And most important, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to use this plan 
as our benchmark. I think we need a benchmark. We need 
something that states what we think is important and the 
important priorities for health care in this province, and we’re 
going to use it as a measuring device, if you like, for Mr. Fyke’s 
report. We’re going to use it as a measuring device in 
measuring what the government plan may be, and . . . well 
that’s pretty easy, because there is no plan. But we put it out 
there on the public forum so people could say we have a plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been my pleasure to outline this plan for this 
Assembly today and for the people of Saskatchewan that are 
watching on the legislative network. Mr. Speaker, we, the 
official opposition, Sask Party caucus are proud of this plan, 
and we know that it’ll move health care and the health care 
debate in this province forward in a very constructive way. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very happy to be 

able to finally rise in my place to speak in support of the Throne 
Speech of the second session of the twenty-fourth legislature. 
 
Listening to the previous speakers, I must say that I was a little 
disappointed in the Leader of the Opposition. He spoke mostly 
about personalities and criticisms of individuals and left aside 
the discussion of ideas and policies, thereby showing that he is 
bereft of ideas. 
 
It sort of reminded me of a quote that the former US Speaker of 
the House of . . . US Speaker of the House, Sam Rayburn, said. 
And I’ll paraphrase it because there’s some language in there 
that’s likely unparliamentary, saying that anyone — I’m using 
the word anyone as opposed to donkey or what have you — 
anyone can kick down a barn, it takes a real carpenter to build 
one. So I’m very happy to rise in my place here today. 
 
Before I begin I’d like to congratulate my colleagues from 
Saskatoon Meewasin and Saskatoon Elphinstone for their fine 
speeches yesterday about moving and seconding the Throne 
Speech. 
 
I can say that after hearing the member from Regina 
Elphinstone who is now the youngest member of the Legislative 
Assembly, which bumps me down to the third youngest 
member of the Legislative Assembly — in fact I think we’ve 
got the five youngest members of the Legislative Assembly on 
this side — but I know we’ll hear more from the member from 
Elphinstone. 
 
I’d also like to thank the good people of Saskatoon Sutherland 
for making me their MLA. I certainly appreciate that. It’s a 
great honour. Saskatoon Sutherland, there’s lots of good people 
in that riding. It’s one of the fastest growing ridings with lots of 
new homes being built in Arbor Creek. In fact, I haven’t 
double-checked this, but I do believe that it has the highest per 
capita number of lottery homes. In fact, everyone seems to want 
to live there and they’re able to buy a ticket to live there. 
 
Also part of the riding is Muskeg Lake First Nations Reserve. 
Now I’m originally from Loon Lake and the Makwa lake band 
reserve First Nation is right next to Loon Lake, and so it feels 
like home living in Saskatoon with the Muskeg Lake band part 
of the riding. 
 
I’ll be speaking a little bit later about the partnership and the 
contributions that First Nations people have made in building 
Saskatchewan and some of the success stories that are available 
out there today. 
 
I’d be remiss in not congratulating our new Premier on his 
decisive win this week. He provides a new face and an energetic 
leadership and the victory with the spirit of Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — I’m looking forward to the new direction, the 
optimism, the openness, and the confidence that this 
government will be providing in the next several years. 
 
I’d also like to congratulate the new Speaker for his knowledge 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

 

and his gentle humour. And I know as a former schoolteacher 
he will be strict but fair and impartial. I would also like to 
congratulate the new Deputy Premier for his intelligence . . . for 
his new position that he now takes . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . I wouldn’t go that far, Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education, but for his intelligence and his quick wit and I do 
appreciate that he will also do his job well. 
 
I would also like to thank the old . . . the former Speaker. I was 
going to say the old Speaker but I mean the former Speaker, the 
MLA from Melville, and recognize . . . and compliment him on 
his speech as well for recognition of the difficulty that some in 
our agriculture community are facing. But still examples of his 
enthusiasm and his optimism for the rest of Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan today is thriving. It’s a prosperous and growing 
and innovative province with an economy based no longer just 
on wheat and natural resources. Saskatchewan, and in particular 
Saskatoon, is becoming a world leader in ag biotech, in 
information technology, in new agricultural products and in 
research and development. 
 
Some examples of the good news in Saskatchewan are the 
synchrotron, and even the member from Melfort-Tisdale has 
commented on what a good project that is. I was at the official 
opening on February 25 and it was on time and on budget. 
 
Also the University of Saskatchewan which is also in my riding, 
which is probably the largest employer in all of Saskatoon and 
it continues to provide innovative education opportunities for 
all people in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re able to continue to provide good government. In fact The 
Globe and Mail headline recently said Saskatchewan is the star 
of the 90s, leading Canada in the GDP (gross domestic product) 
growth. Saskatchewan is also the second highest net worth in all 
of Canada. Volunteerism is another example of good news in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan leads the way having the highest 
rate of volunteerism in all of Canada. Even in today’s 
Leader-Post, some of the headlines: Regina economy looks 
good; Saskatchewan retail sales are up. There’s more good 
news in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some other examples would be in taxation. On January 1 your 
taxes went down. The provincial flat tax, the debt reduction tax, 
and the high-income surtax were all eliminated, putting 
hundreds of dollars in the hands of every family in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
At the same time provincial income tax rates were lowered for 
all income brackets. And the best news is there are even more 
tax cuts coming. Tax brackets will continue to drop in 2002 and 
2003, and the child tax credit, and the seniors supplemental 
credit will be increased. It’s all part of this government’s 
commitment to put money back in our communities, now that 
our province’s books are back in order. 
 
It started in 1997, when the provincial sales tax was slashed 
from 9 per cent to 7 per cent, and continued in 1999, when the 
sales tax was cut yet again, this time to 6 per cent. As our 
province has become financially healthy, we’ve kept our 
commitment to putting money back in the hands of the people it 
belongs, the taxpayer. 

Here are some examples of how this year’s tax cuts will affect 
families. The single income family of $40,000 will receive a 
total tax savings of $869. A two-income family at $80,000 will 
receive a total tax saving of $950. A single income senior at 
$20,000 will receive a total tax savings of $450, plus the sales 
tax credit. Single part-time students earning $12,000 will 
receive tax savings of $173, plus the tax credit. Saskatchewan 
now has the third lowest taxes in the country. Not bad for a 
province that was nearly bankrupt a decade ago. 
 
As well, the job figures are looking pretty good as well. 
Statistics Canada numbers show that Saskatoon had the second 
lowest unemployment rate of any city in Canada in December, 
2000, with a rate of just 4.1 per cent. The province’s 
unemployment rate was 4.9 per cent, well below the national 
average of 6.3 per cent. Four hundred and eighty-five thousand 
people were working in Saskatchewan last year, an increase of 
5,000 over the previous year. 
 
Another fact. Our health care system is the envy of North 
America. It’s resources are being stretched to the limit, and it’s 
undergoing change, but when has this ever not been the case. It 
bends, but it does not break. And those who have had direct 
experience with the health care system in Saskatchewan are 
pleased with the service they’ve received. 
 
Here are just some statistics. In this year 4.76 million visits to 
family physicians, and 920,000 visits and consultations with 
specialists took place in Saskatchewan. Publicly funded and 
publicly administered visits. We’re not doing too badly, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here’s another fact — our roads are doing quite well. On 
November 30, 2000, the Finance minister announced that the 
province would use $150 million of the projected $370 million 
surplus for increased highway improvements over the next three 
years. This announcement will . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
It’s a great plan. This announcement will result in over 900 
million, almost a billion dollars, being invested on the 
provincial highway system in the next three years. The province 
will easily exceed its 1997 promise and commitment to invest 
2.5 billion over a 10-year period; as well, the 1999 commitment 
to invest a billion dollars over four years. 
 
Over the next three years, some of the department’s key 
initiatives will allow the province to improve pavement 
condition, move forward with improvements to the TMS (thin 
membrane surface) system, develop key transportation 
corridors, continue twinning, and develop a comprehensive, 
three-year capital plan. And this is important, Mr. Speaker — 
the province will deliver the additional $150 million of 
additional work without increasing its administrative structure. 
Good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I could say the same thing about education, about municipal 
government, and about social services, where social assistance 
caseloads are the lowest since 1992. 
 
And this situation or this investment in highways is even more 
impressive when you consider that we have more roads than 
any province in the country. And when you take into the count 
that we get absolutely no help from the federal government in 
repairing the damage caused by its transportation policies, not 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

only are we holding our own, we’re moving forward. The 
people of Saskatchewan asked us to fix the roads — Mr. 
Speaker, we are going to fix the roads. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to be in Saskatchewan and delighted 
that the progress we’re making on all fronts, despite serious 
challenges, and pleased that the government of which I’m a part 
has played no small role in what has been accomplished. 
 
But there’s another side of this story, Mr. Speaker. According to 
the opposition, and this is what they say, Saskatchewan is the 
most godforsaken place on earth — no one is working, our 
roads are crumbling, our health care system is a disaster as we 
just heard, our children are leaving in droves, our taxes are way 
too high, and our farm economy and rural life which form the 
backbone of our province has been betrayed by a heedless 
government that’s lost talk . . . touch with rural Saskatchewan, 
taxes are killing us, and doctors are leaving the province. That’s 
what the opposition seems to say; that’s their attitude towards 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I have to say that the litany I just recited is most of the part of 
the line that’s been pedalled by the opposition party. It’s their 
job, however, to criticize, though I’m not sure that that should 
entail belittling every aspect of provincial life. 
 
The opposition is pretty good at practicing what an American 
journalist recently called, quote, “orchestrated outrage.” The 
political tactic by which every problem is labelled a crisis and 
every group asking for change is a body ignored and dismissed 
by a government that’s lost touch with the people. Those are 
good lines, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and they use them well. 
 
However in Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon Riversdale, the 
opposition said just wait, the people will send you a message. 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they did send us a message and they sent 
the opposition a message. They threw everything they possibly 
could have at us, Mr. Speaker, but they’ve learned that money, 
a dream candidate, a quality candidate, that they cannot buy an 
election, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party is bringing down Saskatchewan. It’s a 
millstone around the public’s neck. We will shed that millstone 
at the next election, Mr. Speaker. Voters had the opportunity to 
cast judgment twice, Mr. Speaker, and both times they rejected 
the radical right wing agenda dividing Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift Current said why 
don’t we come and cross the floor and then we can help our 
hockey teams. Mr. Speaker, I honestly think that after the next 
election, I will be on that side of the House because we’ll have 
50 seats, Mr. Speaker and there won’t be enough room . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, back to the good 
news. Canada’s philosopher king, Allan Fotheringham, also a 
Saskatchewan boy, in a recent column asked why is 
Saskatchewan squawking. 
 
He pointed out that there are 15 relevant economic indicators 
which tell the story of a province’s economic health. Those 
include, just to name some, housing starts, unemployment 

recipients, building permits, exports, and so on. Saskatchewan 
was ahead of the game in 13 out of 15 measures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But Dr. Foth says we live next door to Alberta, the hottest 
economy in the country. So anything looks bad by comparison. 
 
The Sask Party, day after day after day, holds up Alberta as the 
nirvana, Atlantis, and the New Jerusalem all rolled into one. 
 
Now I love to visit Alberta like everyone else, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It has wonderful sights, beautiful parks, and great 
restaurants, and has increasingly all the attractions a big city can 
provide. And sometimes I do look at the money that they’re 
bringing in on the sea of oil that’s being currently sold at 25 to 
$30 a barrel. In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the surplus alone in 
Alberta from the oil revenue is $5 billion. We run our whole 
province on a budget of only 5.6 billion. 
 
We turned the corner on the millennium but we’re still less than 
a hundred years old as a province. Within the living memory of 
many of our citizens we’ve changed from a pioneer society 
where there was a town every seven miles so farmers on their 
quarter section could haul grain in their wagon and be back by 
supper. Today we can be in Toronto, or as the minister . . . the 
member from Kindersley would like, in Ottawa in less time 
than that. 
 
Our roads, our municipal structures, our grain-based economy 
were originally based on the realities of a long gone day. Much 
of what is good about Saskatchewan comes from those times — 
our sense of community, our eagerness to co-operate and 
volunteer, and our closeness to the land. And we must not lose 
that which has indelibly defined us. 
 
But, my friends, those days are gone. We may like it, we may 
not. But thanks to paved roads, to television, and the Internet; 
thanks to modern medicine which demands elaborate equipment 
only to be found in large central hospitals; thanks to all this and 
more, our province is undergoing more rapid and fundamental 
change than any other place at any other time in North America. 
I think we do long for the old days; at the same time we want 
the advantages of the new. 
 
We’ve got some bankable facts of some more good news, Mr. 
Speaker. And most of them are out of the paper, or out of a 
briefing note, as I have here. For example, the economy. The 
average growth rate for Saskatchewan economy from ’92 to ’99 
was 3.4 per cent, matching the Canadian average and ranking 
third highest among all provinces. 
 
2000 figures show increase in exports, manufacturing, 
shipments, oil and natural gas production, production of potash 
and other minerals, retail sales, and new motor vehicles. 
Stronger export sales, up in November 2000 by 8.8 per cent 
compared to November ’99, and manufacturing shipments show 
healthy growth. Retail sales in November increased by 3.3 per 
cent, and new motor vehicle sales increased in the first 11 
months of 2000 up by seven and a half per cent over the same 
period in ’99. 
 
(16:15) 
 
High employment levels, tax reform, and income growth will 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

 

promote construction in Saskatchewan in the next three years. 
More growth — 94 per cent of employers in Regina and 80 per 
cent of employers in Saskatoon expect employment levels to 
increase or stay the same over the next year . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . 90 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Labour. Saskatchewan’s labour force increased 6,000 between 
December 2000 and January 2001. An increase by 4,700. We 
have to thank the former minister of Economic and 
Co-operative Development, the MLA from Idylwyld for a lot of 
these numbers. The 4,000 employed increase in January 
represented a .9 per cent increase which tied Saskatchewan with 
two other provinces for the largest percentage increase in the 
country. More good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In 2000, Saskatchewan created a record number of jobs 
equalling 5,000 throughout the year. Saskatchewan’s 
unemployment rate in January 2001 was 5.6 per cent. The third 
lowest, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the country and 
well below the national average of 6.9 per cent. 
 
The unemployment rate in Saskatoon was 5.4 per cent, the fifth 
lowest among major Canadian cities; and Regina’s 
unemployment rate was 6.5 per cent. Still lower than the 
national average. 
 
I’ve spoken a little bit about tax reform but I think it bears 
repeating. Saskatchewan’s personal income tax rate had been 
going up since the introduction of the flat tax in 1985. Taxes 
were going up in the ’80s. By 1992 an average family in 
Saskatchewan was paying the highest income tax rate in all of 
Canada — in 1992, nine short years ago, the highest income 
tax. 
 
This is no longer the case. Our income tax rates in 
Saskatchewan have come down four times in the last seven 
years thanks to our ministers of Finance. And they will continue 
to come down in 2002 and 2003. The reduction in income tax 
will reach an estimated savings of 442 million a year by 2003. 
As the Minister of Finance says, that’s progress, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
At 6 per cent, Saskatchewan’s rate is the lowest of the nine 
provinces with the sales tax, and only Alberta who has medicare 
premiums are lower than that. In 1992 the total tax bill for an 
average Saskatchewan family was the second highest in the 
country. Very soon, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it will be the third 
lowest. And we’ve maintained a balanced budget and tax cuts 
since 1995. 
 
We’ve heard a bit about health care, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Saskatchewan, the health budget for 2001 is 1.978 billion — the 
highest ever in the history of our province and it’s 5.9 per cent 
higher than last year. 4,761,800 visits and consultations with 
family physicians; 920,000 visits and consultations with 
specialists. Approximately 9,000 nursing home residents in 
special care homes, hospitals, and health centres. Over 800,000 
days of in-patient hospital care; an estimated 650,000 
emergency room or clinic visits. Twenty-five per cent of the 
families that use prescriptions receive financial assistance from 
the drug plan; 2,400 receive drugs free of cost for palliative care 
treatment. 
 

We are committed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to providing 
accessible, quality health care services that are within our 
financial means. We also believe in a publicly funded, publicly 
administered health care system where access to care is not 
based on a member’s ability to pay, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve achieved all of this. We’ve 
achieved upgrades as well by . . . Our economy is not 
overheated, but it is warm. Our job creation is not breathtaking, 
but it’s steady and sustainable. Our variety of businesses and 
industries are growing. 
 
Things are not that bad, Mr. Speaker, and like the true citizen of 
Saskatchewan I am, I’m being understated. Saskatchewan has 
received nine credit upgrades since 1995 — three in the last 
month alone. These upgrades have resulted in annual savings to 
the province of about $3 million. And we’ve achieved these 
upgrades despite the fact we still pay $600 million a year in 
interest on the debt we inherited in 1991. 
 
People might be tired of hearing it and I’m tired of talking 
about it and the Saskatchewan taxpayer is tired of paying it, but 
boredom doesn’t make it disappear, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Saskatchewan is still the best place in the country in which to 
live and raise a family. That’s true in good times and it’s true in 
bad times, but today is good times, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the success . . . and I’m quoting from the 
Throne Speech, quote: 
 

The success that we enjoy rests on the dedication and 
courage of people who dreamed of creating a society where 
the future would be as limitless as the very skies 
themselves. 
 

We must build on that success and continue to connect to the 
future. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are three themes in the Throne 
Speech that I’d like to touch on. Number one, a thriving 
economy. The economy of our province is strong and growing 
and will achieve even greater success in technology, in 
community infrastructure, in rural Saskatchewan with increased 
expenditures on agricultural research and development and 
programs to help farm families take advantage of new 
opportunities. 
 
Transportation by embarking on the largest-ever highway 
renewal program. Economic planning by moving forward with 
the release of an economic blueprint for Saskatchewan — 
Partnership for Prosperity. 
 
Number two, the second theme: healthy citizens, families, and 
communities. It is our responsibility to ensure that every person 
can enjoy the fruits of our prosperity. We will build and expand 
early childhood development programs aimed at high-risk 
communities. We will amend The Labour Standards Act to 
increase maternity and parental leave provisions. 
 
And we’ll increase the number of community schools and 
expand this program to include secondary schools. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re making significant investments in renovating, 
expanding, and building new schools and post-secondary 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

facilities. We will amend the five-year centennial . . . implement 
a five-year centennial summer student employment program to 
provide summer jobs for over 10,000 high school and 
post-secondary students. 
 
Through our excellent public institutions and innovative 
technology, our post-secondary system provides our young 
people with affordable access to the education and training that 
leads to success. Opportunities, for young people in rural and 
northern Saskatchewan as well as larger centres, that lead to job 
opportunities; to learn, live, and work right here and participate 
fully in our economic, cultural, and social life. 
 
We’ll also work side by side with the leaders of tomorrow, 
inviting and encouraging the use of their ideas, talents, and 
energy throughout government and communities. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, government recognizes the 
increasing important role that Aboriginal people will play in the 
social and economic future of our province. We’re committed to 
working with Metis and First Nations people to secure that 
future. 
 
I notice in the speech that the Leader of the Opposition gave, 
that he was taking on our Minister of SERM and touring in his 
riding. I find that odd that he took on the Premier in Saskatoon 
Riversdale and came up short. And in that riding we won 58 per 
cent of the vote. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Fifty-eight per cent of the vote in Riversdale. 
 
What I don’t understand the logic behind going after the 
Minister of SERM, is he won his seat last time with 93 per cent 
of the vote. So I don’t understand why he would do that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a lot of success stories in the 
Aboriginal community, the First Nations community, and I’d 
like to touch on a few of them as examples of what we’ll be 
doing in the future. 
 
I’m quoting from a magazine called Seeds of Success which is a 
quarterly publication produced by the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. The first article makes reference 
to the First Nations Flying School in Western Canada: 
 

The school located in Prince Albert is a joint venture 
between the Prince Albert Grand Council and the National 
Aviation College. 

 
Another good example of First Nations people working together 
is a job fair which boasted great turnout in Saskatoon. 
 

About 600 post-secondary students from all across 
Saskatchewan gathered recently in Saskatoon at the 2001 
edition of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 
Corporate Circle Job Fair. 
 
The fair offered not only one-on-one contact between 
potential employers and students seeking jobs, but also 
information workshops on resumés, job searches, and 
interviews. 

This first-ever event brought together over 60 corporations, 
government agencies, and educational institutions seeking 
Aboriginal employees with the students from all over 
northern and southern Saskatchewan. 

 
John Lagimodiere, who was covering the event for his new 
publication, Eagle Feather Business, said he’s encouraged 
to see the corporate and Aboriginal worlds interacting at 
events like the job fair. 

 
Speaking of Mr. Lagimodiere: 
 

This 32-year-old Metis entrepreneur is the man behind 
Saskatchewan’s newest Aboriginal business publication, 
Eagle Feather Business. 
 

He says he’s determined to tell Saskatchewan readers about the 
growing Aboriginal economies. 
 

His company, Aboriginal Consulting Services publishes 
both Eagle Feather News and Eagle Feather Business. 
 

Another good news success story, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
One I’m quite pleased to talk about as well, another success 
story, is Mr. Ernie Scoles. He stacked up a clientele across 
Western Canada and throughout North America. His work is 
also founded in collections as far away as Europe and Asia. He 
has opened an art gallery and framing shop in Saskatoon. 
 

Last June the painter decided to “step it up a notch” and he 
opened Scoles Fine Arts & Framing in Saskatoon, where 
he’s made his home since the mid 1980s. The art gallery 
carries works by Scoles and other Aboriginal artists, along 
with the traditional crafts by Scole’s wife Doreen, who also 
manages the gallery. 

 
I also want to comment about the North Central Insurance 
Brokers Inc. in Saskatoon which also does business in the 
Muskeg Lake First Nations Band and they’ll be expanding or 
have expanded their current operations. More good news, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
A couple more examples of good news would be Tasha 
Hubbard: 
 

(who) candidly admits she never really aspired to become 
an entrepreneur or a business owner . . . explains the 
27-year-old owner of Thursday Night Productions. 

 
An Hon. Member: — How old? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Twenty-seven years old. 
 

. . . she views her film and video production company less 
as a business venture and more as a way to pursue her two 
passions in life — producing documentaries and exploring 
her Aboriginal roots. 
 
Located on the Muskeg Lake Urban reserve in Saskatoon 
(which is in my riding), Thursday Night Productions was 
officially launched in September 1999. 

 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

 

More good news in the Aboriginal community, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some more examples of good news and what we’ll be working 
with First Nations and Metis people. The development of a 
Metis and off-reserve First Nation strategy is an important first 
step in meeting that commitment. 
 
The report and the recommendations of the commissions on 
medicare will require careful consideration. We will listen, Mr. 
Speaker, we will listen to the feedback from communities and 
stakeholders and make appropriate changes to ensure our health 
care system works well for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Government recognizes the links between quality of our 
environment, strength of our economy, and the health of our 
people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Legislation will ensure that the oil 
and gas wells are properly decommissioned and reclaimed. We 
will focus our attention on wind power as a safe, renewable 
energy resource, and on energy conservations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken on some of the issues that I think are 
important in Saskatchewan. I’ve highlighted some of the areas 
where I think the opposition is falling down in its breadth of 
ideas. And I’d like to say that I’m very happy to be part of a 
government that is responsive and effective, government which 
is dedicated to providing responsible and effective 
administration. Saskatchewan citizens expect and deserve no 
less. 
 
Government will continue to demonstrate openness, 
accountability, and sound fiscal management, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We have in this province the vision, the ideas, and the 
people to connect us to a future filled with promise and 
prosperity. Let us connect to that future beginning today, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
In conclusion, I’d like to again quote from the Throne Speech, 
and it goes something like this. Quote: 
 

The success that we enjoy rests on the dedication and 
courage of people who dreamed of creating a society where 
the future would be as limitless as the very skies 
themselves. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, and Mr. Speaker, we built a foundation in 
the last nine years under the leadership of Mr. Roy Romanow. 
I’m very happy to switch gears and build upon that foundation 
under the present Premier. So for that reason I will be 
supporting the main motion and opposing the amendment. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
opportunity to be able to stand in the House and add a few 
comments on behalf of my background, my experience, and my 
constituency, but in particular some comments pertinent to the 
debate at hand and that is the Throne Speech. 
 
Before I do that I would like to congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, 
on your appointment to the position you’re in, and also to the 

Deputy Speaker for his appointment just recently. We look 
forward to working with both of you. 
 
One of the things that I wanted to comment, Mr. Speaker, was 
about . . . from the Throne Speech was, as I indicated in there, it 
is a spring of the season for us. They missed the date a little bit, 
but nevertheless it is springtime. And springtime certainly is a 
time for optimism. People look forward to this time of the year. 
 
From my background in agriculture and farming, it was the time 
that we look forward to doing what we had to do with the 
optimism of certainly a bountiful crop coming up into the 
future. We knew if we did the right things at the right time, it 
would work out, and we would get the momentum of the 
seasons moving with us. 
 
And I think it’s on that point that I find most frustrating with 
this particular Throne Speech. Because I could not see in that 
Throne Speech any of the vision that we need. I couldn’t see a 
focus of where we need to go. And really that is the part of the 
Throne Speech that I think is the most important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is the opportunity of this government to lay before us and the 
province the direction that they think they want to go. It was a 
great opportunity for the government, the new Premier, to show 
us that there was a vision in place. 
 
I failed to see, in almost all areas, where we were going to get a 
fresh vision and a fresh sense of opportunity for moving on into 
this particular year coming up. 
 
That opportunity is a very important word, and I think it’s a 
word that people in Saskatchewan desperately need. They want 
to embrace that particular word, that phrase, whether it’s an 
opportunity for themselves, whether it’s an opportunity for 
themselves in terms of their business, opportunity for their 
family certainly, and certainly they’re looking for an 
opportunity in the economy that needs to be addressed in this 
province. 
 
We’ve all talked about opportunity. We’ve all talked about the 
economy. We’ve talked about where we need to go in this 
province, and I really feel in my mind that we have an 
opportunity in this province. There is a very strong potential in 
this province. All we have to do is make sure that we can direct 
. . . put the right conditions in place and the potential of this 
province can be realized. And people are looking forward to the 
signals that will generate that particular direction. 
 
The direction and those signals were sadly missing in the 
Throne Speech. Those signals are so badly needed because this 
is what people build their hopes, build their personal dreams on, 
and how they want to move ahead in making the decisions. 
 
Really all they want to do is to develop some kind of 
confidence that we’re moving ahead, and a confidence in 
something that is refreshing and new, and something that when 
they look at, maybe hasn’t been tried before but there’s enough 
confidence to move ahead that this can be done. 
 
It’s like people are moving along in a bus, and the province is a 
bus. Now I know that somebody else has used a reference to a 
bus in this province. And I think people want to move along 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

with this bus going in a particular direction, certainly to the 
destination that each of us feel that the bus has a potential of 
reaching. 
 
And we have to be looking ahead. The leader of . . . or the 
driver of the bus has to be certainly focused on where it’s going, 
and not looking in the rear-view mirror of this bus and looking 
to see where we’ve come from. 
 
We noticed in this particular budget that the driver of the bus is 
looking back from past years — last year in particularly — and 
building and trying to indicate that this is a new direction and 
something that will give us confidence. 
 
Well I’m afraid that people in that bus were not aware of a great 
success at this point in following last year’s road map and 
following that particular direction that the bus was going. 
 
After all, I have five grandchildren. I have a son with families 
and now five granddaughters in this province. And all I’m 
asking is to see that they have an opportunity to move ahead in 
this province and stay in this province and be able to fulfil their 
destiny here in this province without having to move. If they 
wish to move that will be their choice certainly. 
 
But I would like to see an opportunity continuing in this 
province for a long period of time — sustained opportunity. 
And it’s because of the young people in this province that I 
think we really have to put our heads together and make sure 
that we try and achieve that. 
 
Some of the statistics that have been displayed and some of the 
data that has been talked about in the legislature so far would 
indicate that the young people in particular might have a very 
difficult job in trying to remain in this province. The numbers 
that we’ve been seeing would show a bulge of the population 
certainly up to the 20- to 23-year-old range. We also see a bulge 
in the population from the 60 and on range. 
 
The group of people that would be represented from the age of 
20 to roughly 60, there is a deficit in this province compared to 
other provinces. That is the group of people that have looked at 
the opportunity potential of this province and have said we 
think that we will move somewhere else, we will try to achieve 
our objectives and our opportunities there. And it’s very 
unfortunate because they are the ones that we need to be the 
taxpayers and contribute significantly both economically and 
socially to our province. 
 
That is a real problem that it exists. And I want to use an 
example or two if I could of where this opportunity seems to be 
for these younger people. 
 
I live in Lloydminster as you know, Mr. Speaker. That is my 
constituency. Lloydminster is a very unique situation. As you 
know the border between Saskatchewan and Alberta runs right 
down the middle. And it is very difficult for me not to make a 
comparison within my city, let alone between our two 
provinces, of the difference between the numbers of people 
living on either side of the border, where the opportunities are, 
where the investments are made. I have to make that 
observation because it’s in my city particularly. 
 

One of the things that was done recently was a PST exemption 
in Lloydminster on the Saskatchewan side. And I would like to 
thank the Minister of Finance for making that exemption very 
recently. That is going to be a great assistance to our city in 
Lloydminster. 
 
The point being that in order to attract businesses onto the 
Saskatchewan side in development there, we have to be 
competitive. And in order to be competitive, that concession 
had to be made. And like I said, the city of Lloydminster, the 
chamber of commerce, and the people that live there are 
thankful for that exemption. Now I think we can expect to see 
some more development. 
 
The Lloydminster area generally, Mr. Speaker, is moving along 
and developing very rapidly, as you’re aware, primarily driven 
by the petroleum industry — there’s no doubt about that. But it 
has become a very mature city as well. It has the largest canola 
crushing plant in Canada located in Lloydminster and is 
drawing canola from a very large radius indeed. 
 
It has not only the petroleum industry but it has the 
Bi-Provincial upgrader, which is a very significant investment 
and a very significant employer in our area. And it’s also an 
instrument that has allowed the oil industry to survive through 
the very peaks and valleys of the cyclic . . . normal cycles of 
petroleum prices. The upgrader provides a destination and price 
stabilization on that industry. Very effective. 
 
And also in conjunction of course we have the cogeneration 
electrical plant there that is providing a very significant amount 
of energy to Saskatchewan. There is a . . . Nelson Homes is a 
very respected and a company that produces a lot of homes and 
employment for our area, and it’s well known across both 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. 
 
Now what I’m saying is that the city of and the region around 
Lloydminster is doing very well. But I can’t help making the 
comparisons as to where the new investments are and where 
people are living. 
 
At one time Lloydminster was considered to be a Saskatchewan 
city, and if you lived on the other side of the border, it was 
considered something like maybe across the track. Well here 
today, two-thirds of the population is on the Alberta side, 
one-third is on the Saskatchewan side, and that is changing 
daily. We’re seeing people making the decision to move from 
one side of the city to the other. And those decisions are made, 
like I said, every day. 
 
I’ve been getting e-mails from people. In fact two came in 
today. One of them was from one of my constituents who was 
talking about the taxes in Lloydminster. His statement in an 
e-mail to me was that he was going to have to consider making 
a move because of the lack of opportunity. 
 
The other person that wrote to me was somebody by the name 
of Elizabeth Gauthier, and I wanted to just make a quick quote 
if I could, Mr. Speaker. She was telling me, and I quote: 
 

The different situations are chasing all of our neighbours to 
the Alberta side. I’m not only disappointed, but also afraid 
that the investment in equity that I have in my home may 



March 22, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

 

not be realized if nobody wants us on this particular side. 
 
When I came to Lloyd I actually wanted to stay on the 
Saskatchewan side since we moved from Saskatoon. Now I 
feel that the decision may have been a mistake. 
 

That’s an example of the kind of reaction we’re getting from 
that side of the border. 
 
Now I’m using those examples for a reason, Mr. Speaker. The 
example is that whether you can document the difference in tax, 
you can document the difference in health care costs, whether 
you can document the cost of automobile registration, the fact is 
that people are moving to that side of the border. Why would 
that be if in fact it is so good on one side of the border? 
 
We have to learn from what they’re doing. We shouldn’t be 
criticizing them. And when we’re talking about a comparison in 
that scenario, we should be thinking of that as a model and 
maybe extrapolating what the reason is for right across 
Saskatchewan in terms of the economy and reasons for that 
kind of thing. 
 
People are moving to Alberta. And not only are they moving to 
Alberta, but they are taking their earning capacity with them. 
Also people are moving in their retirement age and taking their 
investments with them. And I’m afraid that just won’t come 
back. 
 
(16:45) 
 
There’s an equivalent of the town of . . . the city of Humboldt 
moving into Alberta every month. Their population is going to 
be increasing to, at their estimate, to 6 million within 25 years. 
That’s their projection of . . . and their vision. Whether that’s 
right or wrong, whether it’s true that there’s a better rate on our 
side than others in terms of taxes, registration . . . car 
registrations, and health costs, the fact is, people are moving. 
And I think that’s a lesson that we have to learn. 
 
When we talk about the signals that I was hopefully looking for 
in the Throne Speech, and I think a lot of the people in 
Saskatchewan were looking for, those signals are so important 
because those kinds of decisions are made, and therefore 
confidence is built up as I talked about that before. 
 
When we talk about agriculture for instance, Mr. Speaker, and 
we spent a great deal of time talking about agriculture and I 
won’t spend a great deal more time, other than just to 
emphasize one or two quick points that I think will make the 
point about the signals and the direction. 
 
What I noticed when we were debating, there was a call from 
the opposition . . . for people opposite, asking us what our 
program was, what our vision was. And that was astounding to 
me, because the government was elected to put those kind of 
programs forward, and they’re just not there. We have asked 
time and time again, right from when AIDA was cancelled back 
in 1992, those kinds of things; those programs and safety nets in 
this case, have just not come forward. So where was the vision 
and where’s the direction that came out of the Throne Speech. 
 
Well we saw the conservation cover plan was an initiative 

under agriculture, and I’m not sure that that’s the proper vision 
that our agriculture needs. We also saw things like research and 
development, and I think those kinds of inputs are critical and 
they’re needed in agriculture. And I’m looking forward to the 
budget speech to see more detail as to where the research and 
development are going. 
 
What we need, Mr. Speaker, is to expand on a vision that is 
workable and a vision that will take us into the next century. 
 
I’ve spent a long time, many years, almost 40 years in the grain 
. . . in the farming and the grain industry, one way or another. 
And I have found that this . . . every year, except for a very few, 
every year has been a crisis year one way or another. There has 
been a demand for payments because of whatever the situation 
is at that particular time. What we’re asking for now is a 
payment to get us through yet one more crisis, and I think we 
have to do that. The sustainability of agriculture is very 
important in this province. 
 
But there are other things that should be brought forward in the 
vision in agriculture so that confidence can start to be built 
toward where we want to go. Let me give you an example. In 
my constituency we are fortunate that we have the ability to 
grow a lot of special crops. That seems to be working well, 
although the prices need to be adjusted again, and for future 
work that has to be a consideration. But we also have the ability 
to maintain large herds of cattle and livestock, particularly 
livestock, and some hogs as well. There’s an area where there 
has been an opportunity for farmers to be able to sustain 
themselves without total dependence on cereal grains, for 
instance. It is the cereal grains that seem to be causing us the 
biggest problem in terms of prices and sustainability. And 
there’s lots of reasons for that and we’ve talked about them in 
our debates. 
 
One of the opportunities that we have also is the ability to have, 
to sustain exotic herds of cattle, for instance elk and bison. The 
elk are certainly under some pressure now with the CWD, or 
the chronic wasting disease, which is somewhat related to the 
mad cow disease that Europe was really quite worried about, 
but it’s been controlled. They’ve taken the industry, they have 
utterly controlled CWD, and it’s recovering very well. 
 
And I think the important part is that there’s an area where there 
can be value added. There is a meat processing plant in my 
hometown; it’s called Diamond 7 Meats. They are wanting to 
put in a processing plant for elk meat — that will in fact be a 
recognized slaughter and a processing plant that will be both 
recognized provincially and federally — so that they can then 
start acquiring elk from right across both Saskatchewan and 
Alberta and maybe from elsewhere too. 
 
They have solved the problem in that industry and they want to 
move ahead with value added. Diamond 7 Meats is getting 
very, very little support in trying to move ahead with this 
initiative. He is virtually frustrated to the point where he is 
either going to give up or he’s going to try to go somewhere 
else where the business opportunity is much more friendly. 
 
There’s lots of those kinds of examples. But that’s the vision of 
where we need to go in that value adding. We need to 
encourage that and not put regulatory roadblocks or regulations 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard March 22, 2001 

 

in place to stymie that. That’s the kind of vision that I was 
hoping to see in the Throne Speech. 
 
In another area that I would like to make a comment on would 
be the area, again around my particular constituency, that has to 
compete in this very unique situation so close to the border. 
 
In my hometown of Maidstone, we recently did an inventory of 
the businesses that are there. We did an inventory of the 
businesses that were recently there and where they’ve gone. 
And as you can imagine they have disappeared. There’s about a 
dozen of these businesses have disappeared out of my 
hometown of Maidstone and have re-established themselves in 
a area of Lloydminster, of course on the other side of the 
border. 
 
The reason again — we can debate the reason — but the fact is 
there’s a dozen businesses that have gone and likely not to 
come back. 
 
In the Throne Speech we heard some idea that work was going 
to be done on highways. Highways, I think, are a very 
important part of our economy. Highways and transportation 
are certainly a economic tool that we have to look at if we’re 
going to develop an economy, and I was very pleased to see that 
there was the direction in the Throne Speech of advancing the 
date of completion of one of the Trans-Canada Highways. 
 
I guess my question would be: if that’s the vision, why is the 
vision applied to just one area of the province? There’s a 
Trans-Canada Highway through my constituency as well. It’s 
being worked on. There has been some development, but it’s 
not moving ahead nearly at the rate that the Department of 
Highways and Transportation had indicated it would. Hopefully 
they can pick up the pace, but the fact is that it’s still going to 
take many, many years before it gets completed. We need a 
vision that the transportation link is in fact an economic 
development link. And that was missing from that Throne 
Speech. 
 
The problem with — also in that Throne Speech — was that 
the, there was a reference to working with the rural 
municipalities, trying to put forward an agreement with them. 
I’m very interested to see how that evolves and what kind of a 
response they’re getting. Because it would appear that the 
government again is trying to download some of their 
responsibility working with the RMs (rural municipality), but 
downloading some of that responsibility once again. 
Unfortunately that’s, that’s all too common a situation. 
 
When we look at, for instance, the taxes in terms of, again 
under this downloading heading, there was a commitment to cut 
the family taxes by $1,000. That was last year’s commitment 
and I think that’s, that’s a very good objective. But what do 
people see? What is the signal that they get? 
 
Last year they found that even though the promise was there, 
the vision was supposed to be there. In practical terms the tax 
was expanded and they found that there was actually an 
increase in tax. And so people are starting to say; gee, if that 
was the vision, the direction, what’s really happening to that? 
 
So I’m looking forward to that because I think it’s been shown 

that if you do in fact reduce the taxes as the Minister of Finance 
is promising to do, and in fact what this Throne Speech had 
talked about — although it’s the taxes that were promised a 
year ago — those are the things, those taxes are the things that 
will drive the economy. 
 
And that has been shown. As an example, the tax considerations 
given to the film industry has in fact spurred an advancement in 
that industry of some consequence. And I think that’s an 
example of where we have to go. We have to keep reducing 
those particular taxes because they do have an economic 
generation and that has to be part of the vision. And I didn’t see 
any fresh vision there at all. 
 
One other comment, if I could, Mr. Speaker and that would be 
about the economy generally. I’m very concerned that the 
economy is very dependent upon the vision, direction and 
confidence that is in place. 
 
The Throne Speech should have been the place for people to 
say yes, I can buy into that, I can see where we’re going. I hope 
that will be corrected with the budget speech, but I really have a 
problem believing that it might. 
 
In order to have a thriving economy we need to have people 
here and we need to have people that are paying the taxes. And 
actually, we have actually lost jobs this year even though there 
was an indication that we gained. 
 
And I want to just quote briefly from the Sask Trends Monitor 
of the February edition that the employment actually reduced in 
Saskatchewan in that particular month. And compared to 
Canada, when employment gained 2 per cent and Manitoba 
gained 1.5 per cent, we did not. We were minus .9 per cent. 
 
A lot of those details in the economy, Mr. Speaker, really 
indicate that things are not going the direction that we had 
hoped and certainly not in the direction that the government has 
promised in the Throne Speech. So I’m disappointed in the 
Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to close by indicating that I will certainly be 
supporting the amendment to the Throne Speech because I think 
it is a valid amendment. 
 
But in fact, Mr. Speaker, I would at this time move to adjourn 
debate so that we can continue next day. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 

 

 


