















































Hansard: May 09, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1011 
 May 9, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty 
to inform you that Mr. Speaker will be unable to be present to 
open today’s sitting. 
 
Prayers 

 
ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 

 
PRESENTING PETITIONS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, when the EMS (emergency medical services) report 
was released several months ago, there was a great deal of 
consternation raised by the possible ramifications of that report 
in the constituency of Cypress Hills. The community of 
Richmound, if the EMS report came into being, would not be 
served by an ambulance any closer than 50 miles away. For that 
reason the people of that community have signed this petition, 
and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is signed by residents of the 
community of Richmound, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition regarding two of the government’s Crown 
corporations — SaskPower and SaskEnergy. Both have recently 
announced significant rate increases for residential and business 
customers. And therefore, the prayer in their petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from the communities of 
Biggar, Rosetown, Springwater, and Sonningdale. And I’m 
pleased to present the petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have a petition to 
present today by people who are concerned about the Fyke 
report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 

minimum, with 24-hour acute care service, emergency, and 
doctoral services as well as laboratory, public health, and 
home care, and long-term care services available to users 
from our district and beyond. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the increasing cost of energy. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, Kinistino, and St. Brieux. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition on behalf of those concerned with the 
prevalence of youth smoking in this province, recognition that 
over 80 per cent of new smokers are children and adolescents. 
The cost to this province is incredible at over $141 million per 
year, and the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thanks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
conversion of some paved highways to gravel. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Bayard, Moose Jaw, Saskatoon, Regina, and Minot, North 
Dakota. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thanks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency, who are concerned about their ambulance service. 



1012 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Gladmar, Radville, 
Minton, Bengough, and Lake Alma. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I too present petitions on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan regarding the EMS report. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the 
Carlyle, Redvers and Bellegarde area. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I also 
have a petition to present today on behalf of the people of the 
Redvers area. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services available to 
the users from our district, southeast Saskatchewan, and 
southwest Manitoba and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Fertile, Redvers, 
Alida areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens from Regina, 
Saskatoon and Bladworth concerned with tobacco use in the 
province. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from citizens 
concerned about the high rates SaskEnergy and SaskPower 
charge. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners who have signed this are from Bladworth, 
Springside, Davidson, Regina, Girvin and Imperial. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition from citizens concerned about the EMS report. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good citizens of Leroy and 
Englefeld. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province on the following 
matters: 
 

To cause the government to take steps to ensure current 
levels of services and care are maintained at the Wadena 
health centre; 
 
To cause the government to provide funding for the 
proposed alcohol and drug abuse treatment centre at 
Weyburn. 

 
And a number of other petitions that are addendums to 
previously presented petitions, addendums to sessional papers 
no. 3, no. 4, no. 5, no. 10, no. 58, and no 121. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice I shall on day no. 38 
ask the government the following question: 
 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1013 

 

To the Minister of CIC: how much rent money did the 
government receive from private producers in the RM of 
Rudy and the RM of Canaan for the use of 
government-owned potato storage facilities in the 
2000-2001 fiscal year; did the Saskatchewan Valley Potato 
Corporation pay rent for use of these same facilities in 
2000-2001; and if so, how much? 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 38 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: who currently sits on the 
Farm Support Review Committee on safety net design; and 
how many times has this committee met since January, 
1999? 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 38 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways: what is total number of 
kilometres of highways in Saskatchewan; how many of 
these kilometres consist of primary highways; how many 
kilometres of the total consist of secondary highways; how 
many kilometres of the total consist of 200- and 
300-numbered highways; and finally, how many kilometres 
of the total consist of gravelled highways? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day 38 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: has the government formulated a 
response to demands for a Justice inquiry as a result of the 
frozen bodies discovered in Saskatoon over one year ago; if 
so, will the minister table his response; and (2) will a 
Justice inquiry be convened; if not, why not? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it gives me a great pleasure today to introduce the 
entire grade 12 class from the community of Eastend. I 
appreciate the fact that they’re here today. I was unavailable last 
year when the grade 12s came — I was called away to fill 
potholes in the vicinity of Val Marie, and with the increased 
highway funding this year, I decided that I would stay here and 
let the potholes heal themselves. 
 
This class of 16 students make this trip on an annual basis — at 
least the class does, not these particular students — and they’re 
accompanied by their teachers, Shelley Morvik and Marie 
Hanson; and the driver I’m assuming, Connie Sue McAtamney. 
 
I just wanted to say for the benefit of the students, that I’m 
looking forward to meeting with you after question period 
today. I know you’ll have questions after question period. And 
I’m looking forward to that opportunity. 
 
And for the teachers and the adults travelling with you, some of 
my colleagues couldn’t pick out the adults from the students, so 
you should feel complimented in that regard as well. 
 

Please welcome this group to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
my pleasure to be able to introduce to you, and through you to 
all my colleagues in the Assembly, 30 grade 5 students seated 
in the west gallery. 
 
They’re accompanied by their teacher, Ms. Deb Bresciani; and 
also accompanied by Genelle Nicholson, Jacquie Furneaux, 
Celine Novak, Rae Kaytor, and Susan Askin. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have had an opportunity to be in St. 
Dominic Savio School and it certainly is a wonderful 
community place to be. They offer Christian education and 
certainly have taken an interest in being a green school and an 
environmental school. 
 
I’m looking forward to meeting with these students after their 
tour, and having a photo with them, and we’ll meet for 
refreshments. 
 
I ask all members to give a warm welcome to the grade 5 
students and their accompanying adults. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a number of guests seated both in the Speaker’s 
gallery and in the west gallery. I did not notice any behind me. 
 
But these are members of Saskatchewan’s Professional 
Firefighters Association. Members will know that they’re here 
for their seventh annual MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) lobby, a job that they do very, very well each year. 
And one that I personally look forward to, an opportunity to 
renew acquaintances and pick up some new ideas from. Later 
this day all members are invited to meet with the firefighters at 
one larger gathering as well. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier in the day I had the pleasure of meeting 
with Gerry Huget, the Saskatchewan president; with Dick 
Hildebrandt, the vice-president; Brian Beletsky, the treasurer; 
and from the national office, Sean McManus. There are other 
firefighters, as I mentioned, in both galleries now. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Supplemental to the Minister of Labour, I’m pleased to be 
joined myself today by two members of the North Battleford 
Fire Protection Service seated in your gallery — Mr. Clint 
Bullerwell and Rob Campbell. 
 
I welcome them and I’m sure all members will look forward to 
chatting with them at the reception this evening. Thank you. 



1014 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with my colleagues, the Labour minister and the member for 
North Battleford, in also welcoming the professional 
firefighters here today. 
 
We had the opportunity this morning to meet with a couple of 
the firefighters, I believe, from Yorkton and had a very good 
meeting with them. And we’re looking forward tonight to also 
attending the reception and meeting many more of them 
tonight. 
 
So I would also ask everyone to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Highway Improvement Projects 
 

Mr. Harper: — More good news for Saskatchewan and our 
road system, Mr. Speaker. Six more highway improvement 
projects have been announced. Four of these projects are 
resurfacing projects taking place on: Highway 13 east of 
Assiniboia, Highway 2 south of Moose Jaw, Highway 32 west 
of Cabri, and Highway 155 north of Green Lake. 
 
Completing the six announced improvements is a lighting 
improvement on Highway 11 and 16, cloverleaf south of 
Saskatoon. And surfacing has began on a 9-kilometre section of 
Highway 1 just east of the Alberta border. 
 
Work for this $3.8 million project began last week and should 
be completed by the end of July. This project alone will create 
67 full-time jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The twinning of our 
national highway system will increase safety to the driving 
public on this busy route. 
 
These new announcements are only the tip of the iceberg, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as Saskatchewan Highways and 
Transportation’s budget this year is a record $311.7 million. 
 
By accelerating our twinning projects and resurfacing 
highways, we are ensuring a transportation system that will 
connect our province to the future. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fundraising for Craik Golf Course 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to talk 
about an event that occurred in my constituency last month. On 
April 7, the community of Craik held a fundraising event for the 
Craik golf course. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this was the fourth successful annual event that 
the organizing committee has held. The evening started off with 
a delicious supper served by Shirley Peddle and her helpers. 
After that there were various games of chance at which 
participants could win a variety of prizes. Throughout the 
evening, various draws were held as well. It was reported that 
over 200 people attended this fundraising event. 

Mr. Speaker, this is a classic example of people coming 
together to work towards a common goal. The community of 
Craik has worked hard to make their community a very 
attractive place to live. With the prime location along Highway 
No. 11, they realize they can offer an attractive stop for tourists 
travelling along the highway. 
 
They already have a regional park complete with an 
old-fashioned dugout house that I spoke about in the Assembly 
a while ago. Now with the funds they have raised towards their 
golf course, they attract tourism to the community which is 
something this government seems to be failing to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate once again the 
community of Craik for their hard work in making their 
community an attractive spot for tourists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon YWCA Women of Distinction Awards 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to 
add to the list of provincial Women of Distinction, the women 
who were honoured in Saskatoon at the YWCA Women of 
Distinction awards ceremony. More than 700 tickets were sold 
for the 20th annual dinner. All proceeds go to fund YWCA 
programs and in particular the Y women’s shelter. 
 
Excellent women were nominated in 11 categories — an honour 
in itself. And as we can all appreciate, choosing a recipient for 
each category was very difficult for the judges. However, award 
recipients were chosen. I want to mention each by name. 
 
Malvina Gersher, a University of Saskatchewan student with a 
very large resumé of activities was named the young woman to 
watch. Three co-founders of the HOPE Cancer Help Centre 
were awarded the health, well-being, and spirituality category 
— Olga Stefaniuk, Lilah Brehon, and Marie Thiesson. 
 
Reverend Pamela Thomas received the award for community 
development and social activism; and for science and 
technology and the environment, Deborah Fergusson; for 
entrepreneurship, Jean McKen; for education, Lillas Brown; for 
culture and heritage, Bernie Cruikshank; Brenda Baker for the 
arts; Suellen Beatty for management; Marilynn Georgas for 
sports and fitness; and Diane Gossen for lifetime achievement. 
 
My congratulations to all recipients and nominees. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres 
Awareness Week 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I’d like to congratulate you on your election to 
this position as of yesterday. 
 
This past Sunday, Estevan Diversified Services held a barbecue 
to wind up SARC (Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation 
Centres) Awareness Week. Mr. Deputy Speaker, Estevan 
Diversified Services had a very impressive display at the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres open house 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1015 

 

last week at the Travelodge Hotel in Regina here. And I was 
very impressed by all the displays, as I’m sure were members 
from both sides of this House. 
 
I would like to thank Wilf Tisdale, manager of the Estevan 
Diversified Services, for so graciously acting as my tour guide 
last Sunday. Wilf proudly showed off the paper and SARCAN 
recycling facilities, as well as their woodworking and craft 
shop. 
 
I extend my congratulations to Wilf Tisdale and all those 
involved at Estevan Diversified Services. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Youth Week 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I had the 
great pleasure of speaking at a business luncheon held to kick 
off Youth Week celebrations in Regina. 
 
Youth Week is hosted by the Rainbow Youth Centre’s peer 
helpers’ program. As many of us here well know, Rainbow 
Youth is Regina’s only non-profit, multi-cultural youth serving 
agency, and it meets the diverse needs of youth between the 
ages of 11 and 25 through recreation, education, and skill 
development. 
 
The peer helpers’ program is one of the many excellent services 
offered by the Rainbow and it is especially noteworthy, Mr. 
Speaker, because it is centred on youth helping other youth. 
Every year the peer helpers coordinate Youth Week to honour 
the achievements of young people and to bring attention to the 
issues which affect youth. 
 
Yesterday’s launch luncheon was well attended, enjoyable, and 
informative. Other events this week will include a symposium 
on youth and violence, a showcase for youth talent, and a 
dance. 
 
Congratulations to Rainbow Youth, to the peer helpers, and to 
everyone who is making a contribution to the success of this 
year’s Youth Week celebration. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Radville Entrepreneur Recognized 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
congratulate and recognize Radville entrepreneur, Natalie 
Regier. Natalie has been a teacher of the primary grades and 
also a resource teacher for some 12 years now. 
 
Three years ago, Natalie began writing her own teaching 
materials, which she found a great benefit for both her regular 
classroom and the resource room. Natalie then started writing 
materials for other teachers and selling them independently. 
 
Following the birth of her daughter, Natalie quit her teaching 
job and began committing more time to writing and promoting 
her material. Natalie’s resource material allows teachers to add 
creativity and imagination to their classrooms. 
 

Natalie has now had her teaching resources published and is 
working towards marketing her product throughout Canada and 
the United States. What started as a way to make her job easier, 
as well as helping other teachers, has turned into an exciting, 
growing business. 
 
I’d like to congratulate Natalie on her success. Natalie is an 
inspiration to all who dare to dream, because through hard work 
and determination she has made her dream a reality. We’d like 
to wish her all the very best in her most exciting new venture. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Abbeyfield House 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. As The Prince of Wales was unable to include Prince 
Albert in his Saskatchewan visit, as you will know, yet in an 
indirect but very significant way, Prince Charles was already 
making his presence felt. He’s the royal patron of Abbeyfield 
homes. 
 
Since the first Abbeyfield House was established in England in 
1956, over 1,100 homes have been developed in 12 countries. 
Abbeyfield is an international, non-profit movement dedicated 
to providing affordable accommodation and companionship to 
seniors. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, thanks to the world of Abbeyfield House of 
Prince Albert — the work of — we have our own residence. In 
1995 a small group of volunteers had the idea and the vision. 
Since then the society has grown to over 80 people, many of 
whom provide volunteer work on the construction of this home 
and will continue to help in its operation once the residents 
move in. 
 
The target date for occupancy is the end of June. Ten single 
persons and two couples will move into the 14 units, with space 
for a manager, and a visitor suite. 
 
This is a good project, Mr. Speaker, and I’m very proud that 
Sask Housing approved a grant of $150,000 from the Centenary 
Fund, along with financial support from the city and several 
businesses, service clubs, and individuals. In particular I want 
to mention the Prince Albert Rotary Club, which donated the 
building site. 
 
To Sylvia Gent, president of the society, to the future residents 
of Abbeyfield House, and to all who have made this a reality, 
congratulations and best wishes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Molson Brewery 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well unfortunately 
today Saskatchewan experienced another turn of the screw by 
the socialist government opposite. Regina lost its brewery 
today, not because its beer is bad — or so I’m told — not 
because its workforce is weak, not because its bottom line is 
poor. So why did Regina lose its brewery today? 
 



1016 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

The reason, Mr. Speaker, not enough people in Saskatchewan to 
form a large enough market. Ever since the 1940s, the 
CCF-NDP (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation-New 
Democratic Party) have kept our population from growing, Mr. 
Speaker. They have caused some half million people to move 
out of this province — and thereto today, went the brewery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Achievement in Business Excellence 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, Battlefords’ residents took time out from their 
problems last night to salute the successes of local businesses 
that make the Battlefords the trading centre of the northwest. I 
was delighted to join with over 500 people at the Tropical Inn 
for the annual Battlefords Business Excellence awards banquet 
in the Tropical Inn. 
 
Our host Pius Pfeifer received the heritage award. Business of 
the year was the newly renovated Battleford’s and District 
Co-op. Other winners were: property appearance, Doug’s Paint 
Shoppe; new business, Vera’s Restaurant; customer service, 
Tirecraft Auto Centre; young entrepreneur, Rob Deschsner of 
Pizza World; and community involvement, M&M Meats. 
 
Congratulations to all the nominees and winners, and to a 
community that is pulling together in response to the challenges 
it faces, and as a result will emerge united and stronger. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Water Quality Infrastructure Program 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Yesterday the House of Commons passed a 
resolution calling for national water quality standards. While 
the Saskatchewan Party supports the intent of this motion, we 
also recognize that national standards have little value if we 
don’t have the infrastructure we need to provide safe drinking 
water. 
 
Today in Saskatchewan, as far as we know, 37 communities are 
under a boil-water advisory, and tens of millions of dollars are 
needed to upgrade water treatment facilities all across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The money needed is beyond our fiscal capacity of 
municipalities, or the province. That’s why today the 
Saskatchewan Party is calling for a national water quality 
infrastructure program to deal with this growing problem all 
across Canada and so that we ensure that we never see another 
situation like Walkerton or North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier support our call for a national 
water quality infrastructure program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m 
pleased to respond on behalf of the government. And just to 
remind the citizens of Saskatchewan and the members opposite, 
that two years ago there was a $10 million infrastructure 
program, funding for municipal infrastructure that the province 
introduced. A year ago, once again, in addition to that there was 
$5 million for municipal infrastructure through the Centenary 
Fund. 
 
This year the federal government has provided $12 million, an 
injection to our budget, to support a tri-partite program to build 
our municipal infrastructure. This year with the grants in lieu 
of, which reached $13.1 million dollars, there has been 
continued support for municipalities, including — including, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — the $33 million to school boards. So 
there has been ongoing continuous support to municipalities to 
care for the needs of our citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to thank 
the minister for underscoring the statement I made that the 
funding is certainly terribly inadequate. He reinforced that in 
his answer. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, if there’s anything that’s good, anything good that 
is going to come out of the situation in North Battleford, it’s 
that it’s brought the issue of water quality to national attention. 
 
Many experts have said that the issue of water quality is a 
ticking time bomb. We should not wait for this bomb to go off 
again before we act. Mr. Speaker, because of North Battleford, 
Saskatchewan now has the opportunity to take a lead on this 
issue. 
 
Will the Premier contact the Prime Minister and other 
provincial premiers and see that the development of a national 
water quality infrastructure program becomes a top priority at 
the next federal-provincial first ministers’ conference? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
additional funding, of course the federal government obviously 
recognizes now, following the lead of Saskatchewan that 
initiated municipal infrastructure programs with $10 million 
two years ago. 
 
This year the province has an agreement with the federal 
government for Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program 
for $113 million of federal-provincial money for municipal 
infrastructure. The province’s share, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
$56.7 million. With the municipal portion added in, that will be 
$170 million over the next five years. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those communities that have had 
advisories and have applied for help out of this program have 
been approved for that assistance. It was the initiative of the 
province that got this money here to help these people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1017 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I wish the minister wouldn’t read his scripted answers 
and actually listen to the question. Because we’re talking about 
inadequate funding and how we can improve on that by 
consulting and working with the federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if anyone really has a firm grasp of 
how big this problem is in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. North Battleford 
continues to be under a boil-water advisory. Thirty-seven other 
communities in Saskatchewan are also under a boil-water 
advisory. And all across Saskatchewan, after years of cutbacks 
in municipalities, there has been widespread deterioration in 
their water treatment facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of waiting for the next water crisis to come 
along, the government should get out in front of this problem. 
 
Will the government, will the government conduct an overall 
review of water treatment facilities all across Saskatchewan to 
determine the current condition of these facilities and how 
much money would be needed to bring them up to acceptable 
standards? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I regret that the 
Leader of the Opposition would not want to hear the facts about 
monies that this province and the actions that they’ve taken to 
assist communities throughout the province. 
 
There have been ongoing reviews of the water situation across 
the province, and as a result there have been precautionary 
drinking water advisories given. Over half of those 
communities now have approval under the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program to assist them in 
making sure that their quality of water is adequate for their 
citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister also knows that many requests for funding have been 
turned down under these very programs for lack of funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the Saskatchewan Party has called for a 
national water quality infrastructure program. We are also 
calling on the Premier to make this a top priority issue at the 
first ministers’ conference. 
 
Immediately after question period, I will be calling for an 
emergency debate on this issue. I will be asking members on 
both sides of this House to support our call for a national water 
quality infrastructure program, and to send a strong message to 
Ottawa by unanimously passing a motion on this proposal. 
 
To the Premier: in light of recent events, will he allow this 
important debate to take place? Will the Premier allow this 
important debate to take place, and will he support our motion 
calling for a national water quality infrastructure program? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the federal 
government obviously recognized the lead that the province of 
Saskatchewan took in putting money up front two years ago for 
infrastructure programs that addressed the problems and the 
issues that we are now concerned about. 
 
This has been ongoing. These communities that have had the 
precautionary boil-water advisories, Mr. Deputy Speaker, have 
already had monies approved to correct those problems. And 
I’ll be happy to read the list of all those communities for the 
members opposite. 
 
I just wonder why the official opposition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
voted against a budget that would add 10 additional people to 
inspect and examine our water quality system throughout the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Reporting to Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management 

 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Yesterday I asked the Minister of Environment a series of 
questions about routine operating policies and procedures 
within his department. In every single instance the minister said 
wait for the inquiry, completely abrogating his responsibilities 
as a minister of the Crown. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party does look forward to the work of the 
inquiry but that does not absolve the minister of his duty to 
answer basic questions, and what his department knew and 
when they knew it. 
 
The minister has now had another full day to find the answers 
to these questions. So I will ask again: how many times in the 
past year did the city of North Battleford report the discharge of 
untreated sewage to SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) as required by their very own 
legislation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. First of all, I want to say that this is a very serious 
matter as I mentioned time and time again. And once again, I 
want to point out over the last year SERM has not been 
contacted by the city of North Battleford as to when and where 
they dump their raw sewage. And I want to re-emphasize that 
— over the past year SERM has not been contacted at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I told the member time and time again yesterday 
that I have a full copy of the report that was done by SERM 
trying to assess what went wrong in North Battleford, and today 
I will table that document to make sure, to make sure that he 
knows exactly what he’s dealing with here, Mr. Speaker. Very, 
very important, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The opposition talks about a number of arguments they have in 
terms of safe water. First of all, they called for an inquiry. We 
established the inquiry. Then the next day they say, oh, it’s a 
cover-up. And then the member gets up and asks me yesterday, 



1018 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

why weren’t you at that national ministers’ meeting talking 
about safe water? Well, Mr. Speaker, I was in this very 
Chamber voting in favour of a budget to increase our staff by 
10 while he voted against. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well 
perhaps the minister can tell us: was he or was anyone in his 
department aware of any unreported discharges of sewage 
during the three-week period that the water treatment plant 
facility in North Battleford was not fully functioning? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Let me re-emphasize and definitely say 
that SERM was not notified by the city of North Battleford of 
any dumping of raw sewage by the city’s treatment plant into 
the river over the past year and over a past number of years, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We 
don’t understand why we aren’t getting the direct answers, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, to these questions. Either the city was 
reporting the discharges, or they weren’t — one or the other. 
Which is it? Either SERM is aware of unreported sewage 
discharges or they weren’t. Which is it? 
 
The minister keeps asking us not to speculate. Well we’re not 
speculating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re asking some 
straightforward questions here, looking for some 
straightforward answers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister point-blank answer the 
question? Is he or isn’t he aware of any unreported discharges? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, once again I stand 
up and I give the definite answer today — no speculation — 
that no member of SERM was contacted by the city of North 
Battleford to say that there was raw sewage being dumped into 
the river. Again I re-emphasize that no official of SERM was 
advised by the city of North Battleford. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to point out that in the event that 
the member does not get the full details, I’ve said before and I’ll 
say it again, the report’s right here, and we’ll give him the full 
information. 
 
As a minister, I was advised on April 30, the same day that the 
rest of the SERM officials were advised. And, Mr. Speaker, 
again I ask the member not to speculate. This is a very 
important issue. We will provide all the timely details to the 
media and to the opposition and to anybody in the province that 
wants to know. 
 
We have nothing to hide, Mr. Speaker, and we’re looking 
forward to the inquiry. We want to see what went wrong, 
where, when, and how. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is the minister then saying that no one at 
SERM was aware of any discharge of raw sewage into the 
North Saskatchewan River prior to April 30, the date it was first 
reported to the minister, even though it was in the media on 
April 25? 
 
And yesterday, I might remind the minister, he couldn’t even 
remember who it was that had reported it to him on April 30. Is 
that when SERM first became aware of any raw sewage 
discharge — yes or no? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — We’ve tabled the document. That 
document was released to the public by the city and with 
SERM. 
 
And again I point out, when the event occurred, in terms of my 
knowledge of when the spill, if there’s any spill that occurred in 
the river, it was April 30. 
 
And what I want to share with that member is very, very 
important, is that document went and we done a thorough 
inspection of the plant. And upon inspection of the sewage 
treatment plant, that’s when we noticed that there could have 
been some dumping, and we asked the questions. And that was 
when we were notified, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I want to point out as well, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
have gone out to the Battlefords, and we’re working with the 
community, and we’re doing daily testing — daily testing — of 
the water to make sure that we’re able to ascertain that the water 
levels are, where they should be, and this is safe water. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, after we’re done making sure 
that the water treatment plant is safe and within standards, then 
we want to flush the entire system out so we’re able to do what 
we said we were going to do, and that’s to make sure that we 
have no more threat to the public health of the people of North 
Battleford and area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Canada West Report on Demographic Patterns 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My 
question is for the Minister of Economic Development. 
Yesterday in Saskatoon the Canada West Foundation held a 
seminar on economic and demographic trends in the four 
Western provinces. Unfortunately, the news out of the meeting 
was grim for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatchewan has the highest percentage 
of residents age 15 and over 65 in Western Canada. 
Saskatchewan has the smallest number of people in the prime 
taxpaying years, and that’s between the age of 15 and 65. It’s a 
percentage of the population. 
 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1019 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is a demographic time bomb that 
threatens our ability in our province to provide even most basic 
public services. What is the minister doing to defuse this 
demographic time bomb before it really blows up? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member from Lloydminster that this government has been 
delivering budgets since 1991 that have been very consistent in 
a number of ways. 
 
Firstly, we have attempted to get control of the deficit 
budgeting and we won that battle, sir. And the reason we did 
that is because the amount of money that was going into service 
Tory debt from the 1980s was consuming program dollars to 
create jobs and to create education and to create infrastructure 
here in this province. And, Mr. Speaker, we won that battle. 
 
As well we’ve been cutting the debt load in this province 
consistently when we had the ability to do so, so that we aren’t 
serving the debt to the degree that we did before. We’ve made 
the largest tax decrease in the history of this province. Part of it 
is being implemented this year and some more of it next year. 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we have built a healthy 
economy in this province. 
 
We’ve got some difficult challenges facing us in agriculture but 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan will 
win this battle by working with their government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Canada West 
Foundation also released research indicating 40 per cent of our 
young people, those who are between the ages of 18 and 24, 
plan to leave Saskatchewan within the next five years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is yet another indication of 10 years 
of failed NDP economic policy. But it’s also a wake-up call 
because if we keep heading down that road the NDP has put us 
on, Saskatchewan’s tax base will continue to shrink and our 
ability to fund basic public services like health and education 
and the infrastructure will continue to deteriorate. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, will the minister admit that the NDP’s 
gross mismanagement of the economy is fuelling the continuing 
exodus of young people from Saskatchewan? And will the 
minister tell us what he is going to do to fix the economic mess 
that the NDP government has created for us. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, that member can 
continue to ask the questions that have been prepared for him. I 
want to have them look on a broader perspective at what this 
government has done working with the business community, 
working with Aboriginal community to develop jobs and job 
opportunities. 
 
And I want him to look around his home community and the 
increase in the oil and gas activity. 
 
And I’d also like him to look around northern Saskatchewan in 
terms of the hundreds of millions of dollars that have been 

invested in forestry development, which includes First Nations 
people as partners, because that is the largest growing 
population of our youth, is the Aboriginal people. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, these were the same people that 
opposed the gaming industry when it was introduced in this 
province that now employs hundreds of young Aboriginal 
people, First Nations people. 
 
But I want to say what’s more important, Mr. Speaker, is the 
attitude of the people of this province which is so inconsistent 
from the doom and the gloom that you hear from those people 
every day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. When I 
look around my city I see where the development is and where 
people are moving to — it’s very plain. And whatever the NDP 
is doing in Saskatchewan right now, it just isn’t working. And 
the situation is getting desperate, according to the Canada West 
Foundation, as well as a lot of the people that were at that 
meeting yesterday in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people want this provincial government to focus 
on highways and health care and safe drinking water. But what 
we’re getting from this NDP government is Crown corporations 
running out of control, deteriorating infrastructures, and 
non-competitive taxes. No wonder almost half of our young 
people have written off this NDP government and decided to 
leave the province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, will the minister finally admit the NDP’s 
economic policies are a failure and will he tell us what specific 
measures his government is taking to stop this exodus of young 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I will admit a failure 
in this province, and it’s the failure of the members of the 
Saskatchewan Party to win the hearts and the minds of the 
people of this province because of their negative attitude. And 
that’s the failure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other part of the failure is the budget that’s 
before this House, which these people vote against, that put 
more money into highways, that put more money into 
education, and that put more money into health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he talks about infrastructure — $319 million is the 
most that’s ever been spent in this province to rebuild 
highways, to rebuild infrastructure because of the growing 
demand on the oil and gas industry, the growing potash 
industry, and the uranium industry which is on the cusp of a 
great big leap forward because of energy shortages across North 
America. 
 
Now they can holler as loud as they want, Mr. Speaker, but this 
population has grown since 1991, and they know it, unlike the 
record of the previous administration where they lost 33,000 
jobs from ’87 to ’91. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve got some challenges, but we are going to 
succeed — this province is going to succeed in spite of them. 



1020 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Property Assessment 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, my question’s for the minister of Municipal 
Government. On Monday the city of Swift Current voted to 
dump SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency) and hire a private contractor to do their property 
assessment. And Swift Current is just the latest in a list of cities 
that has opted out of SAMA; North Battleford, Lloydminster 
have also decided to look elsewhere for assessment services. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what is wrong at SAMA? Why did Swift 
Current decide to join other cities and look for their . . . services 
SAMA’s providing elsewhere? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, again for the 
edification of members opposite. SAMA is an independent 
agency, and under the Act, those communities do have the 
option of opting out. 
 
However, there still needs to be an assessment and an 
evaluation carried out in accordance with the manual that’s 
provided, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That option exists. They have 
certain requirements that need to be meet under The 
Assessment Management Agency Act, and as long as those 
commitments are met, as long as those criteria are met, they 
have the opportunity to opt out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, municipal governments and school divisions 
rely on SAMA to give them reliable property assessment 
information. More than $1 billion in tax revenue is raised each 
year from the property tax base and most of that billion dollars 
is based on the assessment information that comes from SAMA. 
 
But many local governments are saying the assessments they’re 
getting from SAMA are seriously flawed. And, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, some have already decided to go elsewhere to get 
these services provided. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not good enough for the minister to simply 
shrug his shoulders and gaze at his navel. The problems at 
SAMA are obviously very serious. 
 
What is the minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, doing about 
municipalities’ loss of confidence in SAMA and its property 
assessment services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I didn’t realize my 
navel was over there, because that’s where I was gazing. 
 
But let me just reiterate, the communities across this province 
have the option of opting out of having SAMA do their assess 
. . . 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Regardless of which community, I’m not just shrugging my 
shoulders. 
 
The communities have the autonomy to choose whomever they 
wish, but they still must carry out their assessment in 
accordance with the rules, in accordance with the manual that’s 
established by all the participants that the hon. member 
mentioned that need to have input into ensuring proper 
evaluations of properties throughout the province, no matter 
what community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Department of Labour’s New Information Booklet 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
young and first-time workers are at greater risk of being injured 
at work than are their more experienced colleagues. We know 
workers between the ages of 15 and 24 make up 16 per cent of 
the workforce and this same age group accounts for a full 
quarter of the injuries reported to the Workers’ Compensation 
Board. 
 
We also know that young and first-time workers are generally 
anxious to know more about their rights and responsibilities at 
work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that young and first-time workers 
should have every opportunity to enjoy safe and positive 
experiences in the workforce. I’m therefore pleased to inform 
the Assembly that this week the Department of Labour is 
distributing a new information booklet aimed at helping new 
workers as they enter the workforce. The Guide for New 
Workers contains practical information on more than 30 
workplace topics to help young and other new workers to have 
positive first-time work experiences. 
 
The guide includes information on workplace rights and 
responsibilities, occupational health and safety, and numerous 
other topics including valuable information for workers to use 
during the four phases of the job cycle. The four phases of the 
job cycle, Mr. Speaker, are, one, entering the workforce; 
starting the job; during the job; and of course, leaving the job. 
 
Sample copies of the booklet which is part of the department’s 
Ready for Work program are being distributed to high schools 
and employment centres across Saskatchewan this week. 
 
It’s very appropriate that this new resource is being distributed 
this week, Mr. Speaker, as this is North American Occupational 
Safety and Health Week. And this year’s NAOSH (North 
American Occupational Safety and Health) theme is Prevention 
is the Cure, and nowhere is prevention more important than 
with new workers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan workplaces are facing the challenge 
of changing demographics, and we must look to young people 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1021 

 

to fill the jobs that baby boomers are leaving. It’s therefore 
incumbent upon all of us to work together to ensure that new 
and first-time workers have the kind of first-time work 
experiences that will encourage them to recognize their abilities 
and become full contributors to the Saskatchewan workforce. 
 
The Guide for New Workers was prepared as part of a 
partnership with Saskatchewan Labour and in consultation with 
teachers, employment counsellors, students, young workers, 
and other employment-related agencies. It’s an example of how 
Saskatchewan Labour is working with employers, employees, 
teachers, and students to help young people prepare to join the 
labour force. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the guide, and it will be distributed 
certainly to all members today and tomorrow and beyond. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. May I at this 
time congratulate you on your election yesterday. 
 
I’d like to respond to the minister’s statement. As the minister 
has said, that it’s very important that young and first-time 
workers gain experience and are aware of the dangers — 
possible dangers — in the workplace. And definitely the young 
people between the ages of 15 and 24 are at risk — as the 
minister has said, make up 16 per cent of the Saskatchewan 
workforce and unfortunately has one-quarter of all the injury 
claims at Workers’ Compensation Board. As was said, it’s very 
important that the young people and the first-time workers have 
every opportunity to enjoy a safe and positive experience at the 
workplace. 
 
This guide, on the face of it — I haven’t seen it — but on the 
face of it, it seems to be a positive step helping young people 
and first-time workers enter the workforce, starting a new job, 
and their experience doing a job, and also leaving a job. As I 
mentioned in my private member’s statement yesterday, about 
the North American Occupational Safety and Health Week, 
prevention is the cure. And we all must — as a society, and as 
employers, and employees — take up that challenge to prevent 
injuries. 
 
As the minister has stated, as the economy grows and the 
workplaces develop, we will need these workers as much as 
they need the jobs. And it’s very interesting to note, in the paper 
today, the number of young people that will be leaving over the 
next five . . . as discussed in the foundation, it says that 40 per 
cent of Saskatchewan people 18 to 24 are anticipating moving 
out of the province within five years. 
 
And that really brings up the question, not only do we need 
workers in the workforce, and we need jobs. We have to have a 
place for young people to work in Saskatchewan. And that 
means getting jobs, and building jobs, and creating jobs in the 
province for the young people to keep them in the province. 
And these statistics are unacceptable to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
It also goes on to say that the guide was prepared as a 
partnership with Saskatchewan Labour, in consultation with 

teachers, employment counsellors, students, young workers, 
and other employment related agencies. 
 
Unfortunately, nowhere in here do I see that it was in the 
consultation with employers or small businesses in the 
province. And I think they’ve totally missed a very important 
part of the equation in Saskatchewan, that the employers and 
small businesses must be included in all these areas concerning 
employment. And not only the responsibility of the employers 
and the new employees in the workforce, but the government 
must take into account the small businesses in this province and 
work with them so that not only at first that there are jobs, but 
there are also safe jobs in the province. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The other area I’d like to speak on, on this matter, is also the 
young people in this province should not only be informed of 
their rights in the workforce, but also have an opportunity to 
become aware of the opportunities in building their own small 
business, and not only be a worker in the workforce, but being a 
small-business owner. 
 
This information the minister has prepared kind of begs the 
question, is this guide really a statement that hints at the 
taxpayers of this province paying to promote unionization of 
young people in the province. And I think we would like to take 
a look at this guide to make sure that this is not the direction 
that the government is taking, and really encourage the 
government to also include in the equation small businesses and 
young people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to move a 
motion of urgent and pressing necessity under rule 46. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Proceed. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Water Quality in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the last few days or so have 
come as a real revelation for many in our province. The 
problems we have seen in North Battleford with their water 
drives home the point of how important it is that our citizens 
have access to good quality drinking water. 
 
This is further driven home by the fact that there are over three 
dozen other communities in this province currently under 
boil-water orders. And, Mr. Speaker, we are dealing with water 
quality control systems and infrastructure in our province that is 
rapidly aging and in serious need of upgrading and, in some 
cases, even replacement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the municipalities cannot afford to do this work on 
their own, but the work must be done. The province of 
Saskatchewan cannot afford to do this work on its own, but 
again I insist the work must be done. 
 



1022 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

It will only be with the participation of the federal government, 
along with the province and municipalities, that we can do the 
necessary work to keep our water quality infrastructure 
operating at an acceptable level and that people can be 
comfortable . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, on a point of 
order. 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I would argue that that member is 
entering into debate. That is not the proper protocol. He has 
asked for leave to introduce a motion. That is appropriate, but 
debate in this forum . . . in this format is not. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. On the 
point of order, the Leader of the Official Opposition, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is merely explaining why this is an emergency 
motion, why it is an emergency and needs to be presented 
immediately, as the procedures of this House call for. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — It is understood under rule 46 that it 
is a brief explanation as to the matter of the emergency debate, 
so I would ask the Hon. Leader of the Opposition to please put 
his motion forward with brief comments before his motion. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Water Quality in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate that. 
And as I was making the case for the emergency debate I 
actually only had a couple of sentences left, so I will continue 
where I left off, Mr. Speaker, saying that it is only with the 
co-operation of the federal government, municipalities, and the 
province that we can restore confidence in our water. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move the following motion . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I move the following motion, seconded by the member 
from Carrot River Valley: 
 

That this Assembly . . . 
 

Therefore, Mr. Speaker, we believe that a motion should be 
debated: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government, in 
consultation with provincial governments, to develop and 
fund a national water quality infrastructure program and 
that this initiative be added to the agenda of the next 
federal-provincial first ministers’ conference. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, we are not prepared to 
debate this without the proper notice having been given and it 
wasn’t given. We were not notified, and for that reason we’re 
willing to debate this on a motion tomorrow, once proper notice 

has been given. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 

POINT OF ORDER 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Please state your point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the Government House 
Leader rose, not on a point of order, not on a point of privilege, 
not as a question of debate, but his comments were not part of 
the entire procedures of this House and should be struck from 
the record. Mr. Speaker, I so ask. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I will take that under advisement. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. The hon. 
member will recognize that this House has no tradition of 
striking the records. He knows that fully well, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think it is in order to simply find his point of order not 
well taken. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I will take that under advisement. I 
will take that under advisement and report back. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’ll convert. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Question 152 is converted to motions 
for return (debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m extremely 
pleased to stand up today and table the response to question 
153. Being an open and accountable government, we’re very 
pleased to answer the questions. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Questions 153 and 156 are answered. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am extremely 
pleased this afternoon to stand and table a response to question 
no. 154, being an open and accountable government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Question 154 is answered. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I am once 
again extremely pleased to stand and table a response to 
question no. 155. Being an open and accountable government, 
of course we want to answer their questions. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Question 155 is answered. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Once again, 
I’m very pleased to stand and table a response to question no. 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1023 

 

156. Being an open and accountable government, of course we 
want to answer their questions. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Question 156 is answered. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 15 - The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
pleased today to rise to move second reading of The Credit 
Union Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
In 1998, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government introduced The 
Credit Union Act. This legislation provided credit unions with a 
new legal framework to take the system into this century and 
the Act was proclaimed in February 1999. 
 
The credit union system has worked with the new Act and the 
regulations for a little over a year now, and I’m pleased to 
report, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that credit unions are generally 
pleased with the new Act. As expected with any major piece of 
legislation, the credit unions have identified areas that require 
correction, further clarification and change, and the government 
is pleased to address those areas in this Bill. 
 
During the process leading up to the development of the new 
Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the regulatory framework for the 
credit union system was closely examined, and an important 
component of that framework is self-regulation. Not 
surprisingly, credit union committees play a very important role 
in self-regulation. 
 
Credit unions have requested improvements in relation to two 
such committees, the Conduct Review Committee and the Audit 
Committee. 
 
The Conduct Review Committee is responsible for ensuring 
appropriate practices and procedures are put in place inside the 
credit union when dealing with certain related parties. The 
committee ensures that business considerations, combined with 
the overriding purpose of credit unions to serve members, is the 
basis on which business dealings or transactions occur with 
related parties of the credit union. 
 
Credit union experience has been that current provisions 
dealing with related party transactions are difficult to 
understand, administer, and apply. Accordingly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this government has responded by introducing 
amendments in this Bill which will address those concerns. 
 
Another important committee is the Audit Committee. This 
committee is responsible for the review of audit procedures and 
works in conjunction with the credit union auditor. 
 
Certain sections of the Act have caused some confusion as to 
whether the president and vice-president of the credit union can 
sit as members. Amendments here are being proposed, which 
clarify that these officers can in fact sit as members. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the balance of amendments addressed, 

address detailed corrections such as grammatical and spelling 
errors identified over the past year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
amend The Credit Union Act, 1998. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, Bill 15 relates to a very important part of the 
Saskatchewan economy, and that is our credit unions. Mr. 
Speaker, they are spread across this province. They provide a 
lot of support for particularly rural communities, but very much 
so the larger urban communities as well, Mr. Speaker. Each one 
of those has a number of credit unions in. So it’s an integral part 
of our entire life and lifestyle in Saskatchewan. 
 
The changes being proposed in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, some of 
them seem to be pretty straightforward and valid reasons. The 
change to allow the president and vice-presidents of a credit 
union to be a part of the audit board certainly seems to be 
eminently reasonable, Mr. Speaker, and you would have to ask, 
why was this not the case originally? What was the reasoning 
that these members were excluded from sitting on their very 
own audit boards? 
 
Mr. Speaker, another part though brings into question some 
reasons of what is happening, and what are they? The Conduct 
Review Committee, Mr. Speaker, what is that committee about? 
Who sits on that committee? Is that a committee made up of 
members of the board? Is it made up of members of the credit 
union at large — the individual members that have paid their $5 
fee to be a member of the credit union? Or is it made up of 
staff? 
 
I think that’s a very important question, Mr. Speaker, and needs 
further explanation to determine what the value of it is. Who are 
they reviewing and who sits on that board, Mr. Speaker, I think 
is very critical to the operation of every credit union. 
 
The Bill also deals with what is termed related parties. Again, 
Mr. Speaker, there is a need to determine exactly what is meant 
by the term related parties. And who does that relate to? Is that 
employees of the credit union? Is that members . . . is that the 
board members and their families? Exactly what do they mean 
by the term related parties, Mr. Speaker? And how is this going 
to work in context of the operations of small credit unions and 
large credit unions, Mr. Speaker? 
 
(14:45) 
 
In some communities where a credit union exists, there may be 
members of virtually every family sitting as either a board 
member or as an employee of that credit union. Does that mean 
that all of the members virtually of that credit union are 
somehow a related party to the credit union and those 
transactions should then be reviewed by a conduct review 
committee? 
 
I think those are some of the questions that need to be asked of 
the credit unions themselves, Mr. Speaker, before a 
determination can be made on whether or not this is a good and 
valid piece of legislation; whether it’s going to serve the needs 



1024 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

of the credit unions, of the credit union members, and the 
people of Saskatchewan as a whole, Mr. Speaker. Therefore I 
would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 9 — The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
House today to move second reading of The Power Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
The Power Corporation Act which governs SaskPower was 
drafted first in 1949 and these are the first substantive changes 
since 1996. Over the past several years, the electrical industry 
has evolved and it obviously continues to change, Mr. Speaker. 
The amendments that I am introducing today reflect some of 
those industry changes. The amendments also relate to 
SaskPower’s commitment to continue to provide customers 
with safe, reliable, and cost-effective source of electricity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments are especially important as 
SaskPower prepares to introduce the open access transmission 
tariff, or OATT as it is commonly referred to. The OATT will 
mean that third-party suppliers of electricity will be allowed 
access or rent, if you will, of SaskPower’s transmission lines. 
SaskPower customers will also benefit from the corporation’s 
access to other utilities for importing and exporting electricity. 
 
The amendments will also help bring the Act into alignment 
with other Crown corporations’ Acts. The Bill includes some 
wording changes related to the collection of delinquent 
accounts, some access matters, as well as easement issues 
relating to moving power lines to correct a hazardous situation. 
There are no direct financial implications to these amendments, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In summary, these changes will enable SaskPower to meet the 
challenges of a constantly evolving electrical industry, continue 
to carry on business in a responsible manner, and impact 
positively on the continued reliability of the province’s 
electrical system. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of a Bill to 
amend The Power Corporation Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, it is my privilege to 
stand today and speak on Bill No. 9, an Act to amend The 
Power Corporation Act. 
 
On the face of it, as the minister has said, it seems that it’s . . . 
many of the amendments are really housekeeping in nature, but 
I’d like to point out a few things. And some questions arise out 
of some of the explanation notes as far as the comments 
concerning advance of deregulation and the amendments in the 
Act. And it just makes one wonder is that leaving SaskPower 
really with a leg up on the private sector in many areas, and is it 
reducing competition in the province. 
 
And when you talk about authority to transmit power across the 
province on behalf of third parties also raises the same question. 
And I wonder if the Act is again limiting the private sector in 
those areas. 

The minister also mentioned a number of things concerning 
construction of power lines, under a parcel of land, and so on 
and so forth. This brings to mind health issues and the rights of 
people or the people . . . or the owners of the land that do not 
have rights to stop power lines overhead or otherwise, and the 
whole area of the health concerns concerning power lines and 
the research that’s been done into that area. 
 
The minister also mentioned concerning SaskPower’s ability to 
enter the land adjoining right-of-way for the purpose of 
construction and operation and maintenance, and I was just 
wondering if this Bill says anything to the compensation to 
owners of land and the amount that landowners would receive 
in compensation if there’s any damage done to crops or 
property and equipment. 
 
Again, the explanation for the amendment that gives SaskPower 
the explicit right to consent to not only supply but also the 
transportation. Again, it makes one wonder about the lack of 
commitment to opening up any competition in this province to 
competitors. 
 
And lastly, Mr. Speaker, I don’t see anything in this Bill that 
reins in or possibly stops the corporation from making any more 
unwise foreign investments, as a number of Crowns have done, 
and this is an area that’s of great concern to the Saskatchewan 
people. We believe the investments and jobs should be created 
in this province. 
 
And just like The Leader-Post from today says, that 40 per cent 
of Saskatchewan people age from 18 to 24 are anticipating 
leaving the province in the next five years. And I think the 
government owns the Crowns and should take steps to increase 
the opportunity for young people to have jobs in this province. 
 
And there is many questions, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to take 
this back and talk to all the stakeholders and many of the people 
of this province that have concerns with this Bill. And at this 
time I’d like to adjourn. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 10 — The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like 
to address today some of the issues brought forth by Bill No. 
10, which is of course The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act. 
 
There are several aspects of this Bill that I would like to address 
today, Mr. Deputy . . . or Mr. Speaker. It is very important 
when we look at our oil and gas sector that all issues in regard 
to environment and of course economics come into play. 
 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1025 

 

In particular, this amendment provides for a program that will 
ensure Saskatchewan oil and gas wells and facilities-related 
sites are properly disposed of, reclaimed once they are no 
longer needed. 
 
These wells, which are commonly known as orphan wells, are 
wells which are temporary suspended or shut down, or due to 
low — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker — due to low prices or rates of 
production are shut down. They’re also wells I guess that are 
abandoned or companies that have gone broke or have since 
gone out of business, have left them. 
 
I understand there’s as many as 10,000 non-producing sites and 
wells. And of course that number is growing by roughly 200 to 
500 wells per year. 
 
SaskEnergy and mine officials have stated that there are, right 
now, are fewer than 20 wells have been properly abandoned or 
shut down by their owners, which I would say says a lot 
towards this industry. With that many wells, I would say this 
industry so far polices itself and is a very responsible industry. 
 
Although we must remain diligent as to whether a lot more of 
these wells will be properly shut down in the months and years 
ahead. 
 
As with 10,000 non-producing wells, an increase of possibly 
500 wells per year would dictate that we must be very careful in 
seeing that these sites are properly cleaned up. 
 
I’m very encouraged by the fact that this new oil and gas 
orphan program is modelled after a similar program in Alberta, 
and one that has been working quite well there I understand. It 
is always of note when Saskatchewan decides to follow the 
Alberta example. 
 
I understand, Mr. Speaker, that this industry will pay into this 
fund through annual fees, which is important. The industry will 
look after itself. There’s a few questions I have about this Bill. I 
don’t know if the government also is going to pay into this 
fund, which I believe they should throw in a little money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right now I think there are approximately 41,000 
oil and gas that service . . . related wells, along with numerous 
flow lines to facilities, like old batteries and gas-producing 
plants. We must be very careful to look at the environmental 
aspect of this as well as any footprint that will be left on the 
land. We would definitely like to ensure that this footprint is 
temporary, and the program such as the one put forward should 
go to addressing that, we hope. 
 
We must also ensure that the licensing system of this 
amendment Act also ensures that the industry will meet their 
abandonment and reclaim responsibilities. 
 
We must look at the two important aspects of this Bill, which of 
course includes a licensing system for wells and facilities, as 
well as a system of financial guarantees that will ensure that all 
who are licensed will be able to meet their responsibilities. 
 
When it comes to abandonment and reclaim of all well sites in 
the province, we look at the fund that this program sets up, sets 
up to be used for abandoned and reclaimed wells and facilities, 

and very important to note of course that this, so far as we 
understand, is just an industry-funded program. 
 
As we look at other environmental issues that have sprung up in 
the past and the government’s reaction, it’s very important that 
we look at this industry and sponsored fund for cleanup and 
make sure that what it does . . . what it claims to do that it does. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I ask leave of the House to 
introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
appreciate also the willingness of the hon. member to give way 
to allow me to introduce a guest in the House. 
 
Seated in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a young woman who 
just about a week and a half ago was the valedictorian at the 
University of Saskatchewan agricultural diploma and certificate 
graduation. Her name is Alberta Swan, and she’s a young 
woman who I think has a very bright and promising future here 
in our province. 
 
Many of us who were there I think were much moved by the 
motivational address, in fact in what she presented to her 
friends and colleagues and those of us who were present. And, 
Mr. Speaker, along with wishes for success in her future, I 
would ask all hon. members to extend a warm welcome to Ms. 
Alberta Swan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Oil and Gas Conservation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I may have to start 
from scratch again but I think I can remember where I started 
from. 
 
As we look at other environmental issues that have sprung up in 
the past and the government’s reaction to them, it’s very 
important that we look at this industry-sponsored fund for 
clean-up, make sure that it does what it claims that it can do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the oil and gas industry in 
Saskatchewan will have a bright future, and that should mean 
further development of the oil and gas revenues in this 
province. And then amendments and programs such as this 
definitely should begin the sooner the better as a rapid influx of 
new development hopefully will occur in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that I impress upon this 
Assembly today how strong I feel about the further economic 



1026 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

development to this province and how we should be developing 
our resources further. We should be attracting more businesses 
to the province, and there’s definitely potential for our young 
people who are graduating from our colleges today and in the 
future to have that future here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, businesses in Saskatchewan like to see these kinds 
of developments, but these go hand in hand of course in 
maintaining the natural beauty of Saskatchewan. I can see that 
this kind of program hopefully in regards to orphan wells that 
when wells are dug and utilized, they are cleaned up and 
essentially the landscape is unscarred from the experience. 
 
This can be done and it will be done because I believe strongly 
in the people of Saskatchewan — particularly the young people 
of Saskatchewan who will be working in this industry. They see 
how beautiful our province is and they want to develop it more 
and they want to retain its beauty. I think that it is important 
that we impress upon our young people today that this must be 
in their thoughts when they consider developing our province 
economically. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no reason that we cannot see our province 
develop well economically while at the same time being in tune 
with mother nature. I think that this view is also shared by most 
Saskatchewan residents who wish to keep our province’s 
natural beauty in the state while allowing our people to develop 
and thrive further as we look into the future. 
 
I would like to talk for a few moments about the oil industry in 
Alberta. I have several friends and relatives working in the oil 
field industry and some of them have been working there for 
many years. 
 
One thing that has impressed them from the last boom period, 
which would have been in the late ’70s and early ’80s and now 
the boom that’s going on there right now, that at that time oil 
was needed as quickly as they could pull it up from the ground. 
And that’s, I believe, when this orphan well program legislation 
came in effect in Alberta; that Alberta enacted on it probably I 
think in the early ’70s or ’80s, which also can bring into 
question why this province is lagging behind probably 10-15 
years looking at a program like that. 
 
It seems now that this legislation may go in place and this fund 
will be set up . . . And the fund that is in Alberta, from what I 
hear, that the leases in the areas where the wells are dug in 
Alberta and the oil is moved off the land, are very tight, and 
very strict rules applying from loading oil into trucks and for 
the trucks to take it out, as well as the rig movers to get in to 
move the equipment away from the well. 
 
And this seems to be the general consensus across the province, 
that this cleanup program and the licensing program to ensure 
that these sites are looked after is definitely working well in 
Alberta. 
 
Now of course during this present boom in Alberta, the oil 
industry in such good economic conditions that we see today, it 
is very important that this legislation continue and ensures that 
these companies take responsibility, and which I’ve stressed 
before in this Bill, they have been looking after their industry 
quite well. I would like to put that on record. 

But when we also look at the oil industry in Alberta and just see 
how well it’s developed there and how many people it employs, 
a lot of these of course are younger people who haven’t been 
able to find any economic opportunities here in Saskatchewan. 
So many of them from Saskatchewan are working out in the oil 
field industry in Alberta. 
 
It’s just another sign Alberta is doing the right thing at the 
programs, and the industry itself is very healthy and there’s a 
bright future there ahead. 
 
Indeed the price of oil in the last while has almost doubled, and 
it seems like it may hold that way for a long ways into the 
future. And of course this bodes well for the future, as the 
Alberta government is doing quite well, and there’s even talk of 
them further removing the provincial income taxes presently 
paid there. 
 
I think there isn’t a person from a small town in this province 
that they don’t know a friend or a relative that isn’t working in 
the oil fields in Alberta. In fact I think that’s what’s keeping 
most of the Saskatchewan farms going, is going to the rigs and 
coming back and keeping your farm going. 
 
Also when we take a broader look at how much oil industries 
impact in taxation decisions such as this, that it is clear that the 
Government of Saskatchewan should be looking at further and 
rapid development of the oil sector here in the province. And 
that could be further developed with additional incentives. 
 
Of course, hand in hand, that goes with Bill No. 10, which will 
ensure that even a rapid expansion of the oil industry in 
Saskatchewan would be kept in check similar to Alberta, and 
that environmental issues would be nailed down by the aspects 
of the licensee having to follow all the rules and regulations of 
well cleanup. 
 
Definitely we would have to keep a close eye on how the 
equipment is moved in and around and again off the lease. 
 
We must ensure that all clauses in Bill 10 ensure that the oil 
field companies, the drillers, the rig movers, and the related 
industries all realize their responsibility in keeping our 
environment safe while at the same time allowing for the 
economy to grow. 
 
This is why I am very concerned that these licences do the job 
that they’re meant to do. It’s all well and good to ensure that a 
driller has a licence, but it’s also good to see that . . . to make 
sure that they can fulfill their responsibilities. 
 
However if Saskatchewan does incur dramatic growth in the oil 
industry, then we must also have a more streamlined way to 
ensure that the companies that are set up and that want to run 
here are able to get this licence in a timely fashion. We’d like to 
make sure that it would happen and that further, any 
streamlining would still engage the oil field company in 
attaining all the safety aspects of which I’ve just spoken about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the conclusion we are reaching here is that we 
must not allow too much micromanagement here, which would 
probably end up delaying the licensing process to oil field 
companies when there’s intent to engage in drilling wells and 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1027 

 

helping our economy along here in Saskatchewan. 
 
I would suppose that there can be a way to reach a certain level 
of efficiency when it comes to licensing each company that 
would definitely guarantee that the company is reputable and 
deserves a licence and would have the opportunity to drill here 
in the province of Saskatchewan without too much red tape, but 
at the same time also guarantee that our Saskatchewan 
environment is intact. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our environment is of the utmost importance, I 
believe when you talk to all the residents. I know I’ve stressed it 
in many times in this address about my Arm River constituency 
and the beauty there. 
 
But I think it is key to what people are concerned with when it 
comes to the oil industry. People want to see jobs, they want to 
see progress, and they want to see our economy grow; but of 
course they also want to see that environment is looked after 
and that wildlife is not threatened. They want to see that our 
land does not get scarred as a result of oil field development. 
And of course all these concerns are ones that we all hold close 
to our heart. 
 
And I’m very proud to say that our province is one of the most 
diverse, most naturally beautiful in Canada, when we look at 
the southern and central part of our province and we see our 
beautiful prairie landscape and we continue on further north 
into our forest areas, which include hundreds and hundreds of 
lakes with a beauty all of their own. 
 
There’s also another important industry up there that has been a 
major part of Saskatchewan economy, and that’s the forest 
industry. And also that is . . . there’s many environmental 
concerns with that, but that’s another industry I think has 
looked after, policed itself very well and looked after it. 
 
Another large industry concerning Saskatchewan is our potash 
industry, and it seems to be doing very well these past few 
years, and there of course there’s many environmental concerns 
there. 
 
But all aspects of this have to be looked at, and I think this is 
something we all should remain very aware of as we watch out 
for environmental concerns. Of course when we’re talking 
about Bill No. 10, it’s just a small step towards a broad range of 
environmentally safe solutions to some of the problems that are 
brought up by industry in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think with all these different ideas in mind, we 
can definitely take a serious look at this Bill, conclude that this 
is definitely a step in the right direction towards caring for 
environment as well as allowing the oil industry to proceed in 
the province while maintaining many safety standards. And also 
looking at the industry more closely, I think that by relying on 
the Alberta model, we have seen a model that has worked and 
will work in Saskatchewan. And that makes us more prepared 
for an expansion of our own oil industry, which I believe firmly 
will take our province in more of a solid economic direction. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, all that is holding us back is a 
proper policy to come into play to allow industry and business 
to thrive. And I would call on the present government to look 

more seriously, as we need to further develop our provincial 
industry base. We need to bring in new businesses. We need to 
keep our people here in Saskatchewan. They are the future of 
our province. 
 
So I’d call on the government to seriously address these issues 
and come out with more Bills which provide more of an 
incentive to bring businesses into the province, into the oil and 
gas sector, as well as all the sectors about which I’ve discussed 
in this address. So I’d call on the Premier to form some sort of 
action plan to further our economic future here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
With that I would like to adjourn debate right now on Bill No. 
10. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 11 — The 
Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 
2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this Bill deals with one of our most important industries. 
Probably our largest net contributor to the provincial 
government in royalties, Mr. Speaker, is the oil industry. And 
the freehold oil and gas production tax deals directly with that 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan there are two kinds of minerals 
holdings. There’s that held by the Crown, which are known as 
Crown minerals or Crown leases; and there are those held by 
individuals or corporations through ownership rights, Mr. 
Speaker, and those are known as freehold. 
 
This Bill deals with those freehold leases, Mr. Speaker, freehold 
minerals that are held by individuals. 
 
Now most of the province, Mr. Speaker, is not directly affected 
by this Bill. The freehold oil and gas is generally held, Mr. 
Speaker, on the extreme east side of the province. And fact is, 
Mr. Speaker, all of the land, including homestead land, Mr. 
Speaker, east of the first meridian — east of the second 
meridian, Mr. Speaker, had to get my meridians straight — the 
mineral rights were given with the land titles initially, Mr. 
Speaker. When you got your homestead, you got the mineral 
rights. When you bought land, you got the mineral rights with 
it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
West of the second meridian, Mr. Speaker, you had to pay an 
additional fee to acquire those mineral rights, either at the time 
of initial purchase when it was homesteaded or settled, or at a 
later date you could have purchased it. I believe at one point in 
time during the 1930s, it was possible to buy the mineral rights 
for your property. Now what that means, Mr. Speaker, if you 
have freehold mineral rights, the resources below the ground 
belong to the owner, not necessarily the surface landowner 
although that was the initial case, but now the person who holds 
that right. 
 



1028 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

The government on Crown leases collects a percentage from the 
company that does the drilling and recovers the oil, Mr. 
Speaker, collects a percentage of that as their share; plus, Mr. 
Speaker, charges a royalty tax on the entire production. The 
royalty tax, Mr. Speaker, in old oil in this province is roughly 
about 49 per cent. It varies on new production, depending on 
how long it’s been in production and what kind of well it is, 
etc., but on old oil, Mr. Speaker, it’s roughly 49 per cent. 
 
But on freehold, Mr. Speaker, those, depending on when they 
were contracted — the arrangements made between the owner 
of the minerals and the company that wanted to come and drill 
— could range anywheres on average, Mr. Speaker, from 12 to 
18 per cent. That portion of that revenue for the total production 
would be turned over to the freehold owner. Then as well the 
government would charge their royalty on the entire production. 
 
But under this Act, Mr. Speaker, there is part of the production 
of the oil, that’s when it’s extracted from the ground remains in 
the water, or remains in sand or in paraffin wax, Mr. Speaker, 
and that is not taxed because it’s not measured necessarily at the 
normal measuring points of production. 
 
If your measurements are simply a gross measurement going 
through, with a calculation for the amount of water versus the 
amount of oil, then it would be calculated. But if it’s measured 
at a later point where it’s just the oil being measured, Mr. 
Speaker, there would be some water in that, and that will be 
recorded. That percentage, Mr. Speaker, can be up to a 
maximum of .5 per cent — so one-half of one per cent — and 
that will be recorded as well. And I’m not exactly sure, perhaps 
that’s a question that the minister can answer for us when it 
comes forward in Committee of the Whole sometime this 
summer, that whether or not royalties are paid on that .5 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, or not; whether that’s calculated as oil or it’s 
calculated as water and therefore not taxable. 
 
But part of . . . when you’re producing, part of the cleaning 
process will still have some small amounts of oil remaining in 
the water production that’ll go for disposal. That oil over time 
can be collected, Mr. Speaker, and that’s what this Bill deals 
with, is charging a royalty tax on that secondary production 
shall we say. 
 
The question though, Mr. Speaker, has to be asked. That oil 
doesn’t belong 100 per cent to the producing company; it 
doesn’t belong 100 per cent to the oil company. A portion of 
that, Mr. Speaker, that roughly 12 to 18 per cent belongs to the 
owner of the minerals. Is he, Mr. Speaker, being compensated 
in any way, shape, or form for his asset that has been extracted 
from the ground, has now been collected, and will be utilized as 
oil to make gasoline and diesel fuel and plastics and all those 
things that we make from oil and gas, Mr. Speaker? Will the 
individual freehold mineral-right owner be compensated? 
 
I don’t see that in here, Mr. Speaker. The government is 
certainly bent on extracting their share. The oil company 
already has it; possession is nine-tenths of the law, Mr. Speaker. 
So they get to receive their share of any profits that may be 
available there. 
 
The Crown is taking their share of the profits. But does the 
freehold mineral-right owner receive his share, Mr. Speaker? I 

don’t know. It certainly doesn’t seem to indicate that in this 
Bill. The government gets theirs, the oil company gets theirs, 
but the individual, Mr. Speaker, seems to be left out. 
 
So that’s another area, Mr. Speaker, that we need to very much 
ask the minister about. Does the freehold mineral-right owner 
receive his rightful percentage of that recovered oil, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it also talks about the government being able to 
force shut-ins off production if they’re claiming that there is 
recovered oil there, that the operator needs to pay a certain 
amount of taxes on it. If that operator does not do so within the 
appropriate time frame, Mr. Speaker, they will shut that piece of 
production in. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Well this may work very well, Mr. Speaker, if the facility 
you’re talking about is completely owned by one entity, be it 
one individual or one corporation. But in a large number of 
cases, Mr. Speaker, in this province we have what’s called 
unitisation — one facility will actually represent a number of 
entities all coming together for a similar service. 
 
An example of that would be, Mr. Speaker, would be sort of 
like a grain elevator — the grain in the elevator is not 
necessarily all owned by one individual; it may be owned by a 
number of farmers that have pooled their grain for shipment. 
 
And that’s what happens in the oil industry, Mr. Speaker. Oil is 
brought in from the various production wells, owned at times by 
a good number of different people. As well, Mr. Speaker, 
owned . . . the mineral rights owned by various mineral-right 
holders, freehold mineral-right holders. 
 
So if the government has the authority and the ability to shut in 
that facility because one operator refuses to pay his share of the 
recovered oil, what happens to the other members, Mr. Speaker, 
that are utilizing that facility? Their facility is shut in also. 
 
I think this needs to be clarified, Mr. Speaker. What are the 
rules that the government is looking for on facilities that are 
unitised rather than singular entities, Mr. Speaker? And again 
it’s not addressed in this particular Bill. 
 
Further, Mr. Speaker, there’s a large number of regulations in 
this particular Bill. And it’s been a growing trend throughout 
the last decade, Mr. Speaker, of governments taking more and 
more power onto themselves to be utilized through regulation. 
And I’m sure that the government would say, well these are just 
standard. Yes, Mr. Speaker, they’re standard now, but they 
weren’t standard necessarily in 1990 or in 1980 or in 1970, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read you part (a) of clause 32.8(1). It says: 
 

For the purposes of this Part, the Lieutenant Governor in 
Council may make regulations: 

 
(a) defining, enlarging or restricting the meaning of any 
word or expression used in this Part, but not defined in 
this Part; 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1029 

 

So, Mr. Speaker, what does that really mean? Does that mean 
that by any other name you can call it a rose or something else; 
that you can change the meanings of any of the words, the 
definition; that you can expand the scope of their application or 
restrict it, narrow it down so that freehold may mean all of the 
oil being produced? Recovered oil may mean all of the oil 
extracted from the ground, rather than as this Bill initially 
defines it, Mr. Speaker, that recovered oil is oil that has been 
recovered from either water collection or from sand. 
 
So what does it mean, Mr. Speaker? The problem is, 
government is taking onto itself the ability, without coming 
back to this legislature, without explanation to the stakeholders 
— the freehold owners of the minerals, the oil companies, and 
anyone else involved, Mr. Speaker — to either change the 
meaning of this Act in its entirety almost, by changing the 
meaning of the words. 
 
Part (c), Mr. Speaker, says: 
 

respecting the basis of calculation of the tax, including any 
allowances, credits or other deductions that may be made or 
taken in calculating or paying the tax. 

 
So again, Mr. Speaker, the government is taking power onto 
itself to change the amount of the tax, what is allowable for a 
deduction, what isn’t allowable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The power again is handed over to the minister to make all 
determinations on this particular Bill without regard, Mr. 
Speaker, to the wishes of this Assembly or to what the original 
meaning of this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker: 
 

(d) respecting the price to be used in valuing recovered 
crude oil for the purposes of the tax. 

 
So while the minister may say initially in establishment of this 
Bill that we have determined that the tax is to follow the West 
Texas crude prices, let’s say. Well tomorrow West Texas crude 
drops, but the minister wants to recover X number of dollars 
through this value, so he says no, I’m changing this part, Mr. 
Speaker, that the value of this recovered oil will be the value of 
West Texas crude on May 8, 2001. This gives him the power to 
do that, Mr. Speaker. It gives the power . . . the minister too 
much power, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also says under (f): 
 

respecting the times at which the tax is to be assessed, 
calculated and paid. 

 
So the government has established that the tax, let’s say, will be 
paid on December 31 of every year. But it’s election time, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s time to have a little more money in the kitty when 
we go into the House and prepare the budget. We will now 
deem that the annual tax instead of being paid on December 31 
will now be paid on March 30, Mr. Speaker, so that it’ll fit into 
our budget cycle and we’ll be able to claim it this year and 
spend, and give all the good citizens of the province all of those 
things we want to hand out, Mr. Speaker. Again the minister 
has taken this power unto himself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under (h), it says: 

prescribing the interest rate for the purposes of section 
32.41 . . . 

 
Again the minister can establish an interest rate, let’s say tied to 
the provincial annual rate of borrowing. But again, if he wants 
some more money to come through his department for the 
Minister of Finance, he can change that rate and there’s no 
reasons given unto what that rate should be tied to, no 
explanations; it’s whatever the minister wants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, under (k) it says: 
 

authorizing the minister to estimate, determine, establish, 
approve or authorize factors, allowances, allocations, 
charges, credits, deductions, exemptions, fees, methods of 
payment, time periods, values . . . prices to be used in the 
assessment, calculation and payment of tax imposed 
pursuant to this Part . . . 

 
It allows the minister, Mr. Speaker, to change virtually the 
entire operation of this Bill without any reason, without any 
consultation, without providing any rationale for his doing so, 
Mr. Speaker. The power simply resides in his hands to do what 
he wants. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t feel comfortable with that. And I’m sure 
that the industry, when they look this Bill over, will be similarly 
concerned that this Bill puts too much power in the hands of the 
minister without any checks and balances in place. 
 
There is an appeal process, Mr. Speaker. There is an appeal 
process that you have to file within 90 days of the assessment or 
reassessment, act, or thing done by the minister. But it doesn’t 
tell you that the minister has to give you notice when he has 
done something. 
 
So the minister can change the Act through regulations at his 
whim, and the individuals involved that need to know this may 
not even be notified within the 90-day period, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If this minister is going to make these changes, then it’s 
incumbent on him, Mr. Speaker, to notify all of the stakeholders 
involved, including all of the individual freeholders of mineral 
rights, Mr. Speaker. And from the point of notification of that, 
then perhaps the 90 days should be in place. 
 
But there’s no place in here, Mr. Speaker, where it says that the 
government has to give notice to any of the people involved. 
But the people involved only have 90 days from the point of the 
minister doing something to appeal it. That’s not good enough, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not good enough. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to give the minister an 
opportunity to consider my comments and to come back with 
the answers that are needed to these questions to determine 
whether or not the powers that I have outlined here that are in 
here, Mr. Speaker, are how he interprets them as working, 
whether he intends to give any notification of any changes to 
the stakeholders on this matter. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 



1030 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (IA01) 
 
The Chair: — I call on the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs to 
introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Today with me, assisting in our consideration of the 
estimates of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs are Brent 
Cotter, deputy minister; Donovan Young, acting deputy 
minister of Aboriginal Affairs; Glen Benedict, executive 
director, Indian lands and resources; Melinda Gorrill, director 
of administration; Michael Jackson, Chief of Protocol, and Eric 
Johansen, federal-provincial relations. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to welcome the ministers 
and their officials today. And first of all, I’d like to ask a few 
questions of the Provincial Secretary. On looking at the 
estimates, we see that we have an increase in every department 
. . . in every line in your department under sub-programs, and so 
I’d like to go through them one by one and have you explain 
why there is an increase in each of these areas, starting with the 
Lieutenant Governor’s office. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — The member opposite has correctly pointed 
out that there is an increase in the budget appropriation for the 
Lieutenant Governor’s office, an increase actually of $76,000. 
That increase is accounted for by an increase of 1.5 full-time 
equivalents to assist Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor with 
respect to speech writing and various hospitality functions that 
she undertakes. And then there has been as well staff 
reclassifications and adjustments for actual staff costs of 
20,000. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I am advised by my officials that what we see here will be 
the staff component for Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor 
for the remainder of her term. It was important for us to work 
with Her Honour Lynda Haverstock, and find out her actual 
needs with respect to staff. And as you will be aware, she is 
taking a very active role in representing the Queen of England 
here in Saskatchewan. She’s building on the tradition that was 
established by her predecessor, Jack Wiebe, and Sylvia 
Fedoruk, and has decided that it is extremely important that she 
get out to as many of the communities in Saskatchewan as 
possible, and meet with as many of Saskatchewan’s citizens as 
possible. 
 
In that sense it was important that she have the ability to have 
good advice with respect to speeches and so forth that she might 
be giving. And so it was seen as more than reasonable to assist 
her in that function, and to have a hospitality coordinator hired, 
as well as her private secretary and three additional secretaries. 
 
She is an extremely busy woman. She is doing a very good job 
representing the Queen to the people of Saskatchewan, and 
representing the people of Saskatchewan to the rest of Canada 

and the world. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I appreciate 
what you’ve said about the Lieutenant Governor. I guess my 
question is, in the past we have had also very good lieutenant 
governors. And why the need for extra . . . What is she doing 
that they did not do to require this extra funding? We are now 
spending $375,000 on the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I think I have tried to indicate to the 
member, but I’m going to reiterate, that the Lieutenant 
Governor has indicated her wish to cover as much of the 
province as possible over her five-year term; to meet with 
people in their home communities; to talk with them about the 
importance of our constitutional monarchy; to hear their 
concerns. 
 
She is taking a very active, hands-on approach to her function; 
is being very committed and dedicated to listening to the people 
of Saskatchewan; and also to letting them know, as much as is 
possible, the historic importance of having . . . of the kind of 
constitutional monarchy that we have and how this helps all of 
us in our work here in the House to maintain and enhance the 
tradition of constitutional democracy that we have in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Well I don’t 
believe my question was answered. I believe that we have had 
good representation from former lieutenant governors, and I 
think that the people of Saskatchewan are probably, rightfully, 
wondering why we need an increase in funding in this area 
when we have a lot of other areas in Saskatchewan that are of 
prime importance and that are underfunded. But we will move 
on. 
 
Under the Office of French-language Coordination, we also 
have an increase, and could you please explain to me why. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would thank the member opposite for her 
question. Before I move to the Office of French-language 
Coordination, I want to give you more specifics. I have been 
talking in general, glowing, positive terms about what Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor is doing. I think it is important 
for you and for the people of Saskatchewan to know just exactly 
how active she is in her job. 
 
Last year alone, she attended 200 official functions, and she 
delivered 146 speeches to communities and organizations 
around the province. And the research for those speeches and 
the remarks are now being prepared in-house rather than as 
previously being contracted out. 
 
As well as attending all those numerous community functions, 
the Lieutenant Governor has a goal of bringing the Crown 
closer to the people of the province, and she’s doing this by 
sending out special letters of greetings to Saskatchewan 
residents celebrating milestone wedding anniversaries and 
birthdays. And I’m sure that you’ve had constituents of yours 
who’ve received wedding anniversary congratulations from her. 
 
In the past year, the Office of the Lieutenant Government 
received approximately 2,800 requests for greetings, which 
were forwarded to other provincial and federal officials under a 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1031 

 

congratulatory greeting program, and her office alone sent 
1,748 greetings to citizens in this province. 
 
And also, some 45 messages were prepared to recognize 
achievement of special events by various organizations or 
groups. She has very broad based plans for this coming year. 
There will be an unprecedented participation by the Lieutenant 
Governor in five Saskatchewan treaty days in five different 
communities. 
 
She is very active in support of the United Nations declaration 
of 2001 being the International Year of the Volunteer, so she is 
attending a great number of volunteer recognition and 
appreciation events. And she also has an increased number of 
speaking opportunities in schools, in particular high schools. 
 
So as you can see Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor is 
extremely busy. We are all, I think, very well-served by the 
excellent job that she is doing. And I think that the slight 
increase in her budget is a very worthwhile thing. 
 
Now turning to the Office of the French-language 
Co-ordination, you asked what the increases were. I want to 
start my answer by, first of all, noting that there actually is a 
decrease of $2,000 in operating expenses in this office. 
 
Now the increase that you see is because we have hired a 
director into that office; Monsieur Florent Bilodeau is the 
director. As you may know, Madam Member, that office of the 
director was vacant for some time. And so upon receipt of a 
unanimous recommendation from ACF (Assemblée 
communautaire fransaskoise), the province was very pleased to 
hire Monsieur Bilodeau and we find that he is doing an 
excellent job in that office. 
 
And I think that that accounts almost completely for the slight 
increase that you note in the line for this office. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’ll continue on 
about the French-language co-ordination and then I want to go 
back to what you just . . . the information you just gave us about 
the Lieutenant Governor’s office. 
 
You’ve told us that you’ve been without a director, and I think 
the people of Saskatchewan would really like to know what 
actually goes on in the . . . like what does the Office of the 
French-language Co-ordination do; and in specific what does 
this director do? If you were without one and now you have 
one, what is he doing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — To the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy, I have two and a half pages of activities that the Office 
of the French-language Co-ordination does. So I will start and 
give you some idea of the flavour of the activities. They come 
under the rubric, generally, of awareness and liaison activities, 
as well as translation services and linguistic support. 
 
So if you will bear with me, I will give you some idea of what 
they do. And I would also encourage you to, at some point, go 
over and visit with Mr. Bilodeau in his office and find out just 
exactly what he does. They are always more than willing to talk 
very directly with members of the Legislative Assembly and let 
them know just what a good and valued service they do for the 

people of Saskatchewan. 
 
In the last year the OFLC (Office of French-language 
Coordination) staff participated in and provided financial 
support to major meetings, conferences, and events held by 
Saskatchewan’s francophone community, in particular the Fêtes 
fransaskois and the Forum économique fransaskois and the 
community radio pilot project, Radio réseau, which we are very 
proud of. 
 
They also met periodically with francophone community 
representatives to learn about their priority projects as well as 
any concerns that they had with respect to provincial programs 
and services. Because of course this is an office of coordination 
and so they do meet very regularly with members of the 
Fransaskois community. 
 
I’m just going to carry on. I’m going to struggle here in 
English. 
 
I would like to say they also began implementation of the 
multi-year, cost-shared Canada-Saskatchewan General 
Agreement on the Promotion of Official Languages agreement 
that started in June of last year. And they did that. 
 
And this is why, getting to your particular question, about why 
we needed a director. We needed to reinstate the director’s 
position, and Monsieur Bilodeau took up his functions officially 
in September 2000 and then began laying the groundwork for 
the creation of a joint provincial government/Fransaskois 
community French-language services liaison community. 
 
Last July they hosted a meeting of senior 
federal/provincial/territorial officials responsible for 
French-language services to prepare for the fifth meeting of 
ministers responsible for francophone affairs. 
 
And if I may be permitted to put in a slight advertisement at this 
point, these last couple of weeks they’ve been working very 
actively, preparing for another meeting that’s coming up next 
Wednesday, l’Assemblée parlementaire de la Francophonie. 
 
The Chair: — Your mike’s not working, so they’re using the 
other mike. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — And I said so many important things en 
français while the microphone was off, so I’ll start all over 
again. 
 
I’m doing a bit of a commercial for what the OFLC has been 
doing over the last couple of weeks. They are laying the 
groundwork for an extraordinary meeting that’s occurring. 
Representatives from L’Assemblée parlementaire de la 
Francophonie are coming to Regina to meet with various MLAs 
to discuss that particular organization and the possibility of this 
Assembly taking out a membership in it. 
 
They also have been working with the Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, and they jointly 
funded with them the community-wide consultations on French 
post-secondary needs, structures, and programs just this past 
February and March. They assisted government officials and 
francophone community representatives in preparations for Les 



1032 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

Rendez-vous de la Francophonie, March 15 to 25, I believe. 
 
You and I both participated in some of those events. It would 
not have been possible, for me at least, and perhaps for you as 
well, to participate in those functions if it hadn’t been for the 
excellent help that we received from Monsieur Bilodeau and his 
staff. 
 
We also launched OFLC section of IAA’s (Intergovernmental 
and Aboriginal Affairs) Web site as part of the Rendez-vous de 
la Francophonie celebrations. That was very well received. And 
just today I received in my office a media clipping from the 
on-campus news here in the University of Regina, extolling the 
virtues of that Web site. And I want to congratulate all the staff 
who were involved in the preparation of the Web site at this 
point. 
 
Finally under awareness and liaison activities, they have 
regularly participated in meetings of the subcommittee on the 
implementation of sections 41 and 42 of the Official Languages 
Act in order to explore potential partnerships with federal 
government departments and agencies in the delivery of French 
language services to the Fransaskois community. Now, Madam 
Member, that is only what they’re doing on awareness and 
liaison activities. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Turning now to translation services and linguistic support, they 
responded to 382 translation requests and, if you will believe it 
— I mean this is what’s wonderful about the day of computers, 
because we can find out immediately what people are doing — 
they translated 292,292 words, 292,292 words into French. 
 
In-house translators handled approximately 83 per cent of the 
requests and 52 per cent of the translation volume. They 
completed 37 specific revisions requests, and they entered into 
59 contracts totalling over $27,000 with nine different freelance 
translators based in Saskatchewan. 
 
As well as that, they continued to assist the general public 
francophone community representatives and the media with 
terminology questions especially as they related to the 
Government of Saskatchewan departments, agencies, and 
programs. 
 
And finally, they completed a large number of translation 
projects including translation from English into French of 
background documents and Web site content for the heritage 
fairs that are held in Saskatchewan schools; translation from 
English into French of material for the HEALNet Web site; 
translation into French of the forage rainfall pilot program and 
the 2001 highlights brochures for Canada-Saskatchewan crop 
insurance; translation from French to English, an appellant’s 
factum for the Department of Justice. 
 
And finally, they continued to assist the provincial government 
departments in meeting official languages obligations in their 
delivery of programs delegated to the province by the federal 
government in the areas of social housing and labour market 
development. 
 
Madam Member, I’m sorry I took so long in answering your 

question, but I think it is important for you and through you for 
all people of Saskatchewan to know just what an active and 
energetic and important office we have in the Office of 
French-language Co-ordination. They perform very valuable 
services for the people of Saskatchewan and they assist in 
ensuring that Fransaskois people can receive services in the 
language of their choice. Thank you very much. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for that lengthy 
answer. And it is good to know that there is really something 
happening in that department, and I’m sure the people of 
Saskatchewan will be glad to hear that. 
 
I’d just like to go back to your answer when you went back to 
the original . . . for the Lieutenant Governor’s office. I think it’s 
important to note that you had talked about how she was 
responsible for events at Government House and so on. Not 
only do we spend $375,000 on the Lieutenant Governor’s office 
and those services, we also spend an additional 349,000 on 
Government House. 
 
And I guess the question is where is the breakdown between 
what is allocated to her office and what is allocated to 
Government House. And I might note that Government House 
expenditure has risen by $88,000 this year as well, and if you 
could explain why. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I feel like an astronaut. You hit it, and the 
microphone turns on here. 
 
The Lieutenant Governor’s office, as you know, she worked . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I just want to inform the House 
that we are having some difficulties with the air conditioning 
and the audiovisual, our audio equipment in the control room, 
and so that’s why the mikes are cutting in and out. So I guess 
question period was just a little too hot today. So bear with us 
as they fix the problem. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And here I thought I had all this wonderful power, that 
I was actually getting that microphone turned on by banging it. 
See, another illusion down the drain. 
 
But I hope that the staff are able to iron out the technical 
difficulties as soon as possible. You’re right, it’s getting a little 
hot in here. It was probably from my lengthy responses, so I’m 
going to try to skinny them down just a little bit. 
 
We’ve already talked about the Lieutenant Governor’s office. 
Her office is centred out of Government House, but 
Government House as an entity has quite a lot of other 
functions that are totally separate and apart from the Lieutenant 
Governor. 
 
Various hospitality occurs at Government House. For instance 
the Lieutenant Governor herself hosted a dinner for His 
Excellency the Prince of Wales there last Thursday, April 26. 
There have been other banquets and lunches there hosted by 
other organizations. 
 
There is a very active museum at Government House, and they 
have done just an excellent job in restoring what was a building 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1033 

 

that had been almost decimated by being used for other things, 
other than what it was intended for. 
 
And I do want to commend all the excellent volunteers and the 
staff over at the museum for the work that they have done in 
recreating Government House as it would have been at the turn 
of the century when, as you know, Government House was the 
seat of government for all of Western Canada. 
 
They also do a lot of tours for people. And school kids, in 
particular, really love going over and seeing how things were in 
our grandfathers’ and great-grandfathers’ time — and 
grandmothers’ as well. 
 
They are doing an incredible job, through the money that 
government provides them, in the preservation of Government 
House and also preservation of the grounds. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. There is an 
increase of $88,000 in the budget from last year to this year. 
Could you please explain why? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Yes, you are exactly right, Madam 
Member. There is an increase, and the increase is due, first of 
all, to the increases . . . because of public demand, basically. We 
are responding to public demand, the great public interest in 
Government House. So we’ve had to increase our ability to 
have tours, to have guides helping out with those tours; we have 
longer opening hours for Government House. 
 
And then finally, we are doing some major planning for 
Government House revitalization. And part of the increase that 
you see, the $88,000 variance, is for that planning for 
Government House revitalization. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Just one more 
question on the Lieutenant Governor’s office. You indicated 
that the present Lieutenant Government has enhanced her 
services to Saskatchewan, and I’m not doubting that at all. But 
what I think would be important for this side of the House to 
see is a comparison to the events that the former lieutenant 
governor attended, and what he did, as compared to what the 
present Lieutenant Governor, so we can see the difference 
between. 
 
So if you could provide us with that comparison, it would be 
much appreciated. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I certainly will undertake, Madam 
Member, to provide you with that comparison. I don’t have the 
exact statistics here with me today. 
 
I do want to say though, that former Lieutenant Governor Jack 
Wiebe served the people of Saskatchewan and the Queen of 
Canada very well in his job. And he responded to the needs and 
concerns of Saskatchewan people of the time. 
 
The current Lieutenant Governor, Lynda Haverstock, is 
responding to different, slightly different times and different 
needs. I don’t want to imply in any way, shape, or form that the 
former lieutenant governor did not work very actively for the 
people of Saskatchewan, because I feel that he did. But 
certainly he did not, for instance, do some of the functions that 

the current Lieutenant Governor is doing. 
 
Each lieutenant governor has different areas of interest and 
expertise and focuses on them, and brings their own personality 
and their own areas of interest to the office. So there will be 
slight . . . it is slightly different. 
 
But I do want to emphasize that Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor has made a commitment to being very actively out in 
the different Saskatchewan communities. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees, and I 
want to congratulate you on your new election and welcome 
you to your position. I hope you enjoy it. Madam Minister, Mr. 
Minister, a welcome this afternoon, and welcome to your 
officials. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the most exciting events that took 
place in this province occurred about two weeks ago when the 
Prince Philip, the Duke of Wales, had the opportunity to spend 
three days in our province. It was certainly quite a time for 
members of the House. There was a lot of special events that 
went on throughout the province. Members were able to attend 
many of those events, and it certainly was enjoyable to meet the 
man who will eventually become our king. 
 
Well, Madam Minister, of course as we’re all aware, 
somewhere along the line that there is a price tag attached to 
these very special events. And I’m wondering if, Madam 
Minister, you’d be able to enlighten us as to a breakdown of the 
costs and the overall costs that were incurred with having the 
Prince Philip, the Duke of Wales, in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question. And you are right — we were very honoured to have a 
visit by His Excellency Prince Charles The Prince of Wales and 
the Duke of Edinburgh’s son. And I think that all of 
Saskatchewan was honoured, excited, and very pleased that he 
was here. 
 
Of course there would be a few anti-monarchists who may be 
wondering why he should have come or questioned the 
expenditure. I want to say as a somebody who used to be an 
agnostic monarchist, I am now a true believer, having spent 
some considerable time with His Excellency the Prince of 
Wales. I think that the benefit to the people of Saskatchewan 
was immeasurable. 
 
But the cost, while not substantial, I think is something that the 
people of Saskatchewan deserve to know about. 
 
As you will be aware, the Government of Canada pays the 
travel cost, the plane, to transport His Excellency and all his 
officials to Canada. And then when he’s in the different 
provinces or territories, the funding arrangements are that we 
would pick up our portion of the visit while he is actually in the 
province. 
 
So having said that, in total, we estimate, and we budgeted for 
the royal visit to the province of Saskatchewan, $130,000. We 
do not have all the bills in yet, but we are confident that the visit 
will come in either at or below the amount that we had 
budgeted. We can provide an itemized account for you, if you 



1034 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

wish, when all the bills are in. We think that we got very good 
value for our money. 
 
And I do at this time want to publicly thank all the staff and all 
the many volunteers who were involved in the planning and 
coordination of the royal visit. I think that Saskatchewan was 
able to show off its best. And we were blessed with good 
weather, so we were able to have the sunshine in, and no doom 
and gloom while he was here in the province. 
 
I can’t emphasize enough what a great job the Office of 
Protocol did; what a great job Debbie Saum in 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs did, all the other staff 
over there; as well as the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) who handled all the security while His Excellency was 
in the province; and then the large number of volunteers 
involved in the different events — like at the Meewasin Valley 
Authority weir in Saskatoon; the Saskatoon Community 
Services Village; the opening of the Prince of Wales 
Community Complex in Assiniboia; the visit to the Moose Jaw 
air base; and of course all the many events here in Regina, 
including the events at city hall. 
 
So I think we had a great number of people working either on a 
paid or a volunteer capacity to ensure that we would have a 
seamless and fantastic event while the Prince was here and I 
think we have achieved it. And as I say, the total cost is 
estimated to be in the order of $130,000. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and I appreciate 
that you have provided with a good deal of information here. 
And certainly as you mention, there are some information that 
you’re not able to bring to us today, and maybe, Mr. Chair, 
when Madam Minister brings her official back again for 
estimates, we could get a further detailed . . . some further 
details and have them read into the record. 
 
I’m sure the people of Saskatchewan will be very pleased to 
know that the budget was set as to how much it would cost to 
have the Prince here in Saskatchewan, and that the province is 
looking at coming in under budget. And we’re always pleased 
to hear that any time a budget line can come in under budget, of 
course, on this side of House. 
 
Madam Minister, I want to change gears to a large degree. One 
of the things that is happening in the country, is being looked at 
on a federal basis, is accountability — accountability in all part 
of government lives, and is certainly is something that those of 
us on this side of the House hold quite dear. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, the federal government is looking at 
setting up a process to help First Nations people be able to 
achieve an accountable electoral system. On this side of the 
House, we’re certainly applauding that lead. We think it’s 
extremely important that everyone in this province especially 
help to understand the importance of elections, help for them to 
understand what it means to be held accountable during an 
electoral process. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, of course we also understand quite 
clearly that for those people who live their lives under treaty 

obligations, is that those responsibilities lie with the federal 
government. But there is a very, very large population in this 
province, Madam Minister, I dare say in the tens upon tens of 
thousands of people of Metis ancestry who are also very keen 
on having their own electoral process that is open and 
accountable. 
 
We hear on occasion in the papers, Madam Minister, where 
there’s a great deal of concern about how MNS (Metis Nation 
of Saskatchewan) elections are conducted. And I’m wondering, 
Madam Minister, if you’d be able to . . . if we can start down a 
road of discussion here this afternoon on any plans or any 
thoughts that the provincial government and the Department of 
Aboriginal Affairs has around open and accountable elections 
for the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I would like to respond to the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Again, before I move to the question of Metis elections which I 
think is the main substance of what you’re asking, I want to just 
provide you with a bit more detail about the royal visit. Because 
in my haste to answer the question about the cost of the royal 
visit, and mentioning that it was $130,000 in total, I neglected 
to tell you that almost 20 per cent of that is actually something 
that will be of ongoing benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
We have plans to put out an educational booklet, an historic 
memento of the visit to the province of Saskatchewan, and we 
anticipate that that will likely cost around $10,000. We know 
from when Her Majesty the Queen was here in 1987, and the 
former government put out a similar commemorative booklet, 
that they are very well received by the people of Saskatchewan, 
and excellent souvenirs by all people whose lives were touched 
in some small way by the royal visit. So $10,000 of that 
$130,000 cost will go to that commemorative booklet. 
 
And as well, we were very pleased, and again here I would like 
to commend my staff, and in particular my deputy minister, for 
coming up with what we think was a very good idea for a gift 
for His Excellency. As you probably observed in any of the 
events that you attended that the Prince was at, the people of 
Saskatchewan loved having him here, and they were showering 
him with gifts, flowers, books, CDs, and things. 
 
We knew that we wanted to give him a gift, but we wanted to 
make sure that it would be a gift that would be meaningful both 
to him and to the people of Saskatchewan. And so we 
announced the creation of scholarships for grade 11 students 
who were going into grade 12. And those scholarships will be 
given in the name of His Excellency The Prince of Wales. And 
the total cost for those scholarships is estimated to be $12,000. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s part of the 130,000? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — That is part of the $130,000, yes. So those 
two things that I’ve just mentioned, totalling 22,000, are part of 
the $130,000. As well, as you know, we had to pick up the costs 
of the Prince’s travel while he was here in Saskatchewan. He 
flew on a very big plane. And we had to pick up the cost of the 
. . . his accommodation, our share of the accommodation. And 
then we had to hire a few contractual staff. 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1035 

 

If you want, as I say, we certainly, we have nothing to hide. 
We’re very pleased that we were able to have such a great royal 
visit and do it so economically. And it was due because of the 
great staff and volunteer component that we had. 
 
We did it the Saskatchewan way and I think all of us can be 
very proud. 
 
Now turning to the question of accountability amongst First 
Nations and Metis people. You point out quite correctly that 
Indian and Northern Affairs Minister Robert Nault has 
announced plans to revamp the Indian Act. It’s not been 
evaluated seriously for many, many years and so this will be a 
fairly lengthy consultative process. 
 
Some people would say it’s not long enough; other people 
would say it’s overdue and we should get on with it. It’s not my 
position to comment on that because it is of course a federal Act 
and that process is proceeding. 
 
Now you asked me about Metis and about the Metis elections. I 
want to, in answering you, first of all emphasize that it is 
important for all of us to be aware that Metis people, the Metis, 
are a federal responsibility — not a provincial responsibility but 
a federal responsibility. 
 
And as I mentioned to your colleague, the member for 
Humboldt, when we were last dealing with estimates and she 
was asking about the possibility of, for instance, the Chief 
Electoral Officer of Saskatchewan becoming involved in the 
Metis election process, at that point I emphasized to her that if 
any electoral officer were to become involved, it would be the 
position of the province of Saskatchewan that it ought properly 
to be the federal elections officer, not the provincial elections 
officer, because Metis, of course, are a federal responsibility. 
And in that sense we have an office called the Metis 
interlocutor, and the Hon. Ralph Goodale is in charge of that 
office. 
 
Now having said that Metis are a federal responsibility, I want 
to also say though that we recognize very clearly that Metis 
people live in Saskatchewan. And because they are 
Saskatchewan residents, we have concerns as well, and we 
share the concerns that you’re expressing about recent events. 
 
And in that sense I have written to Mr. Clem Chartier, the 
president of the Metis Nation of Saskatchewan. I actually sent 
the letter on April 23, and with your indulgence I would read 
into the record the substance of that letter. And I think you will 
see that we take the concerns that have been expressed very 
seriously, and we do want to see the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan acting on those concerns expressed by Metis 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
And my letter is as follows. It is, as I say, to Mr. Clem Chartier, 
President, Metis Nation of Saskatchewan, and I write: 
 

Dear Mr. Chartier: 
 
I am writing to express concern respecting the outcomes of 
the recent Métis Nation — Saskatchewan (MNS) election. 
 
Prior to the MNS election, my Department communicated 

to the Métis Election Commission that it respected the 
MNS’ internal election processes but that it was concerned 
with pre-election grievances made by some Métis 
candidates and voters regarding the democratic structure of 
the election. 
 
As you know, Métis people, as well as the non-Métis 
public, are again expressing concerns about the election 
outcomes and the processes for addressing electoral 
disputes. Confidence in the MNS election appears to be 
waning. In light of these concerns, I urge you and the MNS, 
in accordance with the processes established for such 
purposes, to address these concerns as expeditiously as 
possible. 
 
I believe it is in the best interests of Métis people in 
Saskatchewan that the MNS election issues be addressed 
promptly. This will enable us to continue our work 
together, and make the progress we both envisage for Métis 
people in our Province. 
 

And I have signed it as the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, I appreciate your concerns and I appreciate the letter 
that you have read into the record. It was very important that 
you do so. 
 
What’s important here is that, you know, we’ve seen this 
government write letters before. Mr. Chair, to the minister, 
we’ve also heard where the Premier has written letters to the 
Prime Minister who are answered by some minor official in his 
department. I guess we’re concerned, and rightly so on this side 
of the House, that when letters are sent from this government 
that often they receive very little attention from the people who 
receive them. 
 
I think it’s, you know, this is a big issue in Saskatchewan. There 
are tens of thousands of people who are of Metis ancestry. And 
yet we noticed in the last round of elections, for the Metis 
Nation, is that about 8 per cent of the Metis participated in the 
election process. And to us that causes a great deal of concern. 
 
Here we have a group that we hear, and certainly we’ve seen it 
in the papers, is of some question who seem to have trouble 
even running elections and yet want to be able to recognize that 
they’re representing the Metis people of Saskatchewan when 
less than . . . or approximately 8 per cent only participate in the 
electoral process. 
 
But, Madam Minister, the Metis peoples of Saskatchewan also 
participate in provincial elections, and rightly so. And I believe 
that those people have every right to be able to expect some 
responsibility, or a great deal of responsibility actually, Madam 
Minister, to be taken by this government to help them better 
understand and better use the electoral process. 
 
We have a Chief Electoral Officer in this province completely 
capable of handling provincial elections in a fair and democratic 
matter. I wonder if, Madam Minister, any thought has taken 
place in your department in having the services of the Chief 
Electoral Officer of Saskatchewan being used by the Metis 
Nation to help them work through their elections? 



1036 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — To the new critic for Aboriginal Affairs, I 
want to assure you that we share your concern. This is a big 
issue and it will receive attention. And I am very confident that 
the letter I have sent to Mr. Chartier will be not only read, but 
will be acted upon. 
 
Having said that, I do have to respect their internal governance 
processes, and I can only say to you that this government, like 
the opposition, is concerned that we have fair and open electoral 
processes for all people and that includes for people who vote 
. . . who participate in the Metis Nation selections. 
 
You mentioned that they had an 8 per cent participation rate and 
you are decrying that. I think that it was probably somewhat 
higher than 8 per cent. I think, if memory serves me correctly, 
around 4,000 people cast their votes. And I think that was 
probably about in the order of a 20 per cent participation rate. 
 
To put that into context, 20 per cent participation rate is 
fortunately or unfortunately — I would say unfortunately — 
about what we see in a lot of municipal elections too. And I 
know that municipal officials are constantly concerned about 
the low participation rate in their elections, yet nobody suggests 
that we wouldn’t have mayors and councillors, or reeves and 
councillors. 
 
So they had about the same participation rate as happens in 
local governments. Now what we have seen subsequent to that 
is that approximately 1,000 of those ballots were disqualified. 
And so I think that that does raise concerns that 25 per cent of 
the ballots would have been considered ineligible by the Metis 
Election Commission. 
 
With respect to your question about whether or not I would 
intervene and ask that the Office of the Chief Electoral Officer 
of Saskatchewan become involved in the Metis elections, my 
answer is no. I have already indicated to you that Metis people 
are a federal government responsibility and I think we, all levels 
of government, are always concerned about off-loading and 
about inadvertently taking on responsibilities that more properly 
belong with a different level of government. 
 
It would be irresponsible of me in the extreme to say anything 
that would imply that I feel that the federal government should 
not be exercising their responsibility and authority with respect 
to Metis people in this country and in Saskatchewan. 
 
Having said that, you are probably aware that we do have a 
tripartite process — Canada, Saskatchewan, and the Metis 
Nation. We are very concerned, as is the federal government. 
Canada is at the table. Just as early as tomorrow morning, there 
will be talks between my officials and the federal government 
officials. We will be raising this whole question of the elections 
at that tripartite table. We are not ignoring the concerns. We 
believe, as I’m sure does the opposition, that there have to fair, 
open, and accountable election processes in this country. That’s 
the only way a democracy can carry on. 
 
And I would hope and I’m sure that the Metis Nation of 
Saskatchewan believes that as well. And I’m sure that they are 
probably concerned when they look and see that the 

participation rate in their latest election was only 4,000 people, 
and one would have expected probably about 12,000 people to 
vote. So it is very concerning to see a lower and lower number 
of people voting in those elections. 
 
So I don’t know what more I can say to you. We share your 
concern. We are working to encourage and indeed to insist that 
the current MNS executive address this very serious issue very 
seriously and expeditiously. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good afternoon to the 
Minister of Aboriginal Affairs and the minister responsible for 
Intergovernmental Affairs, and I must say we’ve got somewhat 
of a broad and mishmash process here for dealing with all of the 
affairs that pertain to First Nations and Metis people, as well as 
justice and so on and all of the other things that we try to sort 
out that have to do with our First Nations and Metis people. 
 
Madam Minister, I have heard your comments thus far 
regarding the responsibility of the federal government as far as 
Metis affairs go in the province and, for that matter, First 
Nations affairs also. 
 
But I think you would have to agree that there is a great deal of 
taxpayers’ money . . . Saskatchewan is contributing money for 
Metis organizations, as well as for First Nations organizations 
in the province. And there is a tripartite process in place, as you 
have mentioned, to deal with these matters. 
 
And so that would mean to me and other people in this province 
that, in fact, there is a say on the part of the provincial 
government and your ministry in dealing with any issues that 
come forward, that the Metis people are putting forward to you 
or First Nations people are putting forward to you, and 
especially issues that are of great concern to them and where 
they’re asking you for their assistance. 
 
For instance, Madam Minister, we have the Associated Entities 
Fund in this province. Gaming money comes through this fund 
that is then directed to First Nations and Metis people. And 
that’s just one example. 
 
And I’ve had a number of questions, in fact, from Metis 
organizations and Metis grassroots people on whether or not the 
kind of funding and organizations that are put forward in public 
accounts and financial statements are the only way that money 
from the province or the federal government comes down to 
Metis organizations and so on. 
 
So in respect to that, Madam Minister, I’d like to ask you some 
specific questions. In looking through public accounts and 
financial statements, I came across a group called Regina Youth 
Development Corporation and apparently they’re a vocational 
mentoring program, from what I can pick up. But I’d like to 
know who these people are. Are they First Nations? Is it a First 
Nations organization or is it a Metis organization? 
 
And I’d like to know what programs they offer. And I ask that 
because there has been a great deal of concern over overlapping 
services in the province. 
 
And so I’d like to know who the Regina Youth Development 
Corporation are and I’d like to know when the organization 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1037 

 

began. 
 
And I understand from looking at financial statements and so on 
that this group has now been closed down, as such. So to my 
understanding, they were in operation for one year, received 
quite an amount of money, and I don’t think there’s been any 
accounting or monitoring of what has happened with this group. 
And so I’d like to know a number of things surrounding, first of 
all, who this group of people were that had this Regina Youth 
Development Corporation and what their mandate was, what 
they spent their money on, and why they closed their operation 
down within one year of setting it up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, and I would like to welcome 
the member from Humboldt, the Aboriginal Affairs critic. I 
thank you for the question. It’s a very specific one and I 
apologize for the delay in responding to you. But the reason for 
the delay is my officials have been frantically flipping through 
the paper that we have here and searching their memory banks 
and trying to find any knowledge, any corporate knowledge, of 
this group, the Regina Youth Development Corporation. 
 
On a cursory review of the documents that we have here in the 
legislature to answer estimates questions, I have to say we have 
no data that indicates that our department has provided any 
financial support to this organization. Indeed, no one here 
seems to have any knowledge of this organization at all. 
 
Having said that, though, I certainly will undertake to check 
with my colleagues in cabinet and find out if any other 
government department knows anything about this Regina 
Youth Development Corporation and if they did provide them 
with any financial support. If they have, I will certainly 
undertake to provide an explanation for you. 
 
And just, I’m going to close my answer in this regard by 
emphasizing again what I said the last time we were up for 
estimates in Aboriginal Affairs, I do not feel that my office is 
one that is directly responsible for First Nations and Metis 
people. We can provide an advocacy role. We can provide 
facilitation and mediation, but we believe very strongly in the 
process of self-government, and we respect the structures that 
First Nations and Metis people have in place. 
 
And what I can undertake to do though, when you have 
concerns that are brought to you by First Nations or Metis 
people such as the concern that you raised in the House the last 
time we dealt with estimates about Piapot Reserve, we will 
immediately sit down with people and undertake a mediation 
and facilitation role and help them to get the answers to these 
financial questions that they’re raising. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
can understand your views and your thoughts exactly on how 
you feel your ministry is involved with Metis and First Nations 
people, but I don’t think it cuts a lot of ice with the people of 
the province. Not what you’ve said, but if that’s all that your 
mandate is, I think people are asking for more than that and I 
think that grassroots Metis and First Nations people are asking 
more than that, simply because they’ve made the statement to 
me a number of times that there’s taxpayers’ money that is 
flowing through to these organizations, the leadership of these 
organizations. 

That money should be accounted for. There should be detailed 
accounting for that. There should be an ability for First Nations 
and Metis people to access audits, detailed audits of how the 
money was spent. And they don’t find that at the provincial 
level there’s anyone really that seems to have the authority to 
give out these detailed audits or to look after these affairs when 
there is allegations of corruption. And actually there have been, 
I guess, some proof that there has been corruption. 
 
So certainly I think people in the province — Metis people and 
First Nations — are expecting that you, within your ministry, 
should have the right and the responsibility in fact to make sure 
that there is accountability and responsibility for the funds that 
are being used, because the tax dollars come from all people in 
the province. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Madam Minister, I’d just like to refer again to the percentage of 
funds that come through the Associated Entities Fund to Metis 
and First Nations people. Now, Madam Minister, it is my 
understanding that the policy is that there’s 25 per cent of 
funding that should go to First Nations and Metis people 
organizations through gaming money. I have had it brought to 
my attention that the Clarence Campeau fund receives $2 
million, and I did bring this up with you the last time we were 
talking about this in estimates — that in fact there’s a feeling 
that there is more than 25 per cent going to the Metis 
association of Saskatchewan. 
 
And there’s an allegation brought forward to me that money . . . 
that there’s money beyond the Clarence Campeau fund that is 
being distributed to different organizations that is, in fact, 
bringing the Metis association’s funding up to about 40 per cent 
rather than 25. 
 
So I guess what I’m doing is I’m looking at things that I have 
here . . . In fact the Regina Youth Development Corp, I’m 
trying to find out from you if this is a Metis organization, if it’s 
a First Nation organization — who it is? — because there was a 
certain amount of money given there. And for instance, if this is 
one organization that is Metis that is receiving money above 
and beyond the 25 per cent, we need to know and find out. 
 
I appreciate the fact that you’ve mentioned that you’re going to 
be looking into it. And if your officials can look into the last 
two fiscal years and see if they can find that, it has been 
something brought to my attention and people are concerned 
about it. 
 
Madam Minister, I’d just like to move over to some First 
Nations concerns that were brought to me. As you well know, I 
think the Government of Saskatchewan has stated a number of 
times that they’d like to see First Nations people running certain 
First Nations programs and so on. But the Women of the Dawn 
have been quite concerned that they received a letter that they 
were not going to be successful in their bid this last while to be 
the preferred service provider for services to multi-barriered 
clients in Regina. 
 
And I would like you today, if you could, Madam Minister, to 
give me an explanation of why the Women of the Dawn did not 
have a reissuing of the contract that they have had in the past 



1038 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

couple of years. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much for that extensive 
question; I think there were probably three or four questions 
embedded in your remarks, Madam Member. 
 
So I want to first of all assure you that while I am telling you I 
do not feel I am the minister responsible for these people in the 
sense that you seem to be implying, I certainly — and I want to 
assure you that I have a great deal of respect for the First 
Nations and Metis organizations and their self-government 
process — I do feel that my office can act as an advocate in 
certain circumstances and can provide mediation and 
facilitation services to iron out some of these issues that you 
raise. 
 
But we do far more than that. We are engaged very actively in 
the treaty land entitlement process and, as you will know, we 
have a very active and extensive Metis and off-reserve strategy 
with four goals — employment, education, economic 
development, and community health. And we will be making 
more specific announcements about the strategies and 
objectives of those goals in the coming weeks. 
 
So we do an incredible amount in our office. But I want to tell 
you that the one thing I do not think is my job is to hold the 
federal government accountable for monies that it transfers to 
different organizations. It’s not my job to make sure that the 
federal government’s money is spent properly. The federal 
government has its own processes in place. 
 
I’ve already indicated to you that my officials have no 
knowledge at this time about the Regina Youth Development 
Corporation. I have undertaken to do a search throughout 
government to find out if any departments do know about this 
particular organization. We will look, as you have suggested, in 
the last two fiscal years and find out if any provincial 
government department did provide any funds to this 
organization. And we will find out how the money was spent 
and how it was accounted for. 
 
I want to assure you that any money that Aboriginal Affairs 
gives out is given out with strict accountability and 
responsibility criteria. We ask for work plans and quarterly 
reports. Basically, Madam Member, we ask them to tell us what 
they’re going to do and then we ask them to tell us what they 
did. And we make sure that the two match. 
 
But I do have to say that I’m a little disturbed by the tone of 
your questions, both today and the last time that we were up in 
estimates, because you keep bringing up comments like 
corruption and non-accountable and so forth. And I 
categorically reject that view of First Nations and Metis people. 
It seems to me that no one does the people of Saskatchewan a 
good service by running around and suggesting that Aboriginal 
people are nothing but problems. 
 
And I would ask you, Madam Member, in your responsibility as 
opposition critic for Aboriginal Affairs, to look at the great 
number of successes and the positive role models that there are 
in First Nations and Metis organizations. These are proud and 
strong people and it is simply a wrong-headed notion, I would 
maintain, to continually drag out stories of failure or to suggest 

that there aren’t very positive things happening in Metis and 
First Nations communities. 
 
Now with respect to your question about the funding for 
Women of the Dawn. Last year my ministry provided $2,000 to 
the Women of the Dawn. We can give you more specifics on 
that if you wish. 
 
With your respect to your question of, why were they denied 
funding for this year, I do believe that that question should be 
more appropriately addressed to the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education and Skills Training because it was his office, his 
department, that evaluated the services that were being provided 
by Women of the Dawn. They did call for a request for proposal 
for the training that Women of the Dawn had been doing, and 
his office is the one that would have the specific reasons why 
the Women of the Dawn contract was not renewed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — . . . report progress, Mr. Chair. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
Office of Northern Affairs 

 
Subvote (EC10) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Northern Affairs. 
Would he please introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, with me is Alex Campbell, the 
deputy minister; and also Alayne Bigwin, who is the ADM 
(assistant deputy minister); and Donna Dumont, who is the 
director of finance and administration. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome to you and welcome to your officials. It’s a 
pleasure that you could be here this afternoon. 
 
Unfortunately, as we see by the clock on the wall, we’re not 
going to get an awful lot of time. So I’ll have to hope that you 
. . . Mr. Minister, that you’ll be able to bring your officials back 
for another time and we can explore some other avenues that 
need to be explored. 
 
And certainly, there are other members on this side of the 
House that would also like to take an opportunity to be able to 
quiz you about the events and the affairs that Northern Affairs 
is involved in. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was noticing that — and I have of course over 
the last couple of years — certainly the Department of Northern 
Affairs is involved in a peripheral way in quite a few programs 
in the North. And I wonder if you would take a few minutes and 
illustrate for us all the programs that your department becomes 
involved in, in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Well thanks very much for the question 
from the member of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Overall, in regards to the program itself, I’ll give you the 
program headlines. And if you want some specific questions in 
regards to the programs itself, I know that you will be asking 



May 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1039 

 

me more questions later on at a different time. So I’ll just give 
you an overview. 
 
What we have is a Northern Development Fund. Basically we 
operate a Northern Development Fund which provides loans for 
development for small businesses in northern Saskatchewan in 
various areas, from traditional resource use to the different areas 
in forestry and mining, etc. 
 
Then we have a commercial fish transportation subsidy. We 
know the high costs of transportation, particularly as you go up 
north and we know that there are problems relating to the flying 
in of fish from the Far North. So we have a transportation 
subsidy. And I note that Manitoba has one as well and we 
operate one in Saskatchewan. And so that’s another program 
area that we work in. 
 
We also have a Northern Mines Monitoring Secretariat, and the 
work that we do with the environmental quality committees, 
which are unique in Canada. Environmental quality committees 
are a unique aspect in regards to involvement of peoples in 
particular areas. You know, in regards to making sure that 
they’re involved in strategic decision-making processes relating 
to the environment and making sure that our goals of 
sustainable development are being followed. So that’s an 
important aspect in regards to northern mines monitoring, as 
well as environmental development. 
 
We also have surface lease agreements. And along with the 
surface lease agreements we have human resource development 
agreements. 
 
Those human resource development agreements, of course, first 
of all, the licence itself provides a licence for the mining 
companies to operate in the North. But we have conditions in 
regards to the improvement and the utilization of the resources 
in our area, means also utilizing the people and resources in our 
area. 
 
(16:45) 
 
So we have a human resource development agreement that’s 
fairly flexible, probably a leadership role across Canada in 
regards to these development agreements that deal with 
training. And they also deal with the question of making sure 
our people are employed, from the North, as well as business 
contracts, and so that in effect we have a, what you would say, a 
positive effect on the people in northern Saskatchewan area. 
 
We also have the northern strategy. And on the northern 
strategy, we have an overall northern development, an Interim 
Northern Development Board, and we look at the strategic areas 
in regards to where the developments should occur — on what 
aspects of mining, on what aspects of forestry, whether we 
should move into the newer areas of the berry picking, as well 
as getting the aspects of mushrooms and other areas. 
 
So those are the major areas: Northern Development Fund, 
commercial fish transportation, northern mines monitoring, 
environmental quality committees, the surface lease 
agreements, the human resource development agreements, and 
the northern strategy. 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. You spoke about the Northern Business Development 
Fund and certainly it’s incumbent that businesses that are trying 
to get started up in the North have an opportunity to have access 
to monies that they can use to get their businesses up and 
running. 
 
Is the Northern Business Development Fund tied entirely to the 
Department of Northern Affairs, Mr. Minister, or is the fund 
tied to other lending agencies that the province uses to help 
small businesses get started? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, they are tied in. We try and work out 
with that strategy to do the linkage, not only with the fund. We 
have a max of 250,000 in one of the funds. So you get a lot of 
funds that range at the smaller level, some at the medium level, 
and some at the higher level of 250,000. 
 
And in that fund we try and create a linkage with the federal 
programs, you know, like community futures, and we try and 
then figure out a strategy where we will linkage not only the 
federal programming but the private sector funding; you know, 
the banks. And we try and then figure out a strategy on each 
project, depending on the size, on how this’ll be done. So 
there’s co-operation with the private sector, you know, banking 
institutions, as well as the federal government programming and 
the provincial government program. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Chair, to 
the minister, you talked about the Northern Business 
Development Fund being used to help link northern businesses 
in setting up new businesses or expansion and linking them to 
federal programs. Does the Northern Business Development 
Fund also help businesses in northern Saskatchewan link with 
the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation or the 
Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, as an example, on the Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Corporation . . . I happened to sit in on the 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. What we did was we 
created a northern arm of the Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation, and very interestingly enough the person that used 
to work for us in Northern Affairs is now working for the 
northern arm of the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. 
And that person is located right in the North, so that people can 
have easier access to the person in regards to the development 
that they will have. 
 
And they’ve been involved right now on the mining sector, and 
now we’re talking about the forestry sector. And I think it’s a 
fairly good strategy in this sense. The development that we do 
have, the smaller-scale development on retail and other sectors, 
a quarter of a million is fine. But once you get into the 
larger-scale development, on a $20 million mill, it’s 
insufficient. So it becomes very important to have another 
funding arm, which is a little bit more than the 250,000, maybe 
roughly around a million dollars. 
 
So that’s where SOCO (Saskatchewan Opportunities 
Corporation) then becomes a strategic player and that, in effect, 
that is what we’re doing by creating a northern arm of SOCO. 
So that where it was not accessible before, now it has become 
accessible by the people of the North. Because obviously it’s a 



1040 Saskatchewan Hansard May 9, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation, and northern 
Saskatchewan is part of Saskatchewan, so in that sense SOCO 
has now become part of northern development in the recent past 
two years. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, you talked also about the fish transportation subsidy. 
And certainly being able for Saskatchewan to participate in 
national and international markets, it’s incumbent upon us to be 
able to get that fish to market, and certainly we’re in a 
competitive world and this government is looking at every way 
they can to be able to keep the fishermen in northern 
Saskatchewan competitive. 
 
My understanding, Mr. Minister, and maybe you can correct 
me, but the fish that are being transported out of northern 
Saskatchewan are not processed. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — That’s correct. What’s been happening is 
this: when the decisions were made way before our time, and I 
think it was back in 1969 when they developed the federal 
Crown, you know, in Winnipeg, and from there all the 
provinces particularly in the Western Canada co-operated to 
make sure that the marketing was done by the Freshwater Fish 
Marketing Corporation out of Winnipeg. So that’s where, you 
know the processing is done on the fish. There is an initial level 
of cleaning, etc., that is being done at the lakeshore over here 
but then it is shipped to Winnipeg. 
 
And the main point on your other information is that in 
Manitoba they provide about 200,000 on a transportation 
subsidy. Alberta I think provides about 20,000, something like 
that. But our subsidy is about $305,000. So that we do provide a 
greater bit of help for our people. It’s a little bit further on from 
than even Manitoba and their 200,000 because of the costs of 
the transportation when you’re trying to fly in from the northern 
lakes. 
 
And we also did do this this past year. We had a study that was 
done on the fishing and it was relayed back to us that some of 
the facilities in keeping the fish fresh were not up to par. So 
many of the people from the North said we need to improve our 
ice-packing plants to keep the fish fresh at the community level, 
at the lakeshore level. 
 
So we provided for 700,000 this year to be able to deal with that 
issue so that indeed we can keep our fish a lot fresher to take 
them to the market. Because in some cases what had happened 
was that because of the long trip to Winnipeg and because of 
the lack of proper facilities, you know, at the lakeshore level, 
the fish was not as fresh as it should have been. And in some 
cases therefore there’s a loss to the fisherman and fisherwoman 
in regards to what happens. So I think in that sense, the 
province is providing a leadership in Canada on the support that 
we provide for people doing commercial fishing. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister. Certainly we want to applaud all efforts that are made 
to enhance the quality of product that comes out of northern 
Saskatchewan so that we ensure that a quality product hits the 
tables of the consumer. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, has any thought been put into expanding the 

processing opportunities in northern Saskatchewan even further 
than what we’re at now so that the fish might arrive to the 
consumer in an even fresher condition, and also give the people 
of Saskatchewan more opportunity to be involved in job 
opportunities in packaging fish. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — That’s an excellent question. We tried to 
do some work in that area over time because there was a lot of 
concerns raised in regards to the possibilities of getting a 
processing plant and there was a proposal done for Prince 
Albert. Now when that was done, that study was commissioned 
and the feedback we got from Freshwater and the report on it 
was that it would go in a hole by about $600,000 per year. 
 
So when that report came to us we were very, very concerned 
that we don’t create something that’s not going to be viable and 
sustainable over the long-run. So the basis of the study that was 
done about . . . I think it was about four years ago. 
 
Since then we have been meeting with the people in the 
industry and they have come back with newer ideas on what is 
possible — that there might be private sector interest in this 
area and possibly even the bands may be interested in coming 
together with a plan, or even some people have talked about the 
fact that when we did the lakeshore facilities we had the co-ops 
involved. So we created co-ops to get at the level of 
development when we built these lakeshore facilities. So we 
thought maybe the co-op could get involved. 
 
So a lot of ideas have been brought forward to try and get a, you 
know, the idea of value-adding into our product in 
Saskatchewan. So we’re looking at that. 
 
We’re also looking at the possibility of aquaculture. There are 
definitely problems with aquaculture in different parts of the 
world, especially not only in terms of the environment but in 
terms of the economics on it over the long-run. So we’re 
looking at that as well. 
 
So we’re trying to find out exactly our next steps on it, and 
we’re working with a co-operative in the province and we’re 
moving forward. And I’m pretty sure there will be newer plans 
that will be coming forward. 
 
But the idea of processing itself is not lost and we are trying to 
figure out what is the best strategy for it. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 
 
 
 


