















































Hansard: May 14, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1097 
 May 14, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
residents of several communities in the southwest have 
expressed their concern about the possible implications of the 
EMS (emergency medical services) report and they are very 
dependent on the ambulance at Richmound, Saskatchewan. 
Their prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Burstall, 
Golden Prairie, Richmound, Saskatchewan, and from the 
community of Hilda, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present approximately 120 signatures on a petition 
from people in the Bruno area who would like to become part 
of the Humboldt telephone exchange. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 

 
Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 
 

And this petition is signed completely by members from Bruno. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, today I have a petition signed by 
good citizens of Saskatchewan expressing interest in 
maintaining and upgrading of the Saskatchewan road network. 
And the prayer goes: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 
increasing the funding to $900 million over the next three 
years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Pelly, Kamsack, and Canora. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition about the government . . . provincial 
government’s report, the Saskatchewan EMS development 
project, which calls for provincially run and centrally operated 

ambulance services. Mr. Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in this EMS report 
and affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
communities of Beechy and Demaine, and I’m pleased to 
present the petition on their behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand 
today also to present a petition regarding the Fyke report. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health care 
centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, public 
health, home care, long-term care services for use in our 
district and beyond. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest, Drinkwater, Baildon, and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about 
the cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by citizens of Limerick, Verwood, and 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise on behalf 
of people from across southwest Saskatchewan concerned about 
the hospital. And they have signed the petition, the prayer 
which reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by residents of the 
city of Swift Current, of Gull Lake, of Abbey, of Eston, Mr. 
Speaker, and the city of Regina, as well as Waldeck. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of southern Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the speed at which vehicles can pass 
emergency tow trucks. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
include emergency tow trucks in their description of 
emergency vehicles for Bill 78, section 37(1). 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Yellow 
Grass, and Pangman, and Francis. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too present petitions on 
behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan regarding the EMS service. 
This petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Redvers, 
Wauchope area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 

Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the people of the 
Redvers, Wauchope, and Alida areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by good citizens concerned about the high rates of 
SaskEnergy, SaskPower. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Watson, Bladworth, Kenaston, 
Strongfield, Loreburn, Elbow, Regina, Saskatoon, Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by the citizens 
of Saskatchewan concerned about the cellular telephone 
coverage. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 

 
And the citizens on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from Chitek 
Lake, Spiritwood, Shell Lake, and Medstead. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with what’s 
happening at Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at very least, current 
levels of service and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Assiniboia, 
Crane Valley, and Willow Bunch. 
 
I so present. 
 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
with continued and increasing concerns with reference to the 
cuts at the Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signators on this are from Assiniboia, 
Mossbank, Hazenmore, Ardill, Rockglen, Lafleche, and 
Meyronne. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Petitions of citizens asking the government to continue to 
fund the province’s road network. 

 
And other petitions that are addendums to sessional papers 
nos. 3, 4, 5, 10, 58, 121, and 137. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my pleasure to introduce to you this afternoon and through you 
to my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly, 45 grade 5 and 
grade 6 students from the good school of McLurg in the 
constituency of Regina Sherwood. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it’s very special for me because I’d also like 
to welcome Mrs. Carol Grant and Dorothy Lind, the teachers; 
and the parent volunteers, Gary Wilmot, Mrs. Zacharias, Mr. 
Piotrofsky, and Mrs. Lott. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is the sixth year in a row Mrs. Grant has 
brought classes here and it’s a great pleasure to see her again. 
I’d like to point out to you and to the members of the 
Assembly, that Mrs. Grant taught both of my sons preschool in 
a program before, and I taught her son baseball. 
 
Well both of my sons are graduating from university a week 
from this Friday, here at the U of R (University of Regina), and 
her son, I notice, isn’t playing professional baseball. So that 
does go to show who the better teacher has been. 
 
Welcome to Mrs. Grant and to her class from McLurg. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m delighted today 
to stand and introduce to you and through you to all members, 
students from my constituency who are job-shadowing me 
today. They’re a bright, enthusiastic group of people and we 
won’t have to worry about the future of our province when 
these young people are in charge of it. 

Today we have Caitlin Ponath from Naicam, Jake Berg from 
Pleasantdale, Briana Pisian from Wadena, Logan Banadyga 
from Wadena, Koren Wohlgemuth from Spalding, Stacey Lutz 
from Porcupine Plain, Derita Ekra from Weekes, Amy Shuya 
from Porcupine Plain, Stephanie Geenen from Muenster, 
Heather Moellenbeck from Englefeld, and Lacey Bohay from 
Englefeld as well. 
 
Please welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a former 
member of the Youth Parliament, I’m happy to introduce two 
young men who are members of Youth Parliament who take an 
active role in political life in this province. They’re both up in 
the west gallery — Dana Brûlé and Steven Lloyd. 
 
Dana is a former leader of the official opposition in Youth 
Parliament and he wanted me to assure the members opposite 
that that is in no way to mean that he has a further association 
with the opposition at this time. 
 
And the other chap, Steven Lloyd, was former premier, former 
premier of the Youth Parliament and he wanted me to assure 
the members that he is still a strong supporter of government. 
 
So welcome to you folks and I hope you enjoy the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Regina Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was a great honour on Saturday night for me to attend the 
second annual Regina Chamber of Commerce Paragon Awards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, nine different businesses were awarded excellence 
in their categories. And it was really quite interesting to go 
through and see some of the businesses that have done so well. 
 
It was also interesting to know that the categories were set up 
that no government could compete against private industry, a 
lesson that perhaps this government should know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’m just going to briefly go 
through the nine different award winners and young 
entrepreneurs. It was Total Landscape Care for community 
involvement; it was National Print-It Centre/Signature Graphics 
on community achievement; Z99 for their telethon that they do 
for infant care. Marketing and promotion achievement was 
Access Communications. Export achievement was Off the Wall 
Productions who does 90 per cent of its work outside the 
province but is centred here in Regina. 
 
(13:45) 
 
CNT Tours won customer service excellence, and CNT Tours 
quite often do we have in the gallery showing people the 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

Legislative Building. New business venture was StoneCreek 
Financial Group; the Athena award and also the business of the 
year award was presented to Employment Network Inc. 
 
A job well done by these nine businesses as well as all the other 
ones that were nominated in those categories. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Important Milestone for North Central Health District 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Friday there 
was an event which contained a double dose of good news for 
the people of Melfort and the North Central Health District. 
 
The Minister of Health, the member from Melfort, the deputy 
mayor, and the chairperson of the health district all took part in 
the official opening of the expanded, renovated Melfort 
Hospital. That was the first dose. 
 
In the hospital, the emergency ward, the outpatient areas, the 
lab, and the X-ray areas were all improved. And it was fitting 
that the ribbon-cutting ceremony took place during the health 
district’s staff appreciation event because, of course, it is the 
medical professionals and support staff who ensure the high 
quality of health care we have come to expect. This is good 
news for Melfort and we’re all happy for it. 
 
At the same time though, Mr. Speaker, an additional 
announcement was made. The minister announced that approval 
has been given for a replacement project which will involve 
new construction of 105 long-term care beds with support 
services to replace the current Parkland Care Centre. 
Construction for this project will commence next spring with a 
75/25 per cent cost sharing between the province and local 
governments. This too is good news. 
 
Another example of people working together to ensure the very 
best health services possible. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too attended an 
event this past Friday that I had the pleasure of joining the 
Minister of Health at in my constituency. And it marked two 
important milestones in the North Central Health District. 
 
The first milestone was the ribbon-cutting for the renovation 
and expansion of the emergency, outpatients, laboratory, and 
X-ray departments at the Melfort Hospital. This million-dollar 
project will greatly enhance the services that the Melfort 
Hospital will be able to provide to the citizens of the entire 
district and beyond. 
 
The second milestone was the announcement by the Minister of 
Health that the province has granted final approval for the 
construction of the new 105-bed long-term care facility to 
replace the aging Parkland hospital. 
 
Both of these milestones are a result of a great deal of effort by 
many people. 
 
First let me express our community’s appreciation to the 

Minister of Health for his participation in this event. The 
minister’s interest and commitment to this project is noted and 
appreciated. The North Central Health District chairman, Dale 
Link, the board, and CEO (chief executive officer), David Fan, 
congratulations for a job well done. 
 
I’m sure that the minister will agree that these projects were 
easier to support because of the excellent preparation and 
documentation that was done by all. 
 
And finally to all the health care workers in the district, 
congratulations. It is because of your ongoing commitment to 
improving health care services that all of this is possible. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Education Conference in Meadow Lake 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 10 it 
was my great pleasure to bring greetings from the government 
and the Minister of Education at the Breaking Down Barriers: 
Old Challenges, New Solutions Conference in Meadow Lake, a 
Conference for Storefront and Alternative Schools of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Every child, Mr. Speaker, regardless of residence, race, social 
class, or any other consideration deserves the best our education 
system has to offer. A school is more than bricks and mortar. It 
is more than desks and books. A school is a place where 
teachers and students come together in the creative search for 
knowledge and truth. 
 
Success in education is measured in the lives of individual 
children. For those who work in the alternative school settings, 
the challenges can be enormous. At the Store Front School in 
Meadow Lake and throughout Saskatchewan, creative and 
dedicated educators are adapting the education system to the 
particular needs of their students. 
 
Storefront and alternative schools are a valuable resource in 
meeting the diverse needs of Saskatchewan students. Storefront 
and alternative schools represent the flexibility, responsiveness, 
and local initiative that Saskatchewan Education encourages 
and supports. A very large thank you to those educators, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Police Week 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to rise in the House today to raise awareness of 
National Police Week. Included in this week is International 
Peace Officer Memorial Day, to be recognized tomorrow, May 
15. 
 
Mr. Speaker, National Police Week is governed by four specific 
objectives: to act as a vehicle to reinforce ties with the 
community; to honour police officers for the public safety and 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

 

security they provide to their communities; to promote the work 
that the police do in those communities; and to inform the 
community about the police’s role in public safety and security. 
 
Mr. Speaker, next to our health, nothing is more important and 
sacred than our own safety and security and that of the 
communities in which we live. Twenty-four hours a day, 365 
days a year we depend on the police officers, not only to protect 
us when we need protecting but also to uphold the laws that we 
as a peacekeeping society have set down. 
 
In the past decade, Mr. Speaker, we have seen appalling 
increase in crime statistics, some of these increases occurring 
right here in Saskatchewan. Residents in all communities are 
concerned about their own safety and want reassurance that 
crime prevention remains a priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House to join me in 
recognizing the important contribution that all police officers 
make in our province by acknowledging National Police Week 
here in the province. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Honey Bee Manufacturing Ltd. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More success in rural 
Saskatchewan. Honey Bee Manufacturing of Frontier is in the 
middle of a significant expansion project, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For those of you who are unaware, Honey Bee Manufacturing 
Ltd. is primarily involved in the manufacturing and distribution 
of products for the farm equipment market. This internationally 
successful company started on a farm near Bracken, 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, through the innovative thought of 
Greg and Glenn Honey. 
 
In the late 1970s Greg and Glenn designed a rod weeder 
attachment for tillage equipment. This weeder along with the 
patent covering the quick-attach mounting concept in 1985 
placed the Honeys on the road to success or in this case, the 
field to success, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, construction on an addition to the plant in 
Frontier has taken place to support the increase in demand. This 
expansion will allow the Frontier-based business to streamline 
its operations and increase production capacity significantly. 
 
Honey Bee Manufacturing is one of the biggest employers in 
southern Saskatchewan, employing about 110 people on the 
shop floor alone. This company’s success means success for 
Frontier and its surrounding area. 
 
That is why this government would like to congratulate Greg 
and Glenn Honey on their outstanding achievement. It is people 
and companies like these that will help this province into a 
prosperous future, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Spiritwood and District Co-op 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Even more good news 

for the province of Saskatchewan. The Spiritwood and District 
Co-op had their fourth consecutive record-breaking year in 
fiscal 2000, topping last year’s growth in sales by a phenomenal 
33.2 per cent. 
 
Sales of 9,136,003 displayed an increase of almost 1.3 million 
over 1999 sales. Mr. Speaker, the co-op’s net savings also 
reached a record level, exceeding $576,000 this year. 
 
In 1961 — its first year of operation — the co-op sales were 
$71,580. Now $71,000 is an average business day in the month 
of June for the co-op. At a recent conference in Saskatoon the 
board president for the Spiritwood Co-op said: 
 

The question of what makes one co-op successful and 
viable while another struggles to survive was discussed. 
The answers: remain grassroots oriented, do what you do 
best, increase benefits for the membership, and cultivate 
membership loyalty. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in these same principles 
for success. And working together with rural Saskatchewan and 
sticking close to our grassroots, this government is dedicated to 
ensuring the continued prosperity of all its people. 
 
I’d like all members of the House to join with me in 
congratulating manager, Warner Kabatoff and the staff of the 
Spiritwood Co-op on a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskTel Investment in Ontario Company 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question’s for the 
minister responsible for SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has already lost millions of dollars on its 
failed ventures into the dot-com industry like IQ&A and 
Clickabid. But have they learned anything from this, Mr. 
Speaker? Well apparently not. 
 
Last week the NDP (New Democratic Party) spent another $8.3 
million to buy an Ontario-based company called agdealer.com. 
This company helps ag dealers and producers buy and sell 
equipment online. But, Mr. Speaker, there is already a 
Saskatchewan company that is a recognized industry leader in 
this area. IronSolutions.com of Outlook, Saskatchewan provides 
exactly the same service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, why did SaskTel spend $8.3 
million to buy an Ontario company to compete with a very 
successful Saskatchewan company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
member opposite is exactly wrong when he says they provide 
exactly the same service. They do not. 
 
I have personally been in contact with the people from ironwork 
solutions, Mr. Speaker. In fact, what Ag Dealer provides, the 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

service they provide is complementary to what ironworks 
provides, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve spoken with them directly. It’s my 
understanding they will also be meeting with SaskTel officials, 
I believe this Wednesday, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the company 
will be grateful for the meeting. The government may also want 
to meet with the Canada West Equipment Dealers who have 
some questions about this deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, IRON Solutions is recognized as a North 
American industry leader. They serve about 6,000 implement 
dealers in Canada and the US (United States). Their Web site 
attracts over a million hits a week. They have built this very 
successful company in Outlook, Saskatchewan. They employ 
about 20 workers with a $700,000-a-year payroll. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canada West Equipment Dealers Association 
says, and I quote: 
 

More dealers in Saskatchewan use IRON Solutions than 
any other service. So it’s hard to believe dealers were 
asking for the services provided by agdealer.com. This 
announcement comes as a complete surprise (they say). 

 
They go on to say: 
 

We were not consulted by SaskTel as to the existing 
services that were in place for dealers or whether or not 
additional services were even necessary. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why did the NDP buy an 
Ontario-based dot-com company to compete with a 
Saskatchewan company without even consulting Saskatchewan 
equipment dealers as to whether they’d use the service? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in answer to the 
question why did we do it, we did it because we wanted to 
diverse the portfolio; we want to bring jobs to Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s why we wanted to do it, Mr. Speaker. We 
want to raise revenues outside of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say again to the member, we are not in 
competition with this company. I’ve personally been in 
discussion with the people from ironworks. Let me lay out 
clearly what they do, SaskTel through Ag Dealer, Mr. Speaker, 
provides the hardware, if you will, ironworks solutions, Mr. 
Speaker, provides the software, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There may be some very small area, Mr. Speaker, where there is 
overlap, but it is very, very small, Mr. Speaker. We’ve been in 
consultation with them. There’s a meeting coming up on 
Wednesday, as I understand it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the minister has seen the 

open letter that IRON Solutions wrote on this very subject, and 
they referred to Ag Dealers dot-com as one of their major 
competitors in this country, Mr. Speaker. They do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it now appears that SaskTel has spent 8.3 million 
taxpayers’ dollars to buy a service for farm implement dealers 
that they . . . and they didn’t even bother to ask those dealers if 
they wanted it, Mr. Speaker. The Canada West Equipment 
Dealers Association says that ag dealers were quite happy with 
IRON Solutions. They don’t want SaskTel’s new service, they 
don’t need SaskTel’s new service, and very likely, they won’t 
use SaskTel’s new service. 
 
They say, and I quote: 
 

We question why the government would form an alliance 
with a less successful competitor to an independent 
Saskatchewan-based business. 

 
It’s very clear that this investment in Ag Dealer dot-com is, 
quote, “not in the best interest of dealers in the province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it’s not too late, will the minister rethink this 
deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker the member says that 
the dealerships like the work that ironworks provides, and the 
service that they provide. And he’s right — of course they do, 
Mr. Speaker, they provide very good service to the dealerships 
of Saskatchewan. And Mr. Speaker, Ag Dealer as well, has . . . 
we’ve received a number of calls from different dealers who are 
very appreciative of this as well. 
 
They are complementary services, Mr. Speaker. Ag Dealer, 
through SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, provides the hardware, as I’ve 
described. Ironwork solutions as the member has correctly 
described provides the software, Mr. Speaker. They 
complement each other, Mr. Speaker, very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, a moment ago in justifying the 
purchase of an Ontario company to compete in part, at least, 
with a Saskatchewan company, the minister indicated that it 
was all about diversification and job creation. How does buying 
an Ontario company create jobs in Saskatchewan? They don’t 
get it over there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this particular deal there is no good outcome. If 
this venture fails, SaskTel stands to lose millions. If it succeeds, 
in part it will succeed at the expense of a company already in 
business and operating in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s 
the bottom line here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, can the minister explain the public 
policy behind that, and can he confirm if in fact anybody in the 
cabinet asked these questions when he brought this deal 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

 

forward. What is the public policy benefit of buying an 
Ontario-based company to compete with a Saskatchewan firm 
already in business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, they are not 
directly in competition with ironworks solutions in any way, 
Mr. Speaker. There will be some small overlap. We’ve talked 
about that with the company, Mr. Speaker. I said that in my last 
answer, Mr. Speaker. We’ve talked with them; we’re going to 
meet with them on Wednesday, as I understand it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we offer a very different service through 
AgDealer, Mr. Speaker. It is basically the hard line that is 
provided through AgDealer, and it’s the software package that’s 
provided through ironworks. They complement each other, Mr. 
Speaker. And SaskTel, through AgDealer, is prepared to work 
with anyone, and they’ll be meeting with them on Wednesday, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) can’t seem to adequately explain how this deal 
is going to help Saskatchewan, so I’d like to ask the Minister of 
Rural Revitalization. Madam Minister, how does this deal help 
rural Saskatchewan? 
 
Now as I understand it, the minister’s job is to look at every 
policy decision through a rural lens. Those are her words 
exactly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel just spent $8.3 million to buy up an 
Ontario company. Now that’s going to compete with a business 
headquartered in Outlook, Saskatchewan. I’d like to ask the 
minister if she looked at this decision, and if she would provide 
us with her department’s analysis of how this deal will help 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to thank the member for the question. I had the 
opportunity to be in Outlook last week and had the opportunity 
to travel with one of the vice-presidents of ironworks to 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what I can say to the member is that SaskTel last 
year garnered over $30 million in dividends that were returned 
to the people of this province. SaskTel is a provincial telephone 
company that is competing within a telephone world that is 
becoming increasingly globalized. 
 
If we are to keep SaskTel and its head office jobs in this 
province along with the other jobs in rural Saskatchewan, we 
have to grow SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. Ironworks . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I would all 
members to give the minister a chance to give her complete 
answer. 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, if we are to keep jobs in 
this province, we need to keep SaskTel, not only head office 
jobs but jobs all around rural Saskatchewan. We think that Ag 
Dealer, along with ironworks which is located in Outlook, 
Saskatchewan, has the perfect synergy to grow SaskTel and 
return more dividends and more jobs to the people of this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister has no answer because there is no adequate answer to 
this question. This decision doesn’t help rural Saskatchewan. It 
doesn’t help anyone in Saskatchewan, for that matter. In fact, 
the minister probably wasn’t even aware of it. CIC officials 
didn’t think they had to answer questions from their former 
vice-chair and they certainly aren’t going to take any direction 
from the Minister of Rural Revitalization. 
 
Mr. Speaker, did the minister even know about this deal, that 
SaskTel was going into competition with a rural 
Saskatchewan-based company, or did SaskTel fail to provide 
this information to the minister and the cabinet as well? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What I can 
inform the member is that SaskTel has recently purchased Ag 
Dealer, and as the member or the minister for CIC indicated, we 
do not believe that this is in direct competition to ironworks. 
 
What we do believe, Mr. Speaker, and that is why the meeting 
will occur on Wednesday, is that we have the ability in this 
province to create a synergy between ironworks and Ag Dealer 
and create the biggest on-line used equipment, farm equipment, 
and heavy equipment in North America. And that means jobs in 
rural Saskatchewan; that means jobs in this province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, we need to grow the economy, we need to create 
wealth, and we need to return dividends to the people of this 
province. That’s what this government’s about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Speaker, having spent about 20 of the last 
years of my life in the farm machinery business, I can tell very 
clearly that the competition is going to be direct and explicit. 
And it’s pretty hard to believe that SaskTel wasn’t aware that 
IRON Solutions was actually based in Outlook either. After all, 
this company does $60,000 worth of business a year with 
SaskTel. 
 
Now how did SaskTel miss this little detail? Was there due 
diligence? Mr. Speaker, it took us about 30 seconds on a good 
search engine to find IronSolutions.com and to figure out that 
they’re in the exact same business as agdealer.com. Now if 
SaskTel didn’t tell cabinet there was a Saskatchewan business 
in the same business, then they were deliberately withholding 
important information from the cabinet. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is for the Premier. Mr. Premier, how 
much longer are you going to tolerate CIC officials withholding 
information and making end runs around your ministers? 
 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
What I want to say again to the member is that we have a 
telephone company in this province that is located in this 
province, that provides services to this province, and last year 
returned a over $30 million dividend to the people of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you look at telephone companies across the 
globe they are merging and globalizing. If we are to keep head 
office, good-paying jobs in this province and jobs in rural 
Saskatchewan, we do not want to privatize SaskTel because that 
will mean a flight of jobs outside of this province. 
 
We are going to grow SaskTel. We don’t believe there is 
competition. In fact we have assured ironworks that SaskTel 
will not be in competition with this rural Saskatchewan 
business. It will not be in competition and in fact, we believe, 
we believe that there’s an opportunity for Ag Dealer and 
ironworks to grow and provide a leading North America service 
in the area of used farm equipment and heavy equipment in this 
country and in North America. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment in Nashville, Tennessee Company 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says that SaskTel’s not 
going to be in competition with the private sector. She ought to 
tell that to Access cable; she ought to tell it to Shaw cable; to 
the North Battleford community co-operative that provides 
cable there; to all the alarm companies in this province that 
have to compete with SecurTek; and now to this company in 
Outlook, Mr. Speaker. The words don’t fit with the facts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
My question’s for the minister responsible for CIC. An order in 
council released today shows that SaskTel just bought another 
dot-com company for $7 million. This time it’s a 
Nashville-based company called TappedInto.com, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is SaskTel spending another 7 million 
taxpayers’ dollars on a Nashville-based dot-com company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to answer 
that question first of all by saying this. Last week or the week 
before, that member and the member from Melfort said that 
there were no changes that came out of Channel Lake, Mr. 
Speaker. And I stood in this spot and said we implemented 
every change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member would not even know about that 
investment if the changes through the . . . by virtue of Channel 
Lake were not . . . had not been implemented, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a direct result of the changes that came 
from Channel Lake that an order in council like that was even 
required, Mr. Speaker. That’s how that member found out about 
it. 
 

Why are we doing it? Mr. Speaker, because it’s a good 
investment and it brings jobs here to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Two things about the minister’s answer, Mr. 
Speaker. One, the government seems to be quite proud of the 
fact that it’s actually telling taxpayers now when it spends 
millions of their dollars on corporations out of this country. 
 
And the second thing is, he mentions again job creation in 
Saskatchewan. He ought to explain to Saskatchewan people 
how buying a Nashville-based dot-com is going to create jobs 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, TappedInto.com provides streaming audio and 
video services. But SaskTel already has a streaming audio and 
video Web site called Club Magic dot-com, although you 
wouldn’t know it from their annual reports. It doesn’t receive 
much mention there frankly, Mr. Speaker, which suggests that 
SaskTel’s probably not too proud of its efforts to date. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: how much 
has SaskTel spent on Club Magic to date and how much 
revenue has Club Magic generated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the member asks how can 
an investment like that bring jobs to Saskatchewan? Mr. 
Speaker, why doesn’t he ask the business here in Regina how it 
will bring jobs to Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, those investments, Mr. Speaker, will bring jobs 
right here to the city of Regina, Mr. Speaker. Those investments 
will return dividends to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. Those investments, Mr. Speaker, I predict will bring 
wealth to this province, Mr. Speaker, will diversify the risk as 
in insurance, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, these are good 
investments, Mr. Speaker, and I think the people of 
Saskatchewan will judge each one on their own merit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if we keep getting dividends from 
these new dot-com ventures like we got from IQ&A that lost 
millions; like we got from Clickabid that lost millions; like the 
millions lost in SecurTek, he’s not only going to break SaskTel, 
he’ll break the province in the bargain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, once again the NDP appears to be 
throwing good money after bad. Club Magic doesn’t seem to be 
making any money or going anywhere so now SaskTel is 
spending another $7 million to buy out a Nashville company 
that is apparently doing the same thing as Club Magic within 
SaskTel. 
 
They did lose millions on IQ&A. They lost millions on 
Clickabid. What have they learned from it, Mr. Speaker? 
Apparently absolutely bupkis is what they’ve learned from it, 
Mr. Speaker. Why does the NDP keep gambling millions of 
dollars on dot-com companies when their track record in this 
area has been an absolute, unmitigated disaster? 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, why is SaskTel 
doing this, Mr. Speaker? They’re doing it to diversify their 
portfolios and spread the risk, Mr. Speaker, bringing revenues 
here to the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s why 
they’re doing it. 
 
And from that member, Mr. Speaker, who used to work as an 
MA (ministerial assistant) for the minister of public 
participation, it’s clear to the people of Saskatchewan, I hope, 
that his interest is privatizing SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are partnering — I emphasize the word 
partnering — with the private sector, Mr. Speaker, in proving 
complementary services with them to bring services to 
Saskatchewan, bring dividends and revenues to Saskatchewan 
so that we can provide services in the constituencies that those 
members mostly represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Quality of Drinking Water  
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Environment. As a result of the difficulties 
of the water supply experienced by the citizens of North 
Battleford, people across this province are considering their 
own drinking water sources today, and many municipalities are 
grappling with aging sewer and water treatment infrastructures. 
 
Hundreds of Saskatchewan communities have applied for 
federal/provincial infrastructure money only to be turned down. 
And now the irony of it all is that those same communities are 
hearing this NDP government has spent $7 million to buy a 
dot-com in the United States — Nashville, Tennessee, I believe 
— and another 8.3 million to buy an Ontario dot-com company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: $15.3 million is the same amount 
the cabinet decision item says it would take to fix water quality 
problem in this province. Why are dot-com companies taking 
priority over safe drinking water? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — This government has a story of success 
to talk about when working with the different towns and 
villages across the great province of Saskatchewan that meet the 
challenge of safe water. Mr. Speaker, on Friday this 
government announced $19.4 million in new funding for water 
and waste water management systems. 
 
Twenty-two of the communities, which received precautionary 
drinking water advisory, applied for funding. And, Mr. Speaker, 
they received it. That’s 100 per cent of those that applied, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Now, Mr. Speaker, this government 
moved very fast and moved very quickly, Mr. Speaker. We 
talked about the different initiatives that we had over the past 
five months since the CDI (cabinet decision item) came to 

cabinet, Mr. Speaker. This government moved very quickly, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can say today that we voted in favour of that budget. And 
all the measures that we undertook, you guys voted against in 
that budget. And you have to answer that question . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the minister in his total response 
to go through the Chair with all statements. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is absolutely 
unbelievable to think that Saskatchewan communities and the 
people of Saskatchewan, many who don’t have the financial 
resources to repair and build new water treatment facilities — 
and one of the reasons being there wasn’t a single cent of 
revenue-sharing increase in this last budget — are taking a back 
seat to the whims of CIC executives buying up fly-by-night 
dot-com companies. How can this government make that 
decision? 
 
Let’s see, on one hand, safe quality drinking water. On the other 
hand, two risky dot-com companies. Which is it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
The people of Saskatchewan expect and certainly deserve 
access to safe, clean drinking water. Yet this government knew 
about the serious concerns of the department officials and did 
not act. Instead, they’ve hidden behind a communication 
strategy designed to mislead the public and ensure the people of 
Saskatchewan drinking water is safe. 
 
Why, Mr. Speaker, is wild CIC spending at the cabinet table 
taking priority? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s unfortunate 
that the members opposite won’t give the whole picture of what 
the government’s been doing. 
 
This fiscal year, Mr. Speaker, cities will receive an increase of 
over $8 million in direct funding. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I do want to let people know is that 
there has been a proactive approach taken to problems that are 
facing the people in Saskatchewan. Between 1994 and 1998, the 
federal/provincial governments participated in a tripartite 
infrastructure program; $167 million, Mr. Speaker, was 
provided over the life of that program. 
 
In 2000/2001, the province introduced a municipal component 
of the Centenary Fund which provides $5 million per year for a 
four-year period to support municipal infrastructure, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I think the total story should be told in a chronological sequence 
of events, the efforts to assist people throughout the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
how do you think the people of this province are going to feel 
when they hear the NDP government is blowing $15 million on 
two risky dot-com ventures? 
 
How do you think the city mayors who have been forced to 
raise municipal property taxes and put off water treatment 
infrastructure projects will feel when they hear the NDP 
government says there is no money but there is $15 million on 
Internet ventures? 
 
No more municipal revenue-sharing grants for municipalities, 
hundreds of Saskatchewan communities turned down for 
infrastructure grants. Yet high-flying CIC executives can drop 
$15 million just like that, to provide services that already exist 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Environment explain why the 
needs of municipalities and our provincial water infrastructure 
system are not a priority for this government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we could do an awful 
lot over here with $600 million that unfortunately has to pay for 
interest on a debt that was accumulated in the last 
administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Let me just continue, Mr. Speaker, with a 
chronological sequence of events. 1999-2000 and 2000-2001, 
the province — the province — funded the municipal 
infrastructure program independent of federal participation. Ten 
million dollars was provided to upgrade municipal 
infrastructure each year. 
 
In ’99-2000 the city of North Battleford alone received 
$133,970 for a sewage lift station, forced main, and gravity 
sewer project. In 2000-2001 they received an additional 
133,000 for water and waste water, storm sewer, and surface 
drainage projects, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Between ’94 and ’98 the federal/provincial governments 
participated again in the tripartite infrastructure program. 
 
There are efforts being made, Mr. Speaker, and I wish the 
opposition wouldn’t condemn those municipalities that are 
working with senior governments to try and improve their 
projects. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 30 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 30, The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

Bill No. 31 — The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 31, The 
Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 32, 
The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced 
and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Two New Pages 
 

The Speaker: — Members before orders of the day, I wish to 
inform the Assembly we have two new pages for the remainder 
of the session and I would like to introduce them at this time. 
Sarah Theaker, would you stand please, and Jennifer Simair. 
And would the members please welcome Jennifer and Sarah. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Leave to introduce visitors. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I am indeed honoured to 
introduce special visitors to this legislature. 
 
Over here we have Roy and Gail Peekeekoot. They are 
travelling across Saskatchewan. They travelled from La Ronge 
and it took them ten and a half days on Roy’s scooter. And 
they’re raising awareness in regards to people with special 
abilities. They also work with the First Nations network, you 
know, for disabilities. And I knew that Roy told me that he’s 
also worked with Gary Tinker and Gary Tinker Foundation. So 
basically, it is an honour to introduce them to the House. 
 
And also along with them is a contingent of family and friends 
over there. So in the west gallery we have Robert McNeilly, 
Melanie Albert, Aaron Masuskapoe, Samantha Masuskapoe, 
Phillip Hyman, Elmer Masuskapoe. And of course, you hear 
that noise from the special little person, Chakinah Masuskapoe. 
 
Guests, I would also like to say . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So I guess I’ll invite all members, to please introduce them to 
the House. 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Humboldt and 
why is she on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — I take it the member is asking for leave to 
introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the official opposition I too would like to welcome to the 
House, Roy and the contingent that are with him, in your very 
worthwhile work and your efforts to raise awareness for 
disabilities and the many people in the province who are 
dealing with them. 
 
So welcome to the legislature and I wish you the very, very best 
in your work ahead of you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Northeast on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. Harper: — Leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and to all members of the House, a 
gentleman who is seated behind the bar who is no stranger to 
this House, having served in this House during the Blakeney 
government as the minister of Social Services, Mr. Alex Taylor. 
 
Mr. Taylor is . . . I would say I am very fortunate to have Mr. 
Taylor as my constituent. I’d ask all the members to offer him a 
very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand and respond on behalf of the government to question 
no. 175 and table a response. 
 
The Speaker: — 175 is tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 22 — The Assessment Management Agency 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to move the second reading of The Assessment 

Management Agency Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
The Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency — more 
commonly referred to, Mr. Speaker, as SAMA — is the agency 
that establishes property assessment policy for the province. As 
well, SAMA provides assessment services to most 
municipalities and oversees the assessment process for those 
municipalities that do their own assessments. 
 
The role SAMA plays in the province is a vital and important 
one, Mr. Speaker. The proper and accurate assessment of 
property values for taxation purposes is critical to the ongoing 
operations of every municipality and school board in 
Saskatchewan. As such, it is important that SAMA 
stakeholders, including government, municipalities and the 
public have access to the information necessary to build a 
relationship of trust, confidence and accountability. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amendments to this Act address a number of 
matters that will improve the relationship between the province 
and the municipalities and SAMA. 
 
I would like to take the next few minutes to just outline some of 
the key points and the provisions in this particular Bill. Mr. 
Speaker, SAMA receives its funding from the province and the 
municipalities. Increased financial reporting requirements being 
introduced in this Bill will provide SAMA’s stakeholders and 
the public with a greater opportunity to see where funding 
contributions are spent. 
 
In addition, the provisions will allow for more accurate and 
timely budget preparation relating to SAMA. These provisions 
respond to the need for improved transparency and 
accountability for all organizations that receive public funds. 
 
In the past, Mr. Speaker, some municipalities have expressed 
concern about how their funding contributions are used by 
SAMA. As a result of these amendments, they will be able to 
obtain the information to address these very concerns. 
 
Specifically, the amendments that will ensure increased 
transparency and accountability include requirements that 
SAMA prepare and submit three key documents on an annual 
basis. They are a report on the activities of the agency, a 
financial statement prepared in accordance with generally 
accepted accounting principles and a statement of agency public 
accounts. 
 
Perhaps the most significant of these requirements is the 
statement of agency public accounts. This is a new requirement. 
The statement of agency public accounts will be modelled after 
the municipal public accounts that are required of cities and will 
be available for inspection by any person. 
 
The amendments prescribe categories of information that must 
be included in the statement of agency public accounts. They 
also provide regulation-making authority to allow for potential 
changes or additions to the content of the statement in the 
future. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, the increased level of detail in 
financial reporting and the availability of the statement of 
agency public accounts will make the accounts of SAMA more 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

open and transparent. 
 
In addition to the increased transparency, SAMA will continue 
to be required to appoint an auditor to audit its records, 
accounts and the financial statements. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Important new provisions will introduce authority for the 
minister to request that the Provincial Auditor’s office review, 
examine, or audit the records, accounts, and financial 
statements of SAMA (Saskatchewan Assessment Management 
Agency). 
 
Although SAMA is an independent agency, provincial funding 
of SAMA exceeds $4 million annually. Current legislation has 
left SAMA outside of the purview of the Provincial Auditor and 
the provincial Public Accounts Committee. While the 
amendments do not change SAMA’s status as an independent 
agency, they do certainly enhance transparency and 
accountability for that agency. 
 
Other amendments to The Assessment Management Agency 
Act are more technical in nature. They will however, Mr. 
Speaker, contribute to the efficient operation of SAMA. 
 
One such amendment will require SAMA to provide its budget 
submissions to the Department of Municipal Affairs and 
Housing by July 15 of each year. Currently SAMA’s budget 
submission is not due until October 1. The change will give 
Municipal Affairs and Housing the opportunity to better 
represent SAMA’s budget submissions in the provincial budget 
process. 
 
The amendments being put forth in this Bill represent an effort 
by the province to promote open and transparent accounting by 
SAMA to its stakeholders and the public, thereby promoting a 
greater understanding of SAMA’s role and responsibility within 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I encourage all members of the legislature to 
support these amendments; they are in the best interest of 
SAMA, municipalities, and all the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of the Bill, The 
Assessment Management Agency Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
stand in the House today to speak on Bill No. 22, The 
Assessment Management Agency Act. As the minister has 
outlined, there’s been serious flaws in the requirements of 
SAMA in the past, and this Bill seems to be trying to close 
some of those gaps in accountability and credibility and making 
more transparent to the public. 
 
One of the items that has come up is concerning the Technical 
Advisory Committee. The committee is supposed to meet at 
least four times a year, however, the committee has never met. 
And this seems to be a breach of the law. And also, if the 
committee has never met as . . . one wonders why the purpose 
of the advisory committee. 
 
And the other areas in the Bill really speak to the whole 

accountability process. And it goes on to say that SAMA must 
ensure that its books and records or accounts are kept in a . . . 
and can be verified. And also it speaks to the appointment of an 
auditor. 
 
One has to wonder what has been happening in the past. Has 
there been any accountability in the past whatsoever? And when 
you talk about having an auditor, it’s normal business practice 
today for both individual, private business, and government to 
have an auditor look at the books. And it seems very strange 
that SAMA’s been operating like this without an auditor and 
without proper checks and balances in place to look at its 
books. 
 
One area where the minister has talked about is changing the 
budgetary information to July 15 from October 15, which 
would be more consistent with the provincial budgeting 
process. 
 
One other item, Mr. Speaker, I would like to speak on is the 
expanded authority, regulatory authority given to cabinet in 
terms of its ability to make regulations concerning SAMA. 
 
It seems that the cabinet has taken some control and power 
away from the legislature and I don’t think this is a step 
forward. I think it’s a step back. Items like this should be left in 
the legislature so the people of Saskatchewan can have a look at 
items like this and have their own opinions made. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just . . . I’d like to get 
back to the stakeholders and do more research and talk to more 
people in the province about this Act, and at this time I’d like to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 24 — The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I rise 
to move second reading of The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is indeed a pleasure to introduce amendments to 
The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 that will provide 
municipalities with greater legislative flexibility to explore 
opportunities for voluntary municipal restructuring. 
 
In large part these amendments respond to the report, 
Impediments — this is a quote, Mr. Speaker — “Impediments 
to Voluntary Restructuring; a review of the legislative and 
financial impediments to voluntary municipal restructuring in 
Saskatchewan.” This was prepared by the municipal-provincial 
round table during its spring 2000 talks on voluntary municipal 
restructuring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during these meetings, the members of the 
municipal-provincial round table identified and discussed a 
number of legislative and financial impediments to municipal 
restructuring. In their view, these impediments prevented 
municipalities from talking with their municipal neighbours 
about consolidating services and administration. 
 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

 

The amendments we are presenting today will remove those 
legislative barriers and provide municipalities with new options 
and tools to use when contemplating amalgamation. In addition, 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will introduce amendments that will 
provide municipalities greater independence and will broaden 
the scope of their authority. 
 
These provisions are in keeping with the coalition government’s 
commitment to removing provincial involvement in local 
decision making wherever there is no overriding provincial 
public interest. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like now just to briefly describe the key 
provisions of this Bill. As I mentioned, this Bill will remove a 
number of legislative barriers and will provide a number of new 
techniques and tools to municipalities that may be 
contemplating amalgamation. 
 
For example, authority will be provided to urban municipalities 
to decide whether they will want to become an organized 
hamlet when they amalgamate with a rural municipality. This 
provision is important as it will alleviate concerns related to the 
potential loss of local autonomy when an urban municipality is 
dissolved and forms part of a rural municipality. 
 
To facilitate discussions, municipalities will be able to enter 
into restructuring agreements and determine the terms and 
conditions under which to amalgamate. The terms of that 
restructuring agreement, Mr. Speaker, will provide 
amalgamating municipalities with an opportunity to create their 
own conditions for amalgamation. We believe that this is 
important to local people. Therefore the terms of the 
restructuring agreement will form an integral part of the 
minister’s order establishing the new municipality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during the municipal-provincial round table talks 
last spring, stakeholders indicated that urban municipalities 
were not only interested in consolidating services with rural 
municipalities, but are also interested in consolidating services 
with other urban municipalities. The Act already provides 
authority for urban-to-urban amalgamations. 
 
However one of the biggest concerns expressed with 
urban-to-urban amalgamations was the issue of representation 
on council. We have to respond to this concern by providing the 
necessary authority for these municipalities to ensure their 
residents are fairly represented on council by permitting all 
urban municipalities to establish a ward system. Previously only 
cities had this authority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill also includes provisions that will enable 
municipalities to establish community advisory committees. 
These committees will ensure municipal service levels are 
maintained or enhanced for specified areas within an 
amalgamated municipality. In this way local concerns can be 
made readily known to the municipal council. 
 
These provisions will provide councils with the authority to 
delegate management of local facilities, such as skating and 
curling rinks, to local residents so that services are not 
interrupted as a result of amalgamation. 
 
This Bill will provide authority for amalgamating municipalities 

to address local taxation concerns related to infrastructure 
renewal and the costs associated with it, the mill rate 
differences, and outstanding debt obligations. Mr. Speaker, 
municipal stakeholders strongly felt that they needed flexibility 
to address these issues when considering amalgamation. 
 
Authority will be provided for municipalities to establish 
special-purpose levies. Thus we enable amalgamating 
municipalities to give consideration to equalizing mill rates 
over a number of years, or ensure that those people who are not 
directly benefiting from the provisions of specific municipal 
services do not have to incur an increase in property taxes to 
pay renewal or ongoing operational costs associated with that 
service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other amendments in this Act will — I’ll just 
outline a few here — will enhance local government control of 
local matters and remove unnecessary provincial involvement 
into the services provided by municipalities. And it will also 
streamline provincial administrative processes and remove a 
number of ministerial approvals for municipal actions. 
 
Municipal councils will have the authority to adopt additional 
conflict of interest rules for members of council beyond the 
minimum already provided for in the Act. This means that local 
councils will now be better equipped to determine locally what 
conflict of interest standards and rules are appropriate for their 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a very important feature of this Bill are provisions 
that will transfer the authority for the administration of the 
urban Board of Examiners to the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association and the Urban Municipal 
Administrators Association of Saskatchewan. 
 
This will end the provincial government involvement in this 
function. These two associations will be required to establish 
and operate an urban Board of Examiners for the purposes of 
administering qualification standards for urban municipal 
administrators. The municipal associations have agreed this 
transfer of authority will provide their associations with greater 
control over qualification standards for municipal 
administrators. 
 
Mr. Speaker, professional standards created in the spirit of 
responsible, transparent, and accountable governance are 
imperative to the principles of local government democracy. 
 
Other provisions in this Bill will replace the present 
requirement for municipalities to prepare their financial 
statements on a form approved by the minister. The Bill will 
require that such statements be prepared in accordance with 
generally accepted accounting principles for local governments. 
 
This responds again to recommendations from the Provincial 
Auditor. In addition, municipal councils will be required to 
appoint an auditor that is a member in good standing of an 
accounting profession recognized by statute. 
 
Municipalities have requested greater flexibility in determining 
their own records retention and disposal schedules for 
municipal documents. Accordingly this Bill will provide the 
authority for municipalities to adopt their own records retention 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

and disposal schedules by bylaw. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will provide municipal councils with the 
authority to define areas within which certain businesses or 
limited number of businesses can operate. This is an important 
issue in some municipalities where for economic, social, or 
other reasons it becomes necessary to regulate certain business 
activities. This responds to a request from the city of Saskatoon. 
 
Municipal councils will no longer be required to have 
ministerial approval if they wish to dispose of municipally 
owned property at a price less than its market value. Nor will 
municipalities be required to obtain ministerial approval when 
closing a municipal street or controlling traffic within the 
municipality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities will be permitted to set licence fees 
for direct sellers in the same manner that they have authority to 
set licence fees for other businesses; to extend statutory 
deadlines for the completion of certain administrative matters 
for up to 90 days; and to donate lost personal property to local 
charities if council so desires. 
 
(14:45) 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, cities will no longer be required to obtain 
ministerial approval to establish subclasses of property 
assessments. Mr. Speaker, most municipal councils manage 
their financial affairs responsibly. This is a testament to the 
dedication these people have to ensuring the betterment of the 
whole community. 
 
This Bill recognizes the responsible manner in which 
municipalities have operated fiscally. It will provide improved 
flexibility to manage cash flows by, first of all, increasing the 
amount municipalities may borrow to meet current 
expenditures, and removing the requirement for Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board approval of long-term debt bylaws for all 
cities. 
 
This Bill will provide all municipalities the authority to create, 
operate, and manage capital trust funds, and for cities to invest 
surplus monies in any security deemed appropriate by council. 
The Saskatchewan Municipal Board will no longer need to 
approve their actions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill will update and clarify a number of 
administrative provisions that are important to ensuring 
municipalities clearly understand their legislated powers. For 
example, this Bill will clarify the powers of municipal boards of 
revision to correct errors in the assessment roll, regardless of 
whether the resulting value increases, decreases, or remains the 
same. 
 
As well, clarification will be provided to municipal assessors 
that where two or more abutting parcels of land are owned by 
the same person, the assessor may combine the assessment of 
the parcels into a single assessment. This is a matter of 
administrative convenience and relates to introduction of 
Saskatchewan’s new electronic land titles system. 
 
From time to time, Mr. Speaker, adjoining municipalities must 
work together to provide services to their residents. 

Unfortunately, municipalities cannot always agree to the 
method in which to do so. This can lead to some very difficult 
situations. This Bill will provide municipalities with a formal 
and voluntary dispute resolution mechanism that focuses its 
attention on mediation between the parties as the initial step in 
resolving the dispute. 
 
Should mediation not produce a solution to the problem, the 
parties to the dispute will be able to apply to the Saskatchewan 
Municipal Board for a decision in the matter under dispute. The 
decision of the Saskatchewan Municipal Board will be binding, 
then, on all parties. 
 
The provisions will remove the minister from the current 
position of being judge and jury in these cases. Instead it puts 
the onus for resolving local disputes where it belongs — with 
the people that the dispute affects. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, this Bill will enhance the 
decision-making capacity of urban municipalities, remove 
unnecessary provincial involvement into municipal matters, and 
remove a number of legislative barriers to voluntary municipal 
restructuring. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provisions within this Bill recognize that 
municipalities require additional legislative capacity to continue 
their good work in providing municipal services to the people 
of this great province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe these amendments are in the best 
interests of all urban municipalities and the people of 
Saskatchewan and should be supported by all members of this 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 24, The Urban 
Municipality Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me pleasure to stand to speak about The Urban Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 this afternoon. 
 
This legislation contains portions that deal with voluntary 
amalgamation of municipalities. It also contains changes 
recommended by the municipal round table on operations of 
municipalities, and appears to take away requirements for 
ministerial approval for many ordinary operations of 
municipalities. In effect, it’s a Bill which streamlines the 
operation of municipalities and allows for the voluntary 
amalgamation of many urban municipalities in this province. 
 
I think in speaking to this Bill, Mr. Speaker, it would be 
appropriate at this point to rehearse and review some of the 
history that brought us to this particular Bill. And I think that 
we don’t have to go very far back in the annals of time, frankly, 
to get the impetus for this particular amendment. 
 
About 18 months ago the Garcea commission was travelling 
around Saskatchewan looking at the issue of municipalities — 
the total number of municipalities, the awkwardness of that 
number — and suggesting, quite frankly, that we could do with 
a lot fewer municipalities in this province. And while those 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

 

recommendations were being put forward, the suspicions of 
municipalities, both urban and rural, were being raised. And I 
think that what bothered municipalities and the leaders of the 
municipalities the most was that it seemed that that whole 
process was designed to force amalgamation on the various 
municipalities of this province. 
 
Human nature being what it is, Mr. Speaker, people don’t 
respond very well to being forced to do anything. And I think I 
can speak first-hand when I say that; and I’m sure that all of us 
have had that experience at some point in our lives. 
 
But the reaction of municipalities in this province to the concept 
of being forced into amalgamation with neighbouring 
municipalities was very strong, almost vitriolic. And I think that 
out of that process grew an awareness by the government that 
that certainly was not going to be the way to accomplish what 
might be a desirable arrangement in some situations. 
 
Hence we had the round table discussions. The government and 
municipal leaders sat down and looked at the pros and cons of 
the process, not so much of amalgamation per se but of the 
process, and came up with ways in which they might ease the 
transition of municipalities that wanted to merge their 
operations into a single entity. 
 
The other issue more recently that is going to be addressed, I 
believe, by this particular amendment is the issue of water, 
which we’ve heard so much about in the last week or 10 days. 
With the many numerous small urban communities in our 
province, all suffering from a declining tax base, declining 
population, declining business, they have found it increasingly 
difficult to afford the infrastructure required to provide the safe 
water for the residents of their community that is so vital and 
necessary. 
 
They found it even as difficult to provide the sewer and water 
mechanisms needed to provide decent infrastructure for their 
towns as well. 
 
So what this legislation may offer is an opportunity for 
communities that are under excessive pressure to provide the 
basic needs and infrastructure for their communities to look at 
the possibility of joining forces with adjoining communities to 
provide an opportunity on a cost-effective basis to provide 
sewer and water services for their towns. So I see an Act of this 
nature as having some very strong and good possibilities. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, there are some things about this Act that 
do cause me to want to have a second look at some of the 
provisions. And I’ll get to those a little later. 
 
But if I might just take a quick couple of moments to review 
some of the, some of the conditions of this new legislation that 
may in fact prove beneficial to the urban communities, 
especially in this province. 
 
I’d like to look at the issue of amalgamation. This legislation 
will make it possible for a village of less than 100 people to be 
dissolved by ministerial order rather than an order in council of 
cabinet. I think that that is something that is probably going to 
be quite workable and maybe long overdue. It sets in place a 
process to hold discussions between two or more municipalities 

wishing to pursue amalgamation, and it defines the restructuring 
agreement. 
 
And as the minister alluded to earlier in his comments, this 
legislation gives all municipalities the ability to divide into 
wards for electoral purposes. 
 
It gives municipal councils discretionary authority to establish 
community advisory committees to provide linkages between 
the council of amalgamated municipalities and the individual 
communities that made up the amalgamated entity. 
 
It requires certain financial reporting as well that won’t be quite 
as onerous possibly as some of the earlier requirements, but will 
be effective I believe in the long run. 
 
It gives municipalities the authority for setting fees charged to 
direct sellers for business licences. And this fee apparently was 
previously set out in The Direct Sellers Act, but that authority is 
now being moved to the municipality. 
 
Maybe most importantly it requires municipalities to use a 
dispute resolution mechanism contained within the Act to settle 
any inter-municipal disputes related to public utility service and 
other such entities. This dispute-settling mechanism replaces 
the need for the minister to settle such disputes personally, and 
it sets out the need for two sides to appoint a mediator. And if 
the mediator cannot settle the dispute in time, the matter will be 
settled by the Saskatchewan Municipal Board. 
 
There is the issue of debt approval, Mr. Speaker. Under this 
rewrite of the Act, the Saskatchewan Municipal Board approval 
will no longer be necessary for municipalities entering into 
short-term debt obligations to meet current expenditures. And I 
think that particular provision will be greeted with, if not 
enthusiasm, certainly some degree of pleasure by the 
municipalities. 
 
But long-term debt consolidation has also been clarified by this 
Act. It gives the cities the right to create long-term debt without 
approval of the government as long as that debt is within certain 
limitations. And I think that gives cities more flexibility and 
opportunities to deal with their own financial affairs in a way 
that suits them. 
 
There are several other provisions that the minister alluded to 
that are going to be important to the eventual amalgamation of 
urban municipalities on a as-needed, where-needed basis. 
 
One of the other provisions of this particular Act though that 
has not been mentioned, to my knowledge, is the establishment 
of a Board of Examiners for municipal administrators. Now I’m 
not sure how many positions would be open in the province 
right now, but I frequently hear of communities around the 
province who are looking for administrators and are having a 
very difficult time finding qualified people to fit that role in 
their urban and often in their rural municipalities. 
 
So what we have here is a Board of Examiners established that 
will be overseen by SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and the Urban Municipal 
Administrators Association, and this board will take upon itself 
the duties of certifying municipal administrators. And this same 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

provision, incidentally, has been added to the rural municipal 
legislation as well. 
 
The people are no longer — on this board — appointed by the 
minister. So it is a creature now of SUMA and the Municipal 
Administrators Association per se. I hope that with the creation 
of this new board that the shortfall of qualified people for the 
positions that are vacant around the province will be alleviated 
to some extent and that they will be able to produce good and 
qualified candidates for each of the communities looking for 
that kind of administration. 
 
There was one other issue that kind of caught my attention 
when I was looking through the legislation, and that has to do 
with business licences. And I’m a little troubled by this 
particular provision because it gives authority to a municipality, 
an urban municipality, which I believe may really go beyond 
the need for them to obtain. In the area of business licences the 
Act, as it’s been rewritten now, will give municipal authority to 
limit the number of business licences granted in a certain class 
and limit the number of like businesses within a municipality. 
 
In a competitive business environment, I don’t think there is a 
need for the municipal authority — either urban or rural, but in 
this case urban — I don’t believe there is a need for the urban 
authority to have that particular power granted to it. I think that 
that is solely the prerogative of the entrepreneur or the business 
operator. If the individual wants to set up a business which is 
competitive with other businesses in the community, that is his 
right and I think it’s his risk, and that individual should have the 
opportunity to make that decision with or without the approval 
of the urban municipal authority. 
 
I don’t have any problem with the granting of licences. That’s 
something that I think every municipal government needs to 
retain. However, I don’t know that it’s necessary for the 
government to be able to limit the licence for any given 
business or class of businesses within their boundaries. 
 
(15:00) 
 
I think there’s a danger in giving that authority to municipal 
governments, in that in some circumstances, individuals who 
are serving on the town council who may already own and 
operate businesses, could see a new business of a competing 
variety a threat to that individual’s personal business affairs and 
turn down any new business as a result of that. And I just don’t 
think that that’s the kind of power we want to give to municipal 
lawmakers or administrators. So I have some reservations about 
that particular part of this Act. 
 
We spent some time going through the changes and, as I said 
earlier, the removal of barriers to voluntary amalgamation at the 
urban government level, I think, are welcome generally by the 
official opposition. I believe that streamlining of conditions are 
long overdue and they’re certainly necessary and I think this 
Act goes a long way to addressing much of that. 
 
And I have to recognize the fact, of course, that the round table 
discussions, which involve the government, the Department of 
Municipal Affairs, and the representatives of SUMA, have 
come up with these conditions and, by and large, I find them 
quite agreeable. I don’t think I would want to be in a position 

just to disagree with their collective wisdom. 
 
However, having said that, I think we have some reason to be 
cautious about this government’s track record in matters dealing 
with municipalities, as I mentioned in my opening remarks. 
And so we’re going to have to study all of the municipal Bills 
rather closely. We haven’t been able to go through it clause by 
clause as yet and we want to check not only as to how they 
relate to amalgamation but some of the other provisions that are 
contained herein. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

LEAVE REQUESTED 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I request 
leave of the Assembly to allow members to remove their jackets 
for the remainder of the day given the temperature in the room. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I rise once again, and this 
time to move second reading of The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government endeavours to keep the municipal 
Acts as consistent as possible. Therefore it is my pleasure to 
introduce amendments to The Rural Municipality Act, 1989 
that, as was the case with the amendments I spoke to earlier for 
The Urban Municipality Act, 1984, have been developed along 
two primary themes. 
 
One, the removal of legislative impediments to voluntary 
municipal amalgamation. And number two, removing the 
province from decision making and involvement in a number of 
areas that are clearly within the jurisdiction of local councils. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as noted in my remarks on the urban Act 
amendments, the amendments regarding impediments to 
voluntary amalgamation respond to the options contained in a 
report prepared by municipal/provincial round table. The 
members of the municipal/provincial round table identified 
legislative and financial impediments to municipal restructuring 
that in their view prevented municipalities from seriously 
considering the consolidation of municipal services and 
administrations. 
 
The amendments presented today will remove those legislative 
barriers and provide municipalities with new options and tools 
to use when contemplating amalgamation. 
 
While the amendments proposed for the rural Act are not word 
for word the same as those proposed for the urban Act, they are 
based on the same principles. Taken together, the provisions in 
the Acts do complement each other. 
 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like now to briefly describe the 
key provisions of this Bill. The options contained in the 
impediments report focused mainly on urban to rural 
amalgamations. However, the provisions within this Bill and 
the Bill outlining amendments to The Urban Municipality Act 
are designed to accommodate other types of municipal 
amalgamation as well. 
 
Again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in order to facilitate discussions 
between municipalities that are exploring amalgamation, rural 
municipalities will have the power to enter into restructuring 
agreements to determine the terms and conditions. The 
restructuring agreement will provide amalgamating 
municipalities the power to create their own conditions for 
amalgamation. 
 
We believe these conditions are important to local people, 
therefore the terms of the restructuring agreement will form an 
integral part of the minister’s order establishing the new 
municipality. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the impediments report also recommended 
municipalities have the authority to establish community 
advisory committees. These committees will play an important 
key role by ensuring municipal councils are able to maintain a 
direct and transparent relationship with the residents and 
communities within their jurisdiction. 
 
These committees may help former urban municipalities 
amalgamated with RMs (rural municipality) to maintain their 
community identity. This was identified as an important 
consideration at the round table. 
 
Community advisory committees are mechanisms municipal 
councils can use to maintain volunteerism in local communities. 
Councils will be able to delegate the management of local 
facilities such as community halls and recreation facilities to 
community organizations. 
 
This Bill will provide amalgamating municipalities with the 
option of incorporating as either a rural municipality or a 
municipal district. It is intended that the use of the term 
municipal district will recognize the urban components that 
may exist within it. Municipal districts will operate under The 
Rural Municipality Act, 1989 in a similar fashion as rural 
municipalities currently do. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the impediments report recommended that 
The Rural Municipality Act be amended to allow the use of 
provisions from the urban Act so that rural municipalities could 
resolve any administrative or service delivery differences 
between these two types of municipalities. 
 
We have responded to this recommendation by providing 
authority for rural municipalities to declare that any provision 
within The Urban Municipality Act, 1984 applies to any area 
within its jurisdiction. This provision will permit rural councils 
to provide urban-type services to former towns and villages 
within its boundaries. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the impediments report further 
recommended that councils should have the authority to create 
service areas within an amalgamated municipality. This Bill 

will provide the authority to customize services to be provided 
to the residents within that area, such as a former urban 
municipality, based on need or previous practice. 
 
In addition, it will enable the establishment of a separate 
uniform mill rate for that area as well as the use of separate tax 
tools such as the use of mill rate factors. 
 
This Bill will also provide authority for amalgamating 
municipalities to alleviate concerns related to renewal costs, 
mill rate differences, and outstanding debt obligations. 
Municipal stakeholders strongly felt that they needed flexibility 
to address these issues when considering amalgamation. 
 
Municipalities will now have the authority to establish special 
purpose levies. This will allow amalgamating municipalities to 
give special consideration to equalizing mill rates between 
formerly separate municipalities over a number of years. It will 
also ensure that those people who are not directly benefiting 
from the provision of specific municipal services do not have to 
incur an increase in property taxes to pay renewal or ongoing 
operational costs associated with that service. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a number of statutory property-tax 
exemptions that existed in The Urban Municipality Act have 
now been included in The Rural Municipality Act for 
consistency and to alleviate concerns about potentially losing 
these exemptions should an urban/rural amalgamation occur. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll now move onto the second group of 
the amendments that are being proposed in this Bill. These will 
remove the province from involvement in a number of local 
decisions and processes. The amendments for this Act are 
similar in nature to the amendments we were making to The 
Urban Municipality Act; therefore I will again speak to the 
more significant provisions and those that are unique to the 
rural Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill will enhance local government 
control of local matters. For example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
municipal councils will be permitted, with the concurrence of 
the organized hamlet board, to levy a separate, uniform mill rate 
within organized hamlets to reflect the services provided to 
these hamlets. 
 
As with urban municipalities, rural councils will now have the 
authority to adopt additional conflict of interest rules beyond 
the minimum already provided for in the Act. This Bill will 
transfer the authority for the administration of the rural Board 
of Examiners to the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities and the Rural Municipal Administrators’ 
Association of Saskatchewan. 
 
These municipal associations will be required to establish and 
operate a rural Board of Examiners for the purposes of 
administering qualification standards for rural municipal 
administrators. These two associations have agreed that this 
transfer of authority will provide their associations with greater 
control over qualification standards for municipal 
administrators. Professional standards creating the spirit of 
responsible, transparent, and accountable governments, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, are imperative to the principles of local 
government democracy. 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill will remove ministerial 
prescription of financial statement formats. It will enable rural 
municipalities to work with their auditors, to prepare their 
financial statements according to generally accepted accounting 
principles for local governments. Councils will still, of course, 
appoint auditors that are members in good standing of a 
professional accounting organization recognized by statute. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill will clarify in which divisions 
certain voters are entitled to vote in a rural municipal election. 
 
As well, a new provision will provide clarification to oil and 
gas well drillers that it will be the owner of the well that will be 
required to pay the municipal well tax. This change 
accommodates existing practices in municipalities where oil 
and gas well owners have typically paid the municipal well tax 
associated with drilling . . . associated, pardon me, with drilling 
an oil or gas well anywhere in Saskatchewan. This change 
responds to representations from the oil and gas industry and 
has been supported by the municipal sector as well. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Rural Municipality Act contains a 
number of unique provisions that provide rural municipalities 
with additional tax collection powers. These powers permit 
municipalities to place a lien on crops grown by farmers and 
prohibits the sale of grain if farmers owe property taxes to their 
municipality. Each year councils are required to adopt a 
resolution exempting crops from these provisions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these provisions are rarely used today and are 
becoming impractical. With the concurrence of the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities we are 
removing these provisions from The Rural Municipality Act. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) members have requested greater 
flexibility to decide the level and type of discounts given on the 
prompt payment of property taxes. Presently these discounts are 
outlined in the legislation however, this Bill will remove those 
rules and provide rural councils with the authority to establish 
their own discounts by bylaw. 
 
As is the case with the urban Act, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this Bill 
will also provide municipalities with a voluntary 
dispute-resolution mechanism. This mechanism emphasizes 
mediation between the parties as the initial step in resolving a 
dispute. Should mediation not produce a solution to the 
problem, the parties to the dispute will be able to apply to the 
Saskatchewan Municipal Board for a decision in the matter 
under dispute. The decision of the Saskatchewan Municipal 
Board will be binding on all parties. 
 
(15:15) 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, this Bill responds to significant 
concerns in enhancing the decision-making capacity of rural 
municipalities. It removes unnecessary provincial intrusion into 
municipal matters and removes a number of legislative barriers 
too, and provides new tools for voluntary municipal 
restructuring. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the provisions within this Bill recognize 
that municipalities require additional legislative capacity to 

continue their good work in providing municipal services to the 
people of this great province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe these amendments are in the best 
interests of all rural municipalities and the people of 
Saskatchewan, and should be supported by all members of this 
legislature. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 23, The 
Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a fairly comprehensive Bill dealing with rural 
municipalities and how they interact. Traditionally, Mr. 
Speaker, rural municipalities under this province have had 
difficulty in joining together with their neighbours or with other 
municipalities in the urban sense, within their boundaries. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, will allow that to take place on a voluntary 
basis, and we support that, Mr. Speaker. But the key word there, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, is voluntary — that the heavy hand of 
government not be driving this either directly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, or indirectly through the starvation through reduced 
funding from the province to force municipalities to join 
together. 
 
It has to be done on a voluntary basis that the local people 
determine is in their best interest, Mr. Speaker. Not in the best 
interest necessarily of the minister, not in the best interest 
necessarily of the bureaucracy of Municipal department, but 
rather in the best interest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of the people 
involved in the municipalities that may wish to amalgamate. 
And that’s very critical — may wish to amalgamate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it talks in the Bill about municipal districts. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, in Alberta they also have municipal districts. And 
sometimes those are accepted by the local people and 
sometimes they have a great deal of difficulty with them, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The term municipal district is no different than the term county, 
which is also utilized at various times in Alberta to describe the 
same type of municipal entity. It’s a larger entity, Mr. Speaker, 
maybe one, two, or more municipalities. But the critical issue 
here, Mr. Speaker, is that it be done without being forced by the 
provincial government. 
 
There are a number of things though that are taking place within 
this Act that I didn’t hear the minister speak about. And one of 
those was the removal of voting rights to people within the 
municipalities — not just a new municipal district, Mr. Speaker, 
but municipalities that are already existing and are not joining 
together, are not amalgamating. 
 
Under this particular Act, Mr. Speaker, as I read it, a person 
will only be allowed to vote in the municipality where their 
residence is located or where they designate their residence to 
be. 
 
Up until now, Mr. Speaker, if you owned property in three 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

 

separate municipalities, rural municipalities, you were entitled 
to vote in those three separate municipalities so that you had 
representation for your taxation. Indeed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
our democracy in large part is based on that — the old 
grievance before supply, no taxation without representation, 
Mr. Speaker. This Bill moves us towards that undemocratic 
model of not being able to select your representation even 
though you are forced to pay the taxes. 
 
I disagree with this, Mr. Speaker, and we need to be able to talk 
to the people around Saskatchewan to determine whether or not 
they agree to give up, to abandon, Mr. Speaker, their right to 
vote for the people who will be spending their tax dollars. 
 
In this province, Mr. Speaker, in provincial elections, you get to 
vote either for or against, as the case may be, the members of 
this Assembly who will make the determination on how to 
spend your tax dollars. Unfortunately though, under this 
particular Bill, that right will be removed for people at the 
municipal level. 
 
Let’s say you have land or property in three different 
municipalities — they may be adjoining, they may be separated 
by a hundred miles. Under the current Act, if you wished to, 
you could travel around on election day and cast a ballot in each 
one of those separate and distinct municipalities so that you can 
choose the representatives both of your division and for the 
reeve, if that’s the appropriate election at the time, on how they 
are going to spend your tax dollars. 
 
Under this Act, you’re removing that. The individual or 
corporation, as the case may be, will have to select one 
municipality as being the municipality in which they vote. In 
the other two municipalities, they will pay taxes but have no 
rights of representation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They will not 
have the ability to choose whom they wish to represent them 
and how that money will be spent. 
 
If there’s a referendum within the municipal district, 
municipality, they will not be entitled to vote on it because their 
residents may not be designated in that municipality, but rather 
in one of the others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is wrong, and I think this needs to be cleared 
up in this Act, and I would suggest needs to be removed from 
this Act so that the current voting rights of taxpayers of 
municipalities continues, Mr. Deputy Speaker; that they may 
vote in those municipalities where they pay taxes. 
 
I know this is probably a pull-over from urban municipal law. I 
know that there has been a number of times when people in the 
Parks Association, people who have residences in regional 
parks, have complained that they do not have the right to vote in 
their village, their resort village, because they have property in 
some other location. 
 
Well perhaps, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what needs to be changed is 
not to take the rural municipalities to that model, but rather take 
the urban municipalities to the rural model where in a 
municipality you own property, and paying taxes, you have the 
right to vote. 
 
That is a basic democratic right, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of this 

province, of this country, indeed of this Commonwealth, that if 
you are paying taxes on property, you have the right to vote in 
that municipality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, another section in here, the new section 3 
under this particular clause, is a long-standing NDP tradition, 
Mr. Speaker, to change the rules when it doesn’t particularly 
suit them; not necessarily to change the law directly, but rather 
to allow the minister to deem something to have happened or 
not to have happened. 
 
In this particular case, and I’ll read the sentence involved: 
 

. . . the minister may, by order, set a further or other time 
for doing it, whether the time at or within which it ought to 
have been done has or has not expired. 

 
So under this Act certain things are prescribed to have 
happened within a particular period of time. But the minister 
may at his discretion, or his whim, deem that it doesn’t have to 
have been done in that time, it can be done in some other time 
period. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, if there are time limits put in place in the 
municipal Act to carry out certain functions, I have to assume 
that that has been done for good reason, that it has been done in 
a manner that has worked in the past. Otherwise we would 
simply be changing it to either shorten or extend that time 
period. 
 
But rather what the minister has done is simply said no, if it 
doesn’t happen in the time period that it says under the law, I’ll 
just change that and you can do it whenever you want. That’s 
not good enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have those rules in place for a reason, and those rules 
should simply not be circumvented because the minister wants 
to. I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that the minister take a very 
serious look at that and make the determination whether that is 
a valid reason for making these changes. 
 
Because while it gives the minister the ability to make those 
changes on his time schedule, whatever time he wants, it also 
continues to put limits on councils. It says: 
 

No council shall pass a bylaw pursuant to subsection (3) 
extending the time fixed by or pursuant to this Act by more 
than 90 days. 

 
So the council is restricted, but the minister isn’t. 
 
The minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, isn’t the one paying taxes 
there. The council represents the taxpayers. And if anybody 
should have the ability to extend the time, it should be the 
council, not the minister. But no, the minister has it in reverse 
order — gives him lots of privileges and restricts the council, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it talks in here, under incorporations, 
alterations of boundaries, of division 1. Well for those people 
who know about rural municipalities, Mr. Speaker, there’s 
divisions 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, and 6. Well what happened to those in 
this particular Act? Why are these sections only related to 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

division 1? 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I think the minister needs to give a better 
explanation than what he did today on what is happening with 
this particular Act. Is it an omission, an error, that it should say 
all divisions? Or is there something peculiar about division 1 
that will be outlined or clearly designated in this Act for special 
considerations, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it talks about the restructuring agreements 
between two or more municipalities that may wish to 
amalgamate or restructure. But in reading this over, I don’t see 
any place here where it deals with responsibilities or the 
accountabilities of the councils involved to talk to their 
ratepayers. 
 
No place in here does it mention anything about having a 
meeting of the ratepayers to determine whether or not they’re 
interested in amalgamating with another municipality. And it 
certainly doesn’t say anything in here, Mr. Speaker, about a 
need for a vote of the ratepayers to agree to do an 
amalgamation. 
 
There may be value for the individual council members to join 
with another municipality. And if we go back to the idea of the 
vote in each municipality, if people on council have large 
portions of land in another municipality but their residence is in, 
say, municipality A and their land is in B, certainly an incentive 
for them to try and join A and B together so that they get to vote 
on what’s happening to their property, what the tax structure is 
on their property in another division. 
 
So while it may be to their benefit, it’s not necessarily to the 
benefit of all other ratepayers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is a need to have the municipalities, the ratepayers in 
each municipality that may be amalgamating hold a vote and 
make that determination, not just simply the councils, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There are a number of difficulties that may arise through 
amalgamations, and these are all to be set out in an agreement 
between the two councils. That’s good, Mr. Speaker. But that 
agreement should take place after the ratepayers in all of the 
municipalities involved have given their okay through a vote. 
 
Those would include agreements on equalizing the municipal 
mill rates. Some municipalities may have a higher mill rate, 
some may have a lower mill rate, some may have different 
municipal infrastructures — more roads, less roads, as the case 
may be. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Or a very contentious issue, Mr. Speaker: contaminated sites. 
Places where they have stored, perhaps, their chemicals. Places 
where the town dump has been. Those kind of situations, Mr. 
Speaker. Some municipalities have them, some may not have 
them. It’s going to be a cost to all of the people within the new 
district if an amalgamation takes place. Those kind of things 
need to be settled. 
 
A very contentious issue, Mr. Speaker, is any surplus funds that 

may be . . . have collected up by a municipality. What happens 
to those? 
 
Tax tools are a critical issue. While assessments may be the 
same, based on the same formula, the amount of the taxation, 
the actual dollars paid, is based on whatever tax tools that 
municipality decided to employ. 
 
We saw an example, Mr. Speaker, of a large change related to 
tax tools and the amount of money collected as between 
Saskatoon and Regina when it came to the education tax. 
Within the city of Saskatoon, they knew how much money they 
needed. They set . . . they used their tools, the tax tools 
available to them to set the assessment percentages. And what 
that meant, Mr. Speaker, was that their education tax for the 
formula was lower and so they could collect more grants from 
the province. 
 
In Regina, they didn’t use the tax tools in the same manner so 
they were paying more education tax. What we saw happen 
when those were more equalized, Mr. Speaker, was that the 
property taxes collected in Saskatoon have had to rise for 
education, and Regina now gets more grant from the 
Department of Education. 
 
If you have two municipalities side by side that have been using 
their tax tools differently, that means there’ll be a reallocation 
of the tax dollars collected between the two municipalities. And 
those items need to be agreed to before it happens. 
 
The most contentious issue, Mr. Speaker, or one of the most 
contentious issues when it comes to the amalgamation of 
municipalities, is who gets the office. That is a very critical 
issue, Mr. Speaker, and one that definitely needs to have the 
input of not just the councils but all of the people involved 
within the district, Mr. Speaker, that may be formed — and not 
just the people who are on the council at present time. 
 
I’ve already talked, Mr. Speaker, about the need to have the 
ability to vote in more than one municipality. I believe that is 
critical. It’s part of our democratic base, and the government of 
today is trying to circumvent that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also talks, Mr. Speaker, about forming community advisory 
committees. Now I need to know a little more about that, Mr. 
Speaker, before I can make a determination whether that’s good 
or bad. 
 
On the surface it looks to me like it’s an opportunity to try and 
deflect responsibility away from the municipal council by 
putting up a straw dog to go and do whatever measure it is that 
it’s in place for — to hold hearings, carry out a function — so 
that the ratepayers will be angry at the Community Advisory 
Committee rather than being angry at council. 
 
So I’m not sure exactly what the minister’s intention is on this 
particular issue — why it’s important, what he sees, what the 
useful purpose of it is. But clearly my initial reaction to it is 
negative; that it’s simply a means such as was used by the 
provincial government in setting up the district health boards to 
try and deflect responsibility from the people who were actually 
making the decisions, who were providing or restricting the tax 
dollars available to carry out a project. Whereas the districts — 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

 

or in this case the Community Advisory Council — doesn’t 
have the authority to actually do anything but is there to be a 
buffer between the community and the council. 
 
This also talks about being able to vary the discount rates given 
for prompt payment of taxes. And I wonder whether or not the 
minister and his department actually consulted the Department 
of Education on this because I know that is an issue with every 
school division in the province. 
 
They set their mill rate based on the assessment on what they 
believe they will be able to collect . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Excuse me. Why is the member for Swift 
Current on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to the 
member for Cannington for yielding. 
 
It’s a great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of this Assembly a group of visitors in the east 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. This is a group of students from the 
Cypress Hills Regional College, an excellent advanced 
education institution in my constituency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are seven students in the gallery as well as the instructor, 
Ms. Bula Ghosh. And these students are taking English as a 
second language. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just ask all members of 
the Assembly to join with me in welcoming them here today to 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Rural Municipality 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wonder if the minister or his department discussed the 
discounting of taxes with the Department of Education, with the 
SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association). I know that 
in the past this has been a bone of contention for them because 
it reduces the amount of tax revenues that they generate off of 
the assessment. They’ve made their mill rates based on that 
assessment and their estimate of how much they’re going to 
collect. 
 
When the municipality adjusts, Mr. Speaker, the discount rates 
on this, it varies the amount that the Department of . . . not the 
department, but the education school district receives in 
funding, and at times can be an imposition on that education 
district division in how they can deliver their programs. If 
everybody goes in in September and the municipality is giving 
a 10 per cent discount, that means that the school division 
receives 10 per cent less than what they had budgeted for. 

Now I know it doesn’t happen, Mr. Speaker, that everybody 
goes in on September 1, but it could happen. And I think that 
the minister needs to talk with the SSTA on how this is going to 
affect their budgeting and the determinations that they will be 
making. 
 
I have given the minister a number of suggestions, Mr. Speaker, 
that I hope he will take to heart and discuss with the various 
interests. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I would move we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 25 — The Northern Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of 
The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if I may just make some comments. This Bill 
introduces amendments to The Northern Municipalities Act that 
will reduce provincial government involvement in local 
decision making, remove unnecessary provincial involvement 
in northern municipal affairs, clarify political accountability, 
and streamline administrative processes allowing the provincial 
government to focus its attention and resources on provincial 
interests. 
 
As well, it will enhance the decision-making capacity and 
autonomy of northern municipalities and implement changes to 
respond to specific procedural or approval issues which have 
arisen over this past year. 
 
Earlier, Mr. Speaker, I outlined amendments being proposed to 
the urban and rural municipal Acts. As I noted during those 
remarks, the provisions in the three municipal Acts are similar 
in many respects. 
 
Some of the amendments address issues brought forth in 
southern Saskatchewan. They call for greater municipal 
autonomy and less provincial prescription in matters that can 
and should be decided at the local level. 
 
Some of these suggestions are applicable to northern and rural 
municipalities as well as urban municipalities. That is because 
they contribute to the overall strategy of reducing provincial 
involvement in matters that are clearly of a municipal nature. 
 
We bring these amendments forward, Mr. Speaker, because we 
believe in our northern communities. We want to ensure that 
northern communities are provided with the same legislative 
tools that are available to municipalities in the southern part of 
our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the changes proposed in this Bill relate primarily 
to extending council’s authority and autonomy to decide 
administrative issues and matters of a local nature. They will 
improve the ability of local governments to manage their own 
affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker the following are the key provisions of this 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

particular Bill. Authority for municipalities to adopt stricter 
conflict of interest rules and guidelines. Authority for 
municipalities to extend the deadlines prescribed by the Act for 
the completion of certain matters. Authority for municipalities 
to set licensing fees for direct sellers in the same manner that 
they have authority to set licence fees for other businesses. 
Authority for municipalities to dispose of lost personal property 
in order that such property can be donated. 
 
As well, provisions that clarify that municipalities have the 
authority to define areas within which certain businesses or a 
limited number of business can operate. And provisions that 
provide northern municipalities with the same authority for 
inspection and enforcement procedures as is found in the urban 
and rural municipalities Acts. 
 
Other amendments reduce provincial involvement in municipal 
decisions. The key provisions of this Bill in this regard include 
the following, Mr. Speaker: replacing the requirement for 
municipalities to prepare their financial statements on a form 
approved by the minister with a requirement to prepare such 
statements in accordance with generally accepted accounting 
principles for local governments. 
 
Next, removing the requirement for the minister to approve 
records retention and disposal schedules, but authorizing 
municipalities to set their own schedules by bylaw. 
 
Next, removing the requirement to submit municipal traffic 
bylaws to the Highway Traffic Board for approval. Removing 
the requirement for a capital works plan to be in a form 
approved by the minister and removing the requirement for the 
statement of mailing of tax notices to be in a form approved by 
the minister. 
 
Other amendments, Mr. Speaker, address specific procedural or 
approval issues, including removing the requirement for an 
order in council and replacing it with approval by a minister’s 
order when altering boundaries of northern municipalities and 
settlements. Provisions which provide a voluntary dispute 
resolution mechanism for inter-municipal disputes. Provisions 
which permit the minister to request financial data respecting 
municipal operations. 
 
Provisions that clarify where two or more abutting parcels of 
land are owned by the same person, an assessor may combine 
the assessment of the parcels into a single assessment and 
provisions that clarify. That a board of revision may order the 
correction of errors in assessment and amendments to the 
assessment roll regardless of whether the resulting value 
increases, decreases, or remains the same. 
 
In summary, Mr. Speaker, this Bill responds to significant 
concerns in three areas: enhancing the decision-making capacity 
and autonomy of northern municipalities; secondly, removing 
unnecessary provincial involvement in municipal matters; and 
thirdly, implementing changes for specific procedural or 
approval issues which have arisen over the last year. 
 
The provisions within this Bill, Mr. Speaker, address all these 
concerns. These provisions clarify and improve the 
provincial-municipal relationship and contribute to a more 
transparent, streamlined, and accountable process in order that 

all may have confidence in Saskatchewan’s system of local 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments should be supported by all 
members of the legislature. They are in the best interests of 
northern municipalities, their communities, and all 
Saskatchewan residents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 25, The 
Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
speak to this Bill, An Act to amend The Northern 
Municipalities Act. 
 
As I understand it, Mr. Speaker, this Act contains provisions 
that make boundary alterations subject to ministerial order 
rather than cabinet approval. We would question that. 
 
(15:45) 
 
It also puts in place conflict-of-interest disclosure provision, 
which sounds positive on the surface, clarifies the appointment 
of auditors, and requires financial statements to be done in a 
manner consistent with standard accounting procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill establishes that the minister has a right to 
request financial information at any time and that the council 
must provide that information. It also, Mr. Speaker, establishes 
requirements for record keeping. 
 
The Bill allows municipalities to limit the number of business 
licences of a certain class that will be issued, and allows 
municipalities to establish fees and charges to direct sellers for 
licences just as it does for any other business. These fees were 
previously set by the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It outlines plans for . . . there is a provision where plans for 
capital works no longer have to be submitted to the minister for 
approval. But as I understand it, such plans are still necessary. 
 
It more firmly establishes that the board of revision has the right 
to lower or raise assessments on appeal. Previously, Mr. 
Speaker, there was some confusion over this. It does put in 
place a dispute-settling mechanism between municipalities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it gives council power to extend deadlines 
for such things as compiling the tax role or publishing financial 
reports. 
 
All in all, Mr. Speaker, some provisions of this Bill appear at 
first blush to be quite positive. On the other hand, some of the 
provisions may be controversial and we’ll be looking for 
feedback from municipalities before we’ll be in a position to 
debate this Bill in detail. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on this Bill 
until we have had an opportunity to confer thoroughly with 
municipalities regarding some of these provisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 26 — The Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act. 
 
This statute will regulate private hearing aid businesses in 
Saskatchewan in response to consumer concerns. These 
concerns have focused on the marketing practices of some 
hearing-aid dealers, as well as on the competence of those 
providing hearing tests and fitting hearing aids. Many 
consumers of these products are seniors, and they have felt 
particularly vulnerable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as part of our government’s commitment to 
quality, accessible, and responsible health services for our 
seniors and for all people of Saskatchewan, we believe it is 
important to address these concerns. 
 
We have, over the last year, worked closely with the 
Saskatchewan Hearing Instrument Practitioners Society and the 
Saskatchewan Association of Speech-Language Pathologists 
and Audiologists on this Act. These organizations support our 
move to regulate this sector by requiring businesses to be 
licensed to employ qualified staff to provide hearing aid 
services. 
 
We have also consulted with Veterans Affairs Canada, the 
Workers’ Compensation Board, and health districts. All support 
this initiative. 
 
Saskatchewan Health will continue to work closely with these 
key groups as we develop regulations that establish staff 
qualifications and standards of practice. As audiologists are 
already regulated by the Saskatchewan Association of 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists, only those 
audiologists who operate private hearing-aid businesses will 
need to be licensed. A business, which is not licensed to provide 
hearing-aid services, may be fined under the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Health will administer the licensing 
program and provide a contact for consumers who have 
questions or complaints about hearing-aid businesses. We will 
be able to investigate those complaints and, if warranted, take 
action against the company. This would include suspending the 
licence or ordering a consumer refund. 
 
There are some other significant features of the Act which will 
provide a positive benefit for consumers. Those who have 
ordered a hearing aid will be allowed three days to reflect on 
their order and, if desired, cancel it and receive a refund. 
 
In addition, consumers will be allowed to receive a copy of 
their hearing test so that they may then choose from which 
outlet they wish to purchase their hearing aid. This is quite 
similar to receiving a copy of eyesight test results. 
 
Hearing-aid businesses, unless operated by audiologist, will 
also be restricted from providing services to minors. This is 
because audiologists need to work closely with the education 
sector and with speech-language pathologists to ensure our 
children receive integrated, remedial services such as those 

provided by health districts through the Saskatchewan Hearing 
Aid Plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a first critical step in regulating this sector. 
We will continue to consult with our industry partners in 
developing the necessary regulations, and deciding on an 
appropriate time frame for proclaiming the Act and the 
regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to stand 
today and speak to Bill No. 26, An Act respecting Hearing Aid 
Sales and Services. 
 
The minister outlined the Act and what the Act intends to do as 
far as licensing and regulating, and talks about the Health 
department looking after this area. 
 
The first thing I’d like to comment on, I haven’t heard or our 
caucus offices and constituency offices hasn’t heard many or 
any complaints concerning this area of marketing and business. 
And so I’m not aware of an overwhelming need to change the 
laws. But if the minister and the government has had those 
requests, I suppose that would be an appropriate step to make. 
 
A couple of points I’d like to make is concerning other 
associations and businesses who self-regulate. They look after 
their own industry, their own businesses. They provide the 
licence or recommend the licence to the government agency 
that looks after this area. And I’m just wondering if what the 
minister is stating here is just a duplication of what is already 
going on in consumer and corporate affairs. 
 
And also it seems to me that there are many other areas that are 
already running on their own, a self-regulated industry, and we 
already have laws on the books concerning consumer 
protection. And I’m just wondering if this again is a duplication 
of those same laws and protection that consumers already have. 
 
I believe it’s important that various industries and especially in 
health care are licensed and have professional standings of 
practice. But again I think it’s probably more appropriate to 
have a self-regulating industry which would look after this area. 
 
One thing that businesses right across the province have spoken 
to the official opposition is concerning the amount of red tape 
and regulation in this province which is hindering investment, 
hindering the private investors in this province. And I’m just 
concerned that this is another layer of bureaucracy and 
regulation that is added on to the businesses in this province 
which will stagnate the industry and really hold back the 
professional services that are provided. 
 
And at this time I’d like to take this back to our caucus and talk 
to the stakeholders in the province and have more discussion 
with them. And at this time I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

Bill No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 4 — The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with a great deal of pleasure that I rise to enter into the debate in 
regard to Bill No. 4, The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 
2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many people involved in the health care 
system and they all play an integral part in the delivery of 
health care services in our province and in our communities. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, increasingly it is apparent that there are 
individuals who have the ability to have an extended scope of 
practice that would be very beneficial in many aspects of health 
care delivery in the province. And I speak of nurse practitioners 
or advanced clinical nurses or whatever designation exactly you 
want to give to these individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look across the future mosaic of health care 
delivery in this province, I think everyone would agree that it’s 
extremely important that each of the individuals involved are 
able to fulfill their scope of practice for which they were 
trained. And it is important and necessary that legislation be set 
into place to appropriately come up with a set of rules and 
guidelines so that that can happen in a professional and 
effective way. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I believe that this legislation goes a long way 
in defining the scope of practice and the terms of reference for 
advanced clinical nurses in the province. 
 
Increasingly, Mr. Speaker, there is nurse practitioners or 
advanced clinical nurses beginning to function in our province 
even though these guidelines have not been clearly defined. 
And they’re forced at this stage to still operate under the 
auspices of a general family physician or a medical doctor for 
some of the procedures that they are actually trained to be able 
to do. And, Mr. Speaker, this legislation potentially is going to 
clarify those issues and I think that that is an important prospect 
for nurse practitioners in the province. 
 
The nature of the legislation will put this under the auspices of 
The Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association and they 
will engage in the process of setting up bylaws and guidelines 
for the advanced clinical nurses. 
 
There are two main areas where these individuals will be able to 
function more independently than currently is the case. And that 
is firstly that they will be able to write prescriptions off the 
formulary for a limited number of medical pharmaceuticals. 
And we think that that’s appropriate, because some of the 
clients that these individuals see that a range of pharmaceuticals 
that they could write prescriptions for would be appropriate. 
 
And the second area is that they would be able to also 
independently call up for a certain number of medical tests that 
are required in the conduction of their practice. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that there was some initial testing of the 
use of advanced clinical nurses in the province. And from what 
I understand these initial trial runs, if you like, have come back 
very favourably received by the people in the communities 
where advanced clinical nurses have practiced. 
 
In my constituency, certainly, and in the neighbouring 
constituency under the auspices of the North-East Health 
District, there is an advanced clinical nurse practising in the 
communities of Carrot River, Arborfield, and now Zenon Park 
in my constituency. And everything that comes back from 
people that have used this individual is very positive. 
 
In addition, in my health district they are now under the process 
of hiring an advanced clinical nurse to set up practice and to 
assist physicians in the communities of St. Brieux and Naicam, 
and I think that that is a step in the right direction as well. 
 
However, I think that there has to be some obvious cautions 
placed up in when we look at this practice, because I think we 
don’t want to create a situation where we indeed are alternating 
for advanced clinical nurses where family physicians have been 
adequately putting in a service and a practice to the community. 
And I think that when we define the role of advanced clinical 
nurses in our communities that this has to be done with a great 
deal of consultation. 
 
(16:00) 
 
I note in discussion with various official agencies in the health 
care field that there has been a reasonable amount of negotiation 
on the official level between a number of the people in various 
associations. For example, the Saskatchewan Registered 
Nurses’ Association has had an opportunity to look very closely 
at this legislation and are satisfied with it. The Saskatchewan 
Association of Licensed Practical Nurses, as well. 
 
The Registered Psychiatric Nurses of Saskatchewan, the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons, the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, the Saskatchewan Pharmaceutical Association, and 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations have 
had discussions about this legislation, and I think that that is an 
appropriate avenue to take to make sure that there aren’t some 
pitfalls that we may be stumbling into with this legislation. 
 
In addition, we as the official opposition have been undertaking 
to make connections and contacts, not only with these official 
associations as the Department of Health has done, but also to 
talk to people that are actually in the field, in the profession, not 
only in advanced clinical practice, but also in regular registered 
nurse, licensed practical nurse, registered psychiatric nurse, and 
the medical profession to see if individuals have concerns about 
how this legislation is being crafted. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, in principle I’m pleased as the official 
opposition Health critic to say we are very much supportive of 
the general thrust of this legislation. We certainly think that it is 
going to be another small piece in the very large puzzle about 
health care delivery in this province. And as such, we think that 
it has some real merits. 
 
However I have to also report, Mr. Speaker, that a number of 
the people that we have requested their reaction to this 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

 

legislation from have been unable to give their submissions to 
us at this time, and so we certainly feel it important that this 
legislation be given due care and attention and proper process. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we certainly require some additional time 
for those individuals to respond to our queries as to their 
perspectives about this legislation. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, awaiting that information, I would 
respectfully like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 5 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 5 — The 
Dietitians Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand 
today to The Dietitians Act that has been brought forward by 
the government. Overall we’re encouraged by the contents of 
the Bill, which will formally put in place a regulatory body for 
dietitians across the province. 
 
Public accountability has been strengthened by expanding the 
number of public representatives on the council. There will be a 
requirement for open disciplinary hearings and for the filing of 
an annual report. All of these objectives are something that we 
see as a positive move. 
 
Obviously as health care and health care delivery has changed 
over the years, it has been necessary to effect those changes 
within the professional bodies that are represented. 
 
For those who are not aware of just how far reaching a 
dietitian’s work is, it’s important to note that they are employed 
in various sectors in the health care field serving in such areas 
not only as food services, but clinical dietitians, public health, 
community dietitians, nutritional supplementary programs, and 
even specialized clinics like pediatrics. 
 
One of the primary roles that the dietitians play in health care is 
to improve and maintain health and well-being. 
 
Interesting to note that when the NDP implemented its so-called 
wellness model in 1992, they were so concerned about closing 
down hospitals and consolidating services that they didn’t make 
changes where changes were obviously needed. So while 
dietitians saw their roles expand and change, amended 
legislation did not accompany that. 
 
Unfortunately it’s what we’ve come to expect from this 
government. In its usual style they decide to wait and see. Then 
when it looks like they might be in trouble, they decide to do 
something. But that’s better late than never — it seems to be 
their motto especially when it comes to health care. 
 
We now know Saskatchewan has the longest waiting lists in the 
country. Not only are residents waiting to access health care, 
they’re sick enough to need to access it. Clearly health needs 
and health matters are not being addressed in this province. 
 
Hopefully this Bill not only recognizes the important 

contributions that dietitians make to health care delivery, but 
that it also ensures they have the tools and resources needed to 
deliver their programs and services to more people in a more 
timely manner. 
 
We are pleased to see the discussion took place over a two and 
a half year period with the dietitian association. Through 
discussion and consultation, input and suggestions for this Bill 
were provided. This allowed for the Bill that the dietitians 
throughout Saskatchewan can be proud of. 
 
One of this government’s 1999 election promises was to hire 
500 more health care providers. Last summer it was announced 
that over 200 health care positions would be lost. We know that 
a majority of these positions were nurses but we’re also 
wondering if dietitians were included as well. 
 
In fact the University of Saskatchewan has indicated that it will 
likely be hiking tuition fees this year by an average of 15 per 
cent, something that will no doubt impact the number of 
dietitians who will be able to afford to take their training at the 
U of S (University of Saskatchewan). 
 
And when we talk about the lack of access, while this Bill 
finally gives some long overdue respect to dietitians throughout 
Saskatchewan, it doesn’t address the more serious issue of 
increasing funding to universities or increasing the number of 
seats in the various health care programs. In fact only 24 seats 
are available in the dietitian program at the University of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Another lack of access for dietitians in this province that isn’t 
addressed in this Bill is regards to the student financial aid. We 
know this government has a bursary program in place that will 
allow students going into health-related fields to get help with 
their tuition costs if they promise to work in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
While this is good news for rural Saskatchewan, it’s bad news 
for students studying dietetics because from what we’ve seen 
these bursaries are going to students in physical therapy, 
occupational therapy, speech and language pathology, ideology, 
public health inspection, respiratory therapy, and early 
childhood psychology. 
 
We also know the continued lack of funding to health districts 
has forced health boards to cut back even more on critical 
programs and services, which has negatively impacted the 
access and delivery of health care to many communities. 
 
There is a great demand for dietitians across the province. In 
many instances one dietitian is forced to do many things, which 
again speaks to the serious state of working conditions in the 
health care area in Saskatchewan. We’ve been told there’s a 
two-year shortage of dietitians — very similar to the problem 
facing nursing. 
 
This Bill does not begin to address these very extreme 
important issues. 
 
There is no denying that hospitals are necessary to treat the sick 
and the injured, but it’s also important that people understand 
and take responsibility for their own personal health. This is 



1122 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

where the dietitians come in. Unfortunately we haven’t seen 
much initiative from this government that will address a 
disappointing and overall lack of vision that it has regarding 
health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re well aware this Bill has the support of 
dietitians and that it has been contemplated for a number of 
years. But we’ve also had calls from people who have other 
input issues that they would like to discuss with us and with due 
diligence we feel it would be necessary to adjourn this debate 
on this Bill for now and garner any further information that may 
be coming to us. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Health to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. It’s my 
pleasure today to be here in this very warm place and see if we 
can’t add a little bit of heat through some answers to some 
questions. 
 
But I’m very pleased to have with me today a number of 
officials from the Department of Health. Right to my left is 
Glenda Yeates, who is the deputy minister; and to her left is 
Lauren Donnelly, who is the executive director of acute and 
emergency services. To my right is Lawrence Krahn, who is the 
assistant deputy minister. 
 
Directly behind me is Bert Linklater, who’s the executive 
director of district management services; and beside him is 
Duncan Fisher, the assistant deputy minister. And to my right 
. . . behind me to my right is Wanda Lamberti, who is the 
director of budget and financial planning. 
 
And I also have with me today Kimberly Wihnan, who is the 
assistant to the deputy minister; Eric Young, the deputy chief 
medical health officer; and Tim Macaulay, who is the 
environmental health consultant. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And first of all, to the minister, welcome, and to your officials, 
welcome to the beginning of the estimates process. I think the 
minister can well appreciate that what we don’t want to 
generate today is more heat. I would rather have some light. So 
let’s try to make it happen. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you can appreciate, the Department of Health 
budget is very significant in the province, and I would like to 
outline a little bit of groundwork in terms of my approach to the 
Committee on Estimates in terms of the different departments. 
 
I think that you and I have the opportunity to travel in the health 
circles with a great deal of intensity, and I think that we have a 

responsibility to make sure that we properly scrutinize the 
estimates and the requests for the Department of Health. But not 
to just do that in light of our interest but to do it for the greater 
interest of people who are out in the province who are watching 
these proceedings through the television channels, etc. So I 
think we have an obligation, first of all, to a larger audience 
than those of us immediately into the Chamber. 
 
And so through the course of this process, I certainly intend to 
direct the process from our prospective so that answers that may 
be obvious to you and I may not be so necessarily obvious to 
people who would be wanting to know what’s going on in the 
Department of Health and with this very significant budget. 
 
The process then would go through these various stages over 
time. And over the next weeks and months, or whatever it’s 
going to be, we’re going to have a lot of opportunities, I hope, 
to delve into the various departments and areas in some depth. 
 
I’ve been seconded or whatever by one of my colleagues in 
terms of some issues this afternoon because they’re 
time-sensitive, and there has been a request that the member 
from Watrous would like to ask some questions of your 
department, particularly concerning a situation in her 
constituency and particularly in light where there are decisions 
that are ongoing as we speak; that she feels it’s important that 
there will be some clarification from yourself and your 
department on these issues. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, with those very brief opening statements, I 
would like to defer to my colleague and look forward to the 
next opportunity when we have to start on the general health 
topics. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I too would like to 
welcome the minister and his officials for being here today. 
 
And for the first question, I would like to know what protocol, 
if any, is in place for the Health department to track the staffing 
statistics throughout each of the province’s health districts. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. Basically 
what happens within Saskatchewan Health is that the health 
system is managed on the basis of dollars and services provided 
to patients. So that’s the key factor. But on an annual basis there 
is a Health department survey of all employers within the 
Saskatchewan Health system and that data is then basically like 
a snapshot for the year. 
 
And so this process takes a number of people to do it obviously, 
and the most recent data available is from 1999 — December 
31, 1999. The information for the year 2000 will be available 
later this year. 
 
This data is then checked against some other indicators. One of 
the key areas is the SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations) benefits eligibility system. It basically 
has a record of who has pensions, who has the various benefit 
plans that are there. 
 
We also have a check on a regular basis against the health 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1123 

 

district information. 
 
And finally, we also have the SAHO payroll system as well as 
information from East Central and Swift Current Health 
Districts, because they’re not on that same payroll system. And 
so you have a number of different places where this information 
is taken. But the most accurate one in retrospect is always the 
employer survey. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the past I have 
asked questions about the Living Sky Health District and 
problems that they are facing, and in those questions you knew 
that there was a problem. So who reported the tentative nursing 
shortage at the Lanigan Hospital to your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Perhaps I didn’t understand your first 
question about the protocol around information. 
 
Basically there are staff within Saskatchewan Health who are 
responsible for different districts. And they have two, three, or 
four districts that they’re responsible for and they’re in regular 
telephone contact, sending information back and forth. 
 
And so most likely, the kind of information that you’re asking 
about would be part of a regular daily or every other day 
conversation with the health district management staff in 
Regina. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So if I’m 
understanding you correctly, the administration staff of a health 
district reports to another body who then reports to you or your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The process I just described is a liaison 
role because practically the staff within the health district and 
the CEO report to their health board. But they also give that 
information to us in Regina, because there are different issues 
that sometimes take involvement of information from 
everywhere. 
 
But primarily it’s a liaison role and the board of the health 
district is the one that has the ultimate responsibility. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So if there is a 
possibility, say, of a hospital closure, the one who would report 
to your department would be the CEO of the health district in 
question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The normal procedure would be that they 
would notify the staff in the department, but they don’t have to 
do that. But if they’re actually going to close a facility, then 
they do have to provide that information to the minister’s office. 
 
But often some of these decisions are discussed or made, and 
they don’t notify us before they do that. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So I’m going to 
return to a question that I had asked earlier. Was the tentative 
nursing shortage of the Lanigan Hospital reported to your 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The department knew that they were 
having some difficulties recruiting staff, but I think that was the 

extent of it. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So you knew that 
there was recruitment problems for the district as a whole, 
which also includes the Lanigan . . . or the Watrous and the 
Wynyard hospitals. 
 
Are you now aware of the recruitment problems that they’re 
having? And if so, are you aware of the number of shift 
shortages that they’re having in both of the Lanigan and the 
Watrous hospitals? If so, what shift shortages are you aware of? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At this stage we haven’t been following it 
on a regular basis because that’s the kind of information we 
wouldn’t normally hear about in the department in Regina 
because it’s a local management issue. But our understanding is 
that, at least in the Lanigan situation, they’ve been able to cover 
the shifts for the summer. 
 
But basically those kinds of issues around the shift management 
wouldn’t be something that would be normally part of the 
liaison function unless they were having major troubles. And 
obviously in this situation, when they went to the point of 
announcing that they thought they were going to have to have a 
summer change in how they provided the coverage, well then 
we asked some more questions. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Now that you are 
aware that there is some problems in this health district, have 
you discussed it with the administration of the health district? 
And do you know of any plans that the health district is taking 
in order to cover the shift shortages in the Watrous Hospital for 
the summer months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We don’t have specific information about 
the other facilities within that health district, but we do know 
that the whole health district is having some challenges around 
recruitment. And that is an ongoing situation, I think, that we’re 
working at throughout the province. 
 
But as to specific other facilities that have shortages or not, I’m 
not aware of that, and department people aren’t aware. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When I asked 
questions during question period pertaining particularly to the 
Lanigan Hospital and the proposed closure for the summer 
months, you had answered that the Living Sky Health District 
was working with the stakeholders to try to solve the nursing 
shortage issue of the Lanigan Hospital. Who would have given 
you that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This information would come to me from 
the department through the district consultants that are the ones 
that do the liaison, and basically they receive that information 
from the administration in the health district. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I’m assuming 
the liaison, again I’m asking if that’s the CEO, and you can 
correct me if I’m wrong in assuming that. Were you aware that 
there was a workshop held where the Living Sky Health District 
Board members were present — the CEO and all the 
stakeholders of the Lanigan Hospital were all present at the 
workshop — only six days prior to the board announcing that 



1124 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

there was going to be a summer closure of the Lanigan 
Hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I was aware that they had had a meeting 
where they ended up discussing with the community some of 
the issues around the health district, but that was information 
that I received after they made their announcement. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One of the topics 
of the workshop that I was told about was communication is 
essential. 
 
Has the minister been made aware that there was no mention at 
that workshop of the potential summer closure of the Lanigan 
Hospital? Even the board members themselves did not know of 
this problem, and yet the chairman of the board called the board 
members that night after the workshop to call an emergency 
meeting for the following Tuesday evening. Have you been 
made aware of those facts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I have some basic understanding of that 
information, but all subsequent to it happening. Because 
basically there was a concern that after a meeting of the 
discussion that we then needed to have an emergency meeting 
with the staff around the closure issue. So basically I know 
about that, but only subsequent to it all happening. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On Tuesday, April 
17 the emergency meeting did take place, and the board 
members were given a handout that described the staffing 
difficulties that the Lanigan and Watrous hospitals are facing 
for the summer months. Has the minister been given a copy of 
this document that was discussed at the board meeting? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Okay. I have a copy if we can get someone 
to pass it to you. 
 
The interesting thing to note on this document is that it begins 
with the title in bold print, “Board Decision.” This was the first 
time that the board members were made aware of how serious 
the summer nursing shortage was going to be, and yet the 
document does not open with the title, board discussion; nor 
does it list any options or other possibilities for the board to 
discuss. 
 
Does the minister still believe that the Living Sky Health 
District Board explored every possible avenue before they made 
such a drastic decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the situation here is 
obviously that this board was trying to work with a particular 
problem. They set out a plan — and I’m just speaking from 
what’s happened now — that June 15 was a day that they were 
planning to go into some kind of a summer change in hours. 
And that once they presented that information to the 
community, there were many other suggestions that came 
forward as to how to resolve this. 
 
So I guess the issue only came to be after this particular 
discussion took place. 
 

(16:30) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You have said that 
the board has been trying to work out the problem, but in fact at 
the emergency meeting that very night, which was the first time 
they knew that there was a problem — as drastic as it was — 
and it’s the first time that they were handed this paper that says, 
“Board Decision.” They passed the motion to close that hospital 
that very night, so there wasn’t a whole lot of time that they 
gave to try to work out the problem. 
 
By now I know that you have received a great number of letters 
from concerned citizens who value the Lanigan Hospital, from 
staff who work at the Lanigan Hospital, and from the 
stakeholders at the Lanigan Hospital. 
 
And I know not everybody who wrote you has sent me a copy, 
but I do have copies from Dr. Saxena, from Marlene Pollock 
who is an RN (registered nurse) at the Lanigan Hospital, the 
RM of Wolverine, the towns of Lanigan and Drake, and quite a 
number of citizens. The RMs of Usborne, Jansen, and Prairie 
Rose, and the town of Jansen have also assured me that they’ve 
written to the minister. 
 
All of these letters say the same thing, and that is that the 
Living Sky Health District Board did not consult with anyone at 
all before they made their motion to close the Lanigan Hospital. 
 
After reading all of these letters, does the minister still believe 
that the Living Sky Health District was working with all of the 
people to figure out how to solve the staffing difficulties that 
they were facing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well the simple answer to your question 
is that there have been difficulties around the retention and 
recruitment of RNs and LPNs (licensed practical nurse) in this 
district for quite a period of time. A number of people retired 
and some moved away, so that that issue has been in discussion 
with the local people. 
 
We know that they met with the town council, with other 
people. Whether they talked to every individual in that whole 
area, I don’t think that’s the case, but they did talk to many of 
the people there as they attempted to recruit people and figure 
out how to deal with this. 
 
One of the processes that they obviously used was to say, look, 
this is a serious situation around retention of staff and if we 
don’t sort some of this out, we’ll pass a motion that basically 
says we’ll go into summer hours on June 15. The community 
rallied around the health district and they’ve sorted out some of 
the problems, and I think now they’re putting together a plan 
for the summer. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I believe you 
should maybe talk again to your liaison on this health district. 
All of these letters are not just citizens. A lot of them are 
stakeholders; in fact most of the stakeholders have written you. 
They have all told you the same thing — that there has been no 
communication, there has been no discussion on the shortage of 
nurses; you are being sold a bill of goods here. 
 
And I think there are a number of very credible citizens who 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1125 

 

have written you now to say that this is true. They have no other 
way of recourse if they’re being misrepresented and they’re 
going to lose their health care facility. 
 
The CEO of the Living Sky Health District, Jill Johnson, met 
with the administrator of the town of Lanigan, Jack Dvernichuk. 
And she told Jack at that time that she may encourage the board 
to rescind their motion if the community and the stakeholders 
were able to recruit three nurses to fill the vacant nurses’ shifts. 
She gave them five days in which to accomplish this and then 
stated that the nurses’ names and their credentials would have 
to be on her desk by 8 a.m., Monday, April 30. 
 
The stakeholders and the community did rise to the challenge 
and in only three working days and a weekend, they identified 
nine nurses, one LPN, a health administrator, and an 
experienced scheduler who were willing to work the summer 
months. 
 
The CEO was very gracious when Mr. Dvernichuk handed her 
the list and she, as she lounged on her couch in her office, 
thanked Jack for the list and commended the stakeholders on 
their efforts, and then she said she would need at least 10 days 
to check out the health care workers’ credentials and then she 
would present it to the board. 
 
I found it rather interesting that the stakeholders were given five 
days to recruit their own nurses and the CEO needs 10 days to 
check out their credentials. 
 
It has now been 14 days since the list of health care workers 
was given to the CEO of the Living Sky Health District. The 
people and the stakeholders are still waiting for the board to 
make a decision if they will rescind their motion. The chairman 
of the board, Mr. Wayne Busch, has stated that such a decision 
does not warrant calling an emergency meeting of the board. 
 
So can you, as the minister, tell the people from Lanigan today 
that their efforts has not been in vain and that the Lanigan 
Hospital will remain open this summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s my understanding that the board is 
meeting tonight around this very issue. 
 
I think practically though, many of the questions that you’ve 
raised here are really ones that you should raise with the health 
board and the various board members there, as they do relate 
directly to how the health board operates and the responsibility 
of the CEO. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The stakeholders 
of the Living Sky Health District are looking to you now for 
some guidance because they’re not getting a great response 
from the board of the Living Sky Health District. 
 
When the Living Sky Health District was first formed the 
Lanigan Hospital had over a million dollars in their surplus 
funds. And the facility in Lanigan is the model of what this 
government is encouraging everyone to move towards, because 
it is the ultimate in integrated services. The seniors’ lodge, the 
hospital, the lab, the X-ray, the dietary departments are all 
under one roof. And in fact, even one of the doctor’s clinics was 
located under the same roof until just recently when the CEO 

decided to convert that area into administration offices. 
 
And then last year in the initial budget proposal and again this 
year in the summer months, the CEO and the board chair 
seemed determined to close the Lanigan Hospital and to 
alienate the stakeholders of that hospital. 
 
The board chair was just on the radio this morning and he 
implied that the reason that the stakeholders were able to recruit 
nurses was because they pressured them — something that the 
board is not about to do. And I’ve already received numerous 
phone calls from Lanigan, who are saying that they by no 
means pressured the nurses and they find the chairman’s 
comments offensive. 
 
Surely you must understand at this point that this community is 
becoming very bitter and angry towards the Living Sky Health 
District and the CEO. Many believe that there is another agenda 
behind the board’s decisions and that they are just using the 
summer closure as a way to start the process of closing the 
hospital for good. Could this possibly be true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well unfortunately, you’ve described a 
community that’s having some difficulty sorting out exactly 
how some of these issues should be resolved. And I have a great 
deal of concern and empathy for the people. 
 
I did talk to a number of people that I know in that area last 
week and I know that there are concerns that people have just 
about the whole process, which are the same concerns that 
you’ve raised. And I guess what I would say is that locally 
people will have to sort this out in the sense of working with 
each other. They’ll have to work with each other. That includes 
the board, but it also includes other people in the community. 
 
But they also need to know that the process of closing any 
facility includes making a recommendation from a board to the 
Department of Health and to the minister. And given the kind of 
discussion that we know has gone on in that community, there 
has to be, I guess, a much clearer case for any change to what’s 
happening there. 
 
And I agree with you, their operation, which includes the 
integrated facility and the long- term care and all of these other 
things is a model for how we want a health care system to be 
and so practically I would encourage the people to try to sort 
out some of these things. We will provide assistance such as we 
can but basically my understanding is that if they have the staff 
issue worked out, they can at least then keep the facility going 
out over the summer. 
 
Hopefully we can continue to have more people graduate or be 
recruited to work in that particular area and that we can then 
end up sorting out some of the issues between the board and the 
local community, and between the CEO and the local 
community. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that is the 
most encouraging comments I’ve heard for a while. I do caution 
you that Lanigan isn’t the only community that’s contacted me. 
There’s other communities within the health district that is not 
content. 
 



1126 Saskatchewan Hansard May 14, 2001 

 

Moving on to a different area, could the Health minister please 
tell us here today what the rule of thumb is when calculating the 
amount of monies paid out in a severance package for a health 
care administration position. For example, how many weeks are 
calculated for severance each year for each month of service? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for that question. It kind 
of makes me go back to my role as a lawyer where, you know, 
there are some basic rules at common law, which relate to 
severance packages. 
 
I think that SAHO itself has some basic guidelines that they 
have set as an organization for all of those things. I don’t know 
what those are, but basically it works out to something based on 
the number of years of service, kind of the possibility of getting 
another similar kind of job, and all of those factors that are put 
into there. 
 
But I don’t have that information off the top of my head and 
basically I think it’s one where you should get good legal 
advice. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason why I 
asked that question is I’ve also had numerous phone calls on 
this issue because the emergency meeting that was called by the 
chairperson of Living Sky Health District for April 17 was 
twofold in nature. The chairperson called the meeting to tell the 
board about the closure of the Lanigan Hospital but he also 
wanted to discuss increasing the CEO’s severance package. 
 
The proposal was to increase her package to 18 months pay, 
even though she’s only been employed by the Living Sky 
Health District for approximately five years. So does the 
minister believe that the CEO severance package is reason to 
call an emergency meeting first off, and does he not believe that 
this is quite an excessive package? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think it’s appropriate for me to 
make a comment on that. Basically this would be within the 
purview of that board. And as I said before, I suggest they 
would get some legal advice, or work with SAHO which has 
guidelines around these particular issues. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’d 
also like to welcome your officials here today, Mr. Minister. 
 
I’d like to talk a bit today, Mr. Minister, about the East Central 
Health District and I’m sure you’re quite aware of the situation 
out there. Our local health board was disbanded and replaced 
with an appointed administrator or CEO. And I’ve talked to the 
previous minister of Health about the situation in Yorkton. And 
I’m sure you’re well aware — maybe far more familiar with it 
than I am — but I think once again we have to talk about the 
area that that hospital covers out there. 
 
And as you probably know we go far into Manitoba — I believe 
into the Swan River area, Roblin, down in that area — but we 
go into the Canora-Pelly constituency, a way up, Preeceville, 
Sturgis, Canora, and take the overload from that area and the 
serious cases from there before they get to the point where they 
come to Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
We also go south and we cover my whole constituency along 

the Manitoba border. And I guess why I feel this is so 
important, Mr. Minister, is that I’ve met with doctors out there 
in the last few years, I’ve met with nurses, I’ve met with LPNs, 
and number one, morale is not high in that area. And I think it 
hurts the care that, actually, patients receive out there. 
 
And in saying this, Mr. Minister, I’m not pointing my fingers at 
nurses, doctors, or LPNs because they are the first ones to say 
that they are giving the best care possible. And many that have 
used the facility out there say that once they’ve got into the 
system, they have received very good care. 
 
An example I could use, this summer my mother had a heart 
attack and the care that she’s received out there at the time she’s 
been in the hospital has been excellent. The problem being is, 
number one, we’re short of nurses in that area, as many other 
areas are. But I think the other problem is, is that we’re short of 
beds, Mr. Minister. The doctors, when I meet with those doctors 
out there, I think ICU (intensive care unit)are down to four 
beds; and this is a tremendously big area that we’re covering 
with that hospital. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Pediatrics, we have probably, Mr. Minister, one of the best 
pediatricians in the province and, for that matter, possibly in the 
whole country. And I guess one of our concerns out there is if 
we stay — and I believe we’re at eight beds right now, but at 
one point we were down to four; I think the feeling is that they 
would like to be up to 12 but because of the shortage of nurses 
can’t go back to 12 — that we may lose this pediatrician. 
 
And I know my constituents — and I can’t speak for the 
member from Canora-Pelly — but I know for a fact that people 
in his area are also concerned that we may lose this pediatrician. 
People in Manitoba are even concerned. And I know that’s not 
our responsibility, but in some respects it is because those 
people are coming into Yorkton for care and are taking beds 
that would be Saskatchewan people using them if they weren’t 
in there. 
 
Mr. Minister, I guess what I would like to hear from you today 
is where are we with our health board out there? It was 
disbanded, a CEO or administrator was appointed, and nothing 
seems to have changed. Where are we in this situation right 
now, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I appreciate your comments. And I 
guess I would echo the same comments, which is that when you 
have a good doctor and other good staff you want to try to make 
sure that we get a system that supports them so that they can 
provide the care that we know is well provided when people get 
into the facilities. 
 
As far as the East Central District is concerned, they have been 
dealing with a number of difficulties and concerns. We know 
that last week they did have a public meeting where the 
administrator and the CEO and the financial people laid out 
some of the plans that they have and had what I understand was 
a pretty good discussion around the plans that they have for that 
community. 
 
I know that we’re looking at how to get back to the regularized 



May 14, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1127 

 

situation where we would have a board like all the other areas 
and try to do that in an orderly fashion, because we know there 
are many good people out in that area who would be reflective 
of the community and would be happy to help build even a 
stronger district and institution. 
 
So that’s clearly on the agenda in the very short time frame over 
the next number of months. 
 
As far as the whole issue of the specialists and the service area, 
it is very clear that that particular health district does have a 
broad base of people coming from many places, including from 
Manitoba. And I think that role is going to continue and we just 
need to work with them from the department here and with the 
local people to figure out which are the services that are needed 
and make sure that they get sufficient staff right across the 
board. 
 
We know that the Commission on Medicare has looked at a 
number of the issues around how to provide care in sort of 
regional areas as well as in Saskatoon, Regina, P.A. (Prince 
Albert). And my sense is that the local people have a pretty 
good sense of what kinds of things they need out there. 
 
We’re going to listen very carefully to them as they give us 
their ideas, and then we hope to meld that together with the 
resources that we have as a province so that we can provide the 
long-term kind of care that I know that you are advocating for 
them. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, and I’m glad 
to hear that you share the same concerns. I believe that we both 
have genuine concerns and I think we want to get to the same 
end. 
 
Some of the concerns I’ve had brought to me lately — and I 
know we don’t deal and we don’t make decisions based on 
rumour, but sometimes rumours end up becoming fact down the 
road — and I guess one of my biggest concerns right now is I 
think the possibility of a new long-term care facility in Yorkton 
is being considered and that’s fine. I believe they possibly need 
that facility. 
 
But I think some of the rumours coming out of some of the 
meetings that they’ve had out in our health district, Mr. 
Minister, is that possibly some of our smaller centres where we 
have long-term care facilities — such as Saltcoats and there’s 
others within the Central Health District that are not in my 
constituency — I think have the fear that possibly some of these 
may be closed to cater to one large one in the city of Yorkton. 
And I have no idea if there’s any fact to this, but I guess again I 
reiterate that sometimes these rumours end up being true, Mr. 
Minister, and there’s a great deal of concern out there. 
 
Part of my concern is that many of these local, and by local, I 
mean in the smaller communities care homes that have been 
around there and I believe ran very, very efficiently. I know the 
one at home I think is actually . . . could be a model for some of 
the ones in the province. We have nothing but compliments 
coming out of that. And it would really worry me that we seem 
to be in a transition time in health care, whether health care 
reform is going to take place from what Mr. Fyke has proposed. 
 

And I guess my concern is, Mr. Minister, and I’d like you to 
comment on it, is we have an appointed CEO out there right 
now with no health board. We have the Fyke Commission 
going to be studied one which way or another. We have a 
number of things happening in health care. And I guess my 
concern and many out there is that: how many of the decisions 
are going to happen out there and be made before we deal with 
Fyke and we do all . . . I guess my concern is will some of these 
decisions be made before we deal with Fyke and people have 
had time to put input into what really happens? And I guess, 
Mr. Minister, that’s one of my major concerns right now. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the simple answer to the 
question is that we’re going to have to work with the local 
community people around these decisions because that’s the 
only way that we can make all of this work. And so it may be 
that some of the projects will go ahead, and I guess I point to 
Weyburn and Melfort on Friday where people have been 
working for literally years on those long-term care projects. 
They are now going on to the next step in that process. 
 
And so presumably the Yorkton project is in the process and 
will continue as far as the capital and the local fundraising. But 
I think the important thing is, for the other places that you talk 
about, that the people there end up having to be part of any 
decisions that we make, either with the local officials or on a 
province-wide basis. And so the plan here is that we want to 
listen to the people. 
 
My basic experience is that when you ask, people have very 
good ideas, and let’s figure out how to fit those into an overall 
plan. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:56. 
 
 


