















































Hansard: March 20, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2355 
 March 20, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10 a.m. 
 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Resignations 
 
Clerk: — I will ask you to remain standing, please. It is my 
duty to inform you of the resignation of your Speaker, the Hon. 
Ron Osika, effective February 6, 2001, and the letter of 
resignation is tabled. 
 
I also wish to inform you of the resignation of the Deputy 
Speaker, the member for Regina Coronation Park, Mr. Kim 
Trew, effective February 7, 2001. 
 
In accordance with the rules, the election of Deputy Speaker 
will take place at tomorrow’s sitting. However, the election of 
Speaker must proceed now, pursuant to the provisions of The 
Legislative Assembly Act. I now ask you to prepare for the 
arrival of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
10:02 a.m. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I am commanded by Her Honour the 
Lieutenant Governor to call upon you to proceed to elect a 
Speaker in order that the Assembly may be properly constituted 
according to law. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:03 a.m. 
 

ELECTION OF SPEAKER 
 

Clerk: — Please be seated. 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, pursuant to the rules of 
this Assembly, it is my duty to commence the procedures for 
the election of Speaker. 
 
Pursuant to the procedures specified in rule 26(1), the following 
members have declared their intention to stand as candidates for 
election to the Office of Speaker. 
 
These members are, in alphabetical order: Mr. Lindy Kasperski, 
the hon. member for Regina Sherwood. Thank you. 
 
The other member who is standing for Speaker is Mr. Myron 
Kowalsky, the hon. member for Prince Albert Carleton. 
 
In preparation for the vote, the Sergeant-at-Arms will now bring 
in the ballot box and the pages will distribute the list of 
candidates to all members and post the list in the polling booths. 
The ballot box will then be inspected, and the sealed ballots will 
be opened. And we will do that immediately. Thank you. 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, I will now ask those 
members who wish to cast their ballot to proceed to the 
registration table behind the bar on their respective sides of the 
House. There you will receive your ballot paper, and then 
would you proceed to the polling booth according to the seating 
plan that is on your desk. 
 

May I remind all hon. members to please print the first and last 
name of their candidate on the ballot paper. 
 
The balloting will now proceed. Thank you. 
 
The members proceeded to cast ballots. 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, if they’re any 
members who have not voted and wish to do so, will you please 
vote now. 
 
All the members having voted, the House will recess to the call 
of the bells while the Clerks at the Table count the ballots. The 
bells will ring for three minutes to recall members to the 
Chamber when the results of the first ballot are ready to be 
announced. 
 
Thank you. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
Clerk: — Hon. members, before announcing the result of the 
ballot, I would like to invite you to acknowledge the 
contributions of our two candidates, Mr. Kasperski and Mr. 
Kowalsky on this important day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clerk: — You have elected this Legislative Assembly’s 22nd 
Speaker. It is my duty now to inform you that you have elected 
as your Speaker, the hon. member for Prince Albert Carlton, 
Mr. Myron Kowalsky. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clerk: — And now our new Speaker will be escorted to the 
dais. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, I wish 
to express my grateful thanks and humble acknowledgement of 
the high honour the Assembly has conferred upon me. 
 
While I leave the floor of this Assembly to take the Speaker’s 
chair, I leave behind all political partisan feelings in order that I 
may discharge, with impartiality, to all and to the best of my 
ability, the various important duties pertaining to the high office 
of Speaker. 
 
It will be my aim and duty to uphold the principles and 
traditions of this Assembly; to secure for each member the right 
to express his or her opinions within the limits necessary to 
preserve decorum; to recognize the rights and privileges of the 
hon. members, the political groups, and the Assembly itself; to 
facilitate the transaction of public business in an orderly 
manner; and above all, to seek to be fair and impartial in the 
decisions you have entrusted to me. 
 
I have a deep respect for our system of parliamentary 
democracy and all it represents. It has given us the legal 
framework and stability necessary to become the best place in 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2001 

 

which to live. I have a deep respect for those who have been 
democratically elected to serve in public office. Your 
constituents have entrusted you to represent their interests in 
this legislature. Your work may be difficult but it is important 
— people are counting on you. 
 
The rules and customs of this legislature have evolved 
democratically through decisions taken by members past and 
present. These rules serve us well but they can be amended. As 
I assume my duties as your Speaker, these concepts of respect 
for parliamentary democracy, respect for elected members, and 
respect for the rules of this Assembly are foremost in my mind. 
 
I pray I will be able to serve this Assembly well and that during 
my term as Speaker, the work of the members of this Assembly 
will be a source of pride to constituents. I thank you once again 
for entrusting your confidence in me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to ask leave of the 
Assembly to make a few remarks regarding the election of the 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to first say to the hon. members, ladies and gentlemen, on 
behalf of Premier Calvert and the Government of 
Saskatchewan, it’s my distinct pleasure to congratulate you, sir, 
on the election of this very distinguished office, as Speaker of 
the Legislative Assembly. 
 
As we were escorting you to your chair this morning, Mr. 
Speaker, a couple of my colleagues — particularly the Minister 
of Health — said that the two members who were escorting you 
should have been a little larger. It would have been easier to get 
you to your place. 
 
Today the members of the Assembly were asked to make a very 
difficult choice as two highly respected and most competent 
individuals had placed their names for the task of . . . job of 
being the Speaker. 
 
I would like to thank the member from Regina Sherwood for 
putting his name forward. His proven record and commitment 
to his constituents, the people of Saskatchewan, and this 
Assembly is well-known. I know that Saskatchewan people will 
continue to benefit from your dedicated, hard work as a member 
of the Legislative Assembly from Regina Sherwood. Thank you 
to the member from Regina Sherwood. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as you well know, 
throughout the world as Canadians we are known for our 
commitment to the values of fairness and equity and the 
principles of democracy. And in Saskatchewan, we pride 
ourselves as leaders and pioneers as has been the case on many 
fronts. The election of a Speaker is yet another such example of 
our belief and commitment to the freedom of choice and to the 
principles of democracy. 
 

Mr. Speaker, it can be said that the members of this Assembly 
take the work of this institution very seriously because it is here 
where we can demonstrate our creativity, our vision, our 
passion on issues, and make changes with words and debate as 
opposed to what happens in other parts of the world where 
violence and bloodshed is the vehicle for the freedom of 
expression. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if you were asked, if you were asked a 
school group or a viewer of the legislative channel, it could also 
be said that from time to time this Assembly may resemble a 
war zone. However, the decorum of the Assembly and the 
respect of this institution and what it represents is always 
restored because not only do we believe in the institution but 
more importantly we respect the chair, and you, sir, as our 
newly elected leader, Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that you have served the people of 
Saskatchewan for several years, having been selected by your 
constituency of Prince Albert Carlton for now four terms. This 
accomplishment alone is a tribute to you, sir. That confidence 
supplied with the values of trust, fairness, and impartiality and 
hard work are the assets this Assembly will have the benefit of, 
and we thank you for offering those attributes to this great 
institution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we realize that your role is not an easy one. From 
time to time, in the throes of debate, you will be called upon to 
make some very difficult decisions. However, Mr. Speaker, you 
need to know that on this side of the House we are committed to 
make your job and the legislature work. We will do our part to 
uphold the value of tradition of this Assembly. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of Premier Calvert and all of 
the government members, we congratulate you. I know you will 
perform your duties with integrity, fairness and compassion — 
the very values that have guided your career in the Legislative 
Assembly. And in the way as a Ukrainian Canadian would want 
to bid you well on a safe and successful journey, I would say to 
you — schasliva doroha. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — May I have leave to also address the 
Assembly? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on behalf of 
the official opposition I too would like to congratulate you on 
your election to a very important position in this Legislative 
Assembly. I also want to thank the hon. member for Regina 
Sherwood who put his name forward. 
 
Both of the candidates were . . . made themselves available to 
meet with our caucus. We appreciate that. We appreciate the 
fact that the election of a Speaker is one of the more recent 
reforms in the parliamentary system here in Canada — both 
federally and provincially — and we think it’s certainly a step 
in the right direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re looking forward to working with you on 
this side of the House. We recognize that at times your job is 



March 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

 

difficult, but we are confident that you will maintain order in 
the House, but also you will act in an impartial manner — a 
manner which is fair to both the government side and the 
opposition. 
 
We know we have much business to do on behalf of the people 
of Saskatchewan, and we know you will play a facilitory role in 
seeing that happen. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition we thank 
you for letting your name stand. We wish you well in this 
position and look forward to the days and weeks ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave to 
address a few remarks as well. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Hon. 
Premier, Members of the Legislative Assembly, and honoured 
guests. It is a privilege on behalf of the third party caucus to rise 
in this Chamber to add our voices to the congratulations for our 
new Speaker — the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton. 
 
It is said that this Chamber represents our democracy at its 
finest, that the position of Speaker is to be the bedrock upon 
which our democracy is based. It is up to the Speaker to carry 
on our Canadian tradition of peace, order, and good government 
by providing an example of how a democratic society should 
conduct its affairs. 
 
We in the third party caucus want to applaud the selection of 
our new Speaker to this Legislative Assembly. We know the job 
will not be an easy one. It will be a thankless one at times, but 
in the end it is a job that is absolutely necessary for our 
democracy to not only survive but flourish. 
 
However the Speaker will be ably assisted by one of the best 
staffs anywhere. My caucus colleague, our former Speaker, 
knows full well the competence, caring, and compassion with 
which the staff of the Legislative Assembly serves the Speaker, 
the members, and ultimately the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
This is a job that demands people of principle, people of 
character. And in this Assembly’s selection of the member from 
P.A. Carlton as our new Speaker, that tradition of principled 
Speakers will continue with pride and add to the illustrious 
history of this Assembly. 
 
Thank you and congratulations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I will now declare a brief recess in 
order that I may become properly robed. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Assembly will now 
reconvene. Members of the Legislative Assembly, please rise 
for the arrival of Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the Chamber at 
10:48 a.m. 
 
The Speaker: — May it please Your Honour: 
 
The Legislative Assembly has elected me as its Speaker, 
although I am but little able to fill the important duties thus 
assigned to me. 
 
If, in the performance of those duties I should at any time fall 
into error, I pray that the fault may be imputed to me and not to 
the Assembly, whose servant I am. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I am commanded by Her 
Honour the Lieutenant Governor to assure you that your words 
and actions will constantly receive from her the most favourable 
consideration. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 10:50 a.m. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 89 — The Regina Elphinstone By-election Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that Bill No. 89, The Regina Elphinstone By-election Act 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 89 — The Regina Elphinstone By-election Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 89, The 
Regina Elphinstone By-election Act be now read a second time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 
day. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Saskatoon Riversdale By-election Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of this Assembly, I 
move that Bill No. 88, The Saskatoon Riversdale By-election 
Act be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Saskatoon Riversdale By-election Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 88, the 
Saskatoon Riversdale By-election Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of 
the Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this 



2358 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2001 

 

day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 89 — The Regina Elphinstone By-election Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Just before I accept the motion to have 
this Bill reported without amendment, I’d like to ask the Deputy 
Premier to introduce the official that has entered the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The official that’s 
sitting beside me is Darcy McGovern. He’s with legislative 
services from the Department of Justice. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Saskatoon Riversdale By-election Act 
 
Clauses 1 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 89 — The Regina Elphinstone By-election Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 89, The 
Regina Elphinstone By-election Act be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 88 — The Saskatoon Riversdale By-election Act 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
instructed by the committee to report Bill No. 88, the Saskatoon 
Riversdale By-election Act without amendment and ask for 
leave to sit again. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the Deputy Premier that 
Bill 88, the Saskatoon Riversdale By-election Act be now read 
the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 11:04 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 89 - The Regina Elphinstone By-election Act 
Bill. No. 88 - The Saskatoon Riversdale By-election Act 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 11:06 a.m. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, by the leave of the 

Assembly, I move that the Assembly recess in order for the new 
members to be sworn in. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBERS OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The Assembly will now 
reconvene. 
 
Hon. members, pursuant to an Act of this Legislative Assembly 
respecting a by-election in the constituency of Saskatoon 
Riversdale, which was assented to today, Mr. Lorne Calvert is 
authorized to take his seat as member for the constituency of 
Saskatoon Riversdale. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, it is our honour to present to 
you this morning Premier Lorne Calvert, the member from 
Saskatoon Riversdale. He has taken his oath, he has signed the 
roll, and is now prepared to take his place in this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Calvert, welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly. And I hope that your time here will be one that 
serves to be the record of honour to yourself and to your 
constituents. 
 
Let the hon. member take his seat. Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I hereby inform the Assembly that pursuant to 
an Act of this Legislative Assembly respecting a by-election in 
the constituency of Regina Elphinstone, which was assented to 
today, Mr. Warren McCall is authorized to take his seat as 
member for the constituency of Regina Elphinstone. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have the honour to 
present to you Mr. Warren McCall, member for the 
constituency of Regina Elphinstone, who has taken the oath and 
signed the roll and now claims the right to take his seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. McCall, welcome to the Legislative 
Assembly. And I hope that your time here will be one that 
serves to be a record of honour to yourself and to your 
constituents. 
 
Let the hon. member take his seat. Congratulations, Mr. 
McCall. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I am advised that Her Honour is here for 
prorogation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
make a few remarks, and I believe the Leader of the Opposition 
may want to as well. 



March 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

 

Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Given the hour, I will endeavour to keep my remarks brief. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Leader of the Opposition, members of the 
Legislative Assembly, and our distinguished and many guests 
this morning. First of all, Mr. Speaker, I want to join with the 
other members in congratulating you on your election as 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And if I may say so, Mr. Speaker, the 
three-cornered hat fits very well. It fits very well. And I know 
that we as members of this legislature look forward to working 
with you, accepting the wisdom that you will bring to our 
debates, and we know that you will serve us very honourably 
and very well. 
 
I did notice, Mr. Speaker, the considerable resistance that you 
put up in being led to the Chair. I felt no such resistance in 
taking my own chair. Nor do I believe did the member from 
Elphinstone. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my journey to this chair began there, and of late it 
has taken me to some . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Correct. It 
began there. And to tell you the truth, Mr. Speaker, I have no 
intention of returning. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, it has been a journey of the 
last few months that has taken me from Estevan to La Ronge, to 
every corner of our province. It is a journey that has taken me in 
latter days down 20th Street, 11th, Avenue E, and Dieppe, 
Normandy, Pendygrasse Road, Appleby Crescent. It’s a journey 
that has taken me into the homes of the people of the Riversdale 
constituency. 
 
And I can tell you today, Mr. Speaker, as I’m sure the other 
candidates in the recent by-election could, that the people of 
Riversdale are a hard-working, generous, hospitable people, and 
I very, very much look forward to representing them in this 
legislature and working with them . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I want to thank of course those many, 
many people who worked so hard on my campaign in 
Riversdale, and to thank those who worked on the teams of the 
other candidates. I want to recognize in the gallery, Mr. 
Speaker, a number of those who were participating in the 
Riversdale campaign and who are here to share this day with 
me, and I thank them for being here. 
 
Now I, Mr. Speaker, am especially pleased to be sworn in today 
with the new MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) from 
Regina Elphinstone — and I listened very carefully to Her 
Honour’s description — the youngest member in the 
Saskatchewan legislature. And I want to welcome, on behalf of 
the government caucus and all members, the member for 
Regina Elphinstone to this Legislative Assembly. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I know we look forward to a very 
long and successful working relationship. 
 
I would want also to congratulate the other candidates who ran 
in Elphinstone and to all of your teams who ran excellent 
campaigns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, whether we represent Elphinstone or Riversdale or 
any constituency in this province, I believe that people 
everywhere in Saskatchewan want to build healthy and vibrant 
communities where the people can feel secure and prosperous, 
where everyone shares in the prosperity that we enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am committed to leading a government that 
begins by listening closely to people, no matter who they are or 
where they are; a government that creates opportunities for 
people through economic development; a government that 
works to improve the quality of life for people no matter where 
they are in our great province; and a government that helps to 
foster pride in who we are. 
 
My vision, Mr. Speaker, is for a prosperous, a secure, a tolerant 
Saskatchewan, where diversity is celebrated and where diversity 
is seen as our great, as our great, great strength. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I believe our future in Saskatchewan is a bright 
one. And I believe our challenge now is to connect to that future 
of a prosperity for all. 
 
We begin today, Mr. Speaker, with a Speech from the Throne; 
next week with the tabling of the budget. And I invite all 
members to approach this House with vigour in debate, but 
also, as Her Honour has reminded us, with the humility of our 
office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward . . . we look forward to working 
with you. And if I may say, it is an honour and a privilege to be 
here to represent the good people of Riversdale and to again sit 
in this legislature. 
 
God bless Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I would ask leave also to address the 
Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And on 
behalf of the official opposition, I too want to extend my 
congratulations to the new members who have taken their seats 
in the Legislative Assembly today — the hon. member for 
Elphinstone, first elected just a few weeks ago, and then 
yesterday the victory of our Premier. We sincerely extend 
congratulations. 
 
You have shoes to fill; you have responsibilities to the province 
of Saskatchewan. We will not always agree with you. In fact, 
there will be many times when we will disagree very strongly. 
Just because there’s disagreement does not mean that we don’t 



2360 Saskatchewan Hansard March 20, 2001 

 

share a vision for the future of our province and the well-being 
of our citizens. 
 
We will work as constructively as we can to improve the life of 
Saskatchewan’s people, and we will do that from this side of 
the House while the two new members who have joined their 
colleagues will do it from that side of the House. 
 
Interesting to hear the Premier diagram for us his path through 
the various seats in the Chamber. Very, very interested to hear 
him say that he intended never to come back to this side, which 
means we’ll have to work very hard to make sure that when the 
next election occurs, that the Premier of course does not have a 
seat in this Assembly. That is fair in the democratic system that 
we are involved in. 
 
But on behalf of the official opposition, until that day occurs, 
we will work together with the Premier and his government. We 
will work for the betterment of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And on a personal note, I want to wish you the best as you 
serve. For the Premier, of course, he has served before. We 
know some of the challenges that are involved in dealing with 
constituents and dealing with the larger picture. 
 
For the new member from Regina Elphinstone, you’re 
beginning a career that I’m sure will be very interesting, very 
rewarding, and we wish you much satisfaction in your chance to 
provide public service to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Sincerely best wishes to the both of you, and we look forward 
to working together. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PROROGATION 
 

At 11:37 a.m. Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber and took her seat upon the Throne. 
 
Her Honour was then pleased to deliver the following speech: 
 
Mr. Speaker, 
 
Members of the Legislature: 
It is my duty to release you from further attendance at the First 
Session of The Twenty-Fourth Legislature. 
 
In thus relieving you, I would like to thank you for the work 
you have done. 
 
This Session’s work is a positive step towards a new dawning 
of optimism and hope – a new vision of a fundamentally new 
government. 
 
You successfully introduced legislation that helps families 
make ends meet. 
 
In keeping with your strong commitment to reducing taxes, you 
passed The Income Tax Act and The Income Tax Amendment 
Act. 
 
The Income Tax Act eliminates the Saskatchewan flat tax, the 

debt reduction surtax, the high-income surtax and the basic tax 
on federal tax, and establishes a simpler tax system by setting 
up a single set of lower tax rates. 
 
The Income Tax Amendment Act introduces the Saskatchewan 
sales tax credit and allows the post-secondary graduate tax 
credit to be deducted from the income taxes otherwise payable 
by recent graduates. 
 
You maintained your commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan in regards to the protection of medi-care – 
Saskatchewan’s gift to Canada. To support your health system 
priorities, you passed several Bills. 
 
The Medical Profession Amendment Act allows physicians to 
professionally incorporate. 
 
This measure will help to recruit and retain physicians. 
 
The Licensed Practical Nurses Act permits LPNs to practice 
their skills without having to work under the direction of a 
registered nurse, registered psychiatric nurse or physician. 
 
The Health Labour Relations Reorganization Amendment Act 
extends the moratorium prohibiting the Labour Relations Board 
from changing what are referred to as the “Dorsey Regulations” 
until January 2003. 
 
This action will extend a period of stability in order to complete 
reorganization in the health care sector. 
 
In December, you recognized the importance of the agricultural 
industry in our province by moving that this Assembly’s 
Standing Committee on Agriculture meet in this Chamber to 
hear the voices of farmers and rural leaders. 
 
You also passed The Farm Financial Stability Amendment Act 
and The Department of Agriculture Amendment Act. 
 
These Bills support increased diversification in agriculture. 
 
Also, you passed The Agricultural Equipment Dealerships Act, 
which protects shortline manufacturers in the province and 
those implement dealers selling shortline products. 
 
You successfully passed The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, The Vehicle Administration Amendment Act 
and The Motor Carrier Amendment Act, which improves safety 
for all Saskatchewan motorists. 
 
To help Saskatchewan compete in today’s new economy, you 
passed The Electronic Information and Documents Act. 
 
This Act promotes growth in the expanding world of electronic 
commerce and Internet trade. 
 
You also passed The Land Titles Act, which computerizes the 
entire land titles system and will provide on-line search and 
registration capacity. 
 
In recognition and respect for Aboriginal institutions, you 
passed The Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies Act. 
 



March 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2361 

 

This Act recognizes the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of 
Technologies as a technical Institute governed by First Nations 
people that issues recognized certificates and diplomas and 
serves the post-secondary education and skills training needs of 
First Nations people. 
 
You successfully passed The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Amendment Act, which prohibits spin-off contracting 
in the construction industry and enables the Labour Relations 
Board to deal with applications and make related employer 
declarations. 
 
You maintained your commitment to improve government 
accountability by passing The Tabling of Documents Act. 
 
This Act provides more timely information for the Legislative 
Assembly and the public by reducing the length of time 
allowable for the presenting of documents. 
 
Finally, in taking leave of you, I wish to thank you for the 
diligent manner in which you have devoted your energies to the 
activities of the Session, and wish you the full blessing of 
Providence. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker and members of the 
Legislative Assembly. it is the will and pleasure of Her Honour 
the Lieutenant Governor that this Legislative Assembly be 
prorogued until later today, the 20th day of March, 2001 at 2:30 
p.m. This Legislative Assembly is accordingly prorogued. 
 
Her Honour then retired from the Chamber at 11:47 a.m. 
 



 

 

 


