















































Hansard: July 03, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2251 
 July 3, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I have a 
petition from people in my constituency who are concerned 
about the EMS (emergency medical services) development 
proposal: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Archerwill 
and Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this afternoon 
to present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
condition of Highway 339 and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Milestone, Avonlea, Wilcox, and Truax. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents from southwest Saskatchewan concerned with the 
hospital facilities in the regional centre, the city of Swift 
Current. The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today come from the city of Swift 
Current and the community of Hodgeville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province. This 
one is regarding the EMS report. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 

ambulance service. 
 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
This petition is signed by people in the Bellegarde, Storthoaks, 
Alida, Redvers areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present dealing with health care today. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions come from the Redvers, 
Storthoaks, Alida, Carnduff, Antler, Fertile, Brandon, 
Manitoba, Wawota, Manor, Wakaw, Bellegarde areas, Mr. 
Speaker, across southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of 
Saskatchewan citizens who expressed interest in the 
maintaining and upgrading of the Saskatchewan road network. 
The prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and its vision 
of increasing the funding to $900 million over the next 
three years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Stenen, Canora, and Buchanan, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about high energy prices. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide more 
substantial power and energy relief to Saskatchewan 
customers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

Signed by the good citizens of North Battleford and Battleford, 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present to do with the lack of funding to non-profit 
personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Gerald, Kamsack; Benito, Manitoba; Big River. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by citizens worried about the high rates that SaskPower 
and SaskEnergy are charging. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from North Battleford, Moose Jaw, 
Chamberlain, and Regina Beach. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly to bring forth a petition opposed to the possible 
reduction of health care services in the Shellbrook-Spiritwood 
constituency. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, St. Walburg, and Chitek Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
The petitions are 11 petitions that are addendums to previously 
tabled sessional papers. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 

pleasure today to stand in the Assembly to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, Ms. Kelly Block, 
seated in the east gallery. Kelly is accompanied today by her 
children and her husband. 
 
And Kelly is the chairperson of the Gabriel Springs Health 
District. And Kelly has today presented to the Standing 
Committee on Health Care some of the concerns that have 
come forward to her by constituents of hers there to . . . about 
the Fyke recommendations and how it . . . if those 
recommendations were implemented, they may be very 
detrimental to the services of the people in this province. 
 
So I welcome you here today, Ms. Block, and I ask you to pass 
on a special hello to the CEO (chief executive officer) Mr. Gren 
Smith-Windsor, who I know was with you today in your 
presentation. 
 
So welcome, and I hope you enjoy the proceedings this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to the members of this Assembly, I would also 
like to welcome Milt and Kelly Block to our Assembly, and 
their children. 
 
I know the family quite well having worked with Milt and 
having had the kids in school in some former life of mine. 
 
I’d like to commend Kelly for her work as the Chair of Gabriel 
Springs. Gabriel Springs, I think, has been unique in the 
province in their understanding of the significance of the Fyke 
Commission and how detrimental some of its concepts would 
be to the area, and also in fiscal responsibility in that particular 
position. 
 
So would the members please join me in welcoming this family 
to our legislature this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and through you to all of the members of the 
Assembly four people that are seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
One of them is a constituent of mine, Theresa Scheinous. And 
with Mrs. Scheinous is her sister, Diane, and Diane’s husband, 
Roy Ulmer, as well as their daughter, Shawna. These folks are 
visiting Theresa from Barrhead, Alberta, and they’re in Regina 
for a few days. And it’s indeed our pleasure to welcome you 
here to the Legislative Assembly and I hope you enjoy the 
balance of your stay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to the members here, three people who 
are sitting in your gallery, my assistant, Mr. Clark Puckett, and 
his wife Amy and their niece Jasmine Smith. They were up 
today where they put their daughter Tara on the plane for 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

 

Rome. She’s going there on a school tour there. 
 
So I’d like to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through you 
to the members of this Assembly, it’s a pleasure to introduce 
several members of the Coalition Against No-Fault Insurance 
here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in your gallery are a number of people who 
characterize themselves as victims. Mr. Lloyd Anderson of 
Regina is here with his daughter Melissa. Charmaine Hart is 
here with her son, Anthony. They’re from Regina. Also from 
Regina, Gary Peltzer. 
 
Also with the coalition as the doctor liaison for Saskatchewan is 
Dr. Darren Minztler in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And a 
stranger, no stranger to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is a key 
organizer for the coalition and spokesperson, Lorie Terry. She 
is also with us today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this group not only advocates on behalf of people 
who have been affected by the system, but they also help people 
with their problems. They are also advocates and they do a lot 
of work in that regard on a volunteer basis. 
 
So I’d ask all members of the Assembly to join with the 
opposition, myself, in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
too have a very special introduction that I’d like to make this 
afternoon, and that is of a very young woman sitting your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Savonah Manz. She’s spending a little bit of her summer 
holiday observing question period and the affairs of the 
legislature today. And with Savannah today is her grandmother, 
Betty-Ann Donison who is my principal secretary. So I’d ask all 
members to welcome both. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

New Mill Opens in Hudson Bay 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last Friday I had the pleasure of attending the grand opening of 
the most modern OSB (oriented strand board) mill in the world. 
This $200 million plant is located in Hudson Bay, the heartland 
of Saskatchewan’s forestry industry. 
 
The new plant, which Weyerhaeuser has called OSB 2000, will 
feature 11 acres of manufacturing, storage, and shipping all 
under the same roof, and has the capability to turn out 600 
million board feet of structural oriented strand board annually. 
 
It’s interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that some 60 OSB plants 
have been built across North America in the past four decades 

with the first ever wafer board plant being opened in Hudson 
Bay in the early 1960s. Weyerhaeuser is the parent company of 
three mills in Hudson Bay, two OSB plants, and a plywood 
mill. 
 
With the opening of OSB 2000 the company has clearly 
announced its confidence in the community of Hudson Bay, a 
tribute to that community’s resilience and determination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Weyerhaeuser has only been part of the town of 
Hudson Bay for less than two years but besides its involvement 
in the forest industry, the company has also demonstrated its 
commitment to the community by donating $50,000 to help pay 
to convert an elementary school gym into a community theatre, 
something that will be put to good use by everyone in the 
Hudson Bay area. 
 
While the opening of the OSB 2000 is welcome news to a 
community that’s seen its population vary drastically in the last 
decade, local officials and residents still have their concerns. 
Maintaining acute care in the local hospital is a major issue for 
many people and vital to the survival and success of this new 
mill — a fact that should not be missed by the members 
opposite. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Business News in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well it’s the start 
of July and I’d be remiss if I didn’t start off with some good 
news about the province’s economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I was taking a look through 
Business Unlimited in their June/July edition, and do you know 
what? There’s lots of good things going on in Saskatchewan. 
The help wanted index is up. The number of people who are . . . 
the number of retail sales — up. Department store sales — up. 
 
Conference Board of Canada, I know that they’re awfully 
conservative. The opposition introduced figures saying our 
growth is going to be even bigger than they predict, but they say 
the economy is going to grow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Exports are up. Exports to other countries are up. And the best 
piece of news that I found in this says that there’s something 
down. The province’s social assistance caseload continues to 
decline. 
 
(13:45) 
 
In March 2001, the caseload was 33,000, which was down 3.7 
per cent. And this is the best part — the caseload has declined 
from the same month a year earlier for over the past six years. 
 
That’s more good news about our economy. It’s more good 
news for Saskatchewan people. Just imagine what this province 
could do if we funded the Department of Economic 
Development today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

Disenfranchised Widows Group Faces Clawback 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, I’d like to 
inform all members about an issue affecting the 
Disenfranchised Widows Group in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know women who remarried lost their WCB 
(Workers’ Compensation Board) benefits for spouses of workers 
killed on the job. As this contravened the Charter of Rights and 
Freedoms, these women fought valiantly to see justice done. 
Two years ago, they received an $80,000 one-time tax-free 
payment. 
 
Unfortunately, for those women over 65, the $80,000 payment 
drastically affected other pensions and benefits and they saw 
nearly $5,000 clawed back from the federal government. 
 
There are some who would have you believe that this clawback 
was the federal government’s fault. The members on this side of 
the House know better, Mr. Speaker. We know because in other 
provinces where similar lump sum tax repayments were made, 
there have been no clawbacks. Before making these payments, 
Mr. Speaker, other provinces found out beforehand what the 
financial implications might be. 
 
There are two options that could have been taken to avoid a 
clawback. One was to split the payments up over a two or three 
year period. Another one was to get a special waiver from the 
CCRA (Canadian Customs and Revenue Agency). Anyway you 
look at it, Mr. Speaker, all it would have taken was a phone call 
from the Minister of Labour and a few questions. 
 
There are some who would have you believe that the federal 
government should fix problems that others are responsible for. 
Not only does this indicate a complete and appalling lack of 
judgment, but also of accountability. This can not be tolerated. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Highway Projects 
 

Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, there’s two more new highway 
projects underway. Mr. Speaker, a total of 20.9 kilometres will 
soon be repaved on the westbound lanes of No. 1 Highway near 
Belle Plaine and the nearby off-ramps. This $3.1 million project 
is currently in progress and will be completed by the end of the 
month. Mr. Speaker, this improvement will not only create a 
smooth driving surface, but it will also create 26 full-time jobs. 
 
The second project is a 11.7 kilometre stretch about to be 
resurfaced on Highway No. 5 from Mikado to Canora. 
Roadwork on this $1 million project is expected to begin this 
week and should be completed by mid-July of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to remind the members opposite just one more 
time: Saskatchewan Highways and Transportation budget this 
year is a record $311.7 million. 
 
Our road network is a lifeline of many rural and remote areas. 
And with this record-breaking budget, this government is 
ensuring that people in Saskatchewan, all parts of 
Saskatchewan, stay connected. 

Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Family Business Closing in Wadena 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatchewan has lost 9,000 people in the past 12-month 
period. Unfortunately that number is going to continue to climb. 
 
Today I’d like to read part of an open letter to the customers of 
Perry and Cindy Banadyga which appeared in the June 27 
Wadena News: 
 

When Cindy and I took over the family hardware business 
that has been operating for over fifty-five years, little did 
we think that we would be looking at opportunities in 
another community, let alone another province. It is with 
regret that we’ll be closing our doors effective August 4, 
2001. We would like to extend our most heartfelt thanks for 
your business and support over the years. Although it is our 
sincere desire to see the business continue to operate in the 
community, to date we have not been able to attract a 
successor. 
 
So it’s with mixed emotions that I write this letter, sad 
because we leave Wadena where we were born and where 
we raised our children. We have been privileged to be a 
part of a great community that has been so good to many 
generations of our families, both in business and family 
life. I would like to thank the people of the Town of 
Wadena for giving me the opportunity to lead this 
community. It’s been both an honor and a challenge to 
represent you as mayor, and I hope that in some small way 
I have contributed to the town. Yours truly, Perry and 
Cindy Banadyga. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I recently spoke to Perry and he hasn’t made this 
decision lightly. Unfortunately, Alberta offers more opportunity 
for business people. And for his family’s sake, he and his wife 
have decided to make this move. 
 
Wadena is not only losing a business; it is losing civic-minded 
citizens and future generations. It’s a sad lament for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a pleasure to announce to 
the Assembly that the tent is up and Shakespeare is returning to 
the banks of the Saskatchewan River in Saskatoon for its 17th 
season. The season begins July 4 and continues to August 19. 
 
One major change this year is that Henry Woolf, the previous 
artistic director, will be taking a rest by acting for the summer 
in New York. The new artistic director is Mark Von Eschen. 
 
The company will be performing two of Shakespeare’s plays. 
One play is the Merry Wives of Windsor, with a line for 
Saskatchewan people who want daylight savings time: “We 
burn daylight.” 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

 

The other play is Love’s Labour’s Lost. And I know that the 
opposition’s resident Shakespeare scholar, the member from 
Cannington, will be interested in seeing this play. For it is a 
little-known fact that this play contains a direct reference to 
him, proof of the Bard’s genius, since it was written 400 years 
ago. 
 
And here is the line about the member from Cannington, quote: 
 

The anointed sovereign of sighs and groans, 
Liege of all loiterers and malcontents, 
This wimpled, whining, purblind wayward boy, 
This senior-junior, giant-dwarf, Dan . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, Shakespeare on the Saskatchewan is just one 
reason to visit Saskatoon this summer. Get your tickets now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tax Freedom Day 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand in this 
Assembly today to mention a day that comes far too late for 
Saskatchewan residents and no, it’s not the first day of summer 
or the next provincial election. I’m talking about tax freedom 
day. 
 
In Saskatchewan tax freedom day arrived yesterday. This is the 
latest day that it arrives for all of Canada. Other provinces have 
their tax freedom days in May and June but here in 
Saskatchewan the day doesn’t arrive until July. This is yet 
another indicator of this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government’s dismal record especially in the area of taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government brags about its alleged record tax 
cuts. Well, if taxes in Saskatchewan have been reduced so 
much, why do we still have the latest tax freedom day in 
Canada? 
 
It is my fear that when you look at the record number of jobs 
lost in Saskatchewan which is 21,000 and the latest number of 
people leaving which is 9,000 in the past year, for many people, 
Mr. Speaker, tax freedom day unfortunately begins when they 
leave the NDP-run Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

No-Fault Insurance 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance). 
 
It has been over six months since the NDP’s review of no-fault 
insurance was presented and while we believe that the review 
fell short and recommended only tinkering with this 
fundamentally flawed and unfair system, it did spend a million 
dollars and almost a year on its work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know there has been dissension among the 
NDP MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) opposite on 

the question of no-fault. Is this the reason we have seen 
absolutely nothing this session from the government on this 
important issue? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will he explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan why in the wake of a million-dollar study and its 
recommendations there has been no concrete response from the 
government, no legislation this session to fix the NDP’s 
no-fault insurance mess? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member for the question. 
 
First of all I want to take the opportunity to thank the 
committee, the review committee, who did a great deal of work 
in reviewing this emotional issue, I guess I’ll put it that way. I 
also want to take the opportunity to thank many of the injured 
people who made representation and presentation to the 
committee. I know many of them had their lives affected in 
many and traumatic ways. 
 
There were some 111 recommendations, Mr. Speaker, that were 
presented to the committee. We’ve been working through them, 
Mr. Speaker, and we will continue to try to work through them 
to find the best possible resolution and come up with the best 
recommendations for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s not 
hard to understand why the government may be dithering or 
why perhaps some of its own members are having difficulty 
with simply tinkering with such a flawed system. There is 
precious little to say in defence of no fault. 
 
The NDP promised that insurance rates would stabilize with no 
fault. And what has happened? Premiums have increased 40 per 
cent. Accident victims have been denied access to even any 
legal recourse, even against negligent manufacturers. They have 
been forced into treatment against the advice of their own 
doctors. Countless Saskatchewan accident victims have been 
victimized again by this system; by a system that simply wants 
to close files and move along. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has this government refused to address the 
glaring faults of the no-fault insurance system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I think the member raises 
concerns that were raised by many people in the province. 
There were, and I repeat, some 111 recommendations that 
flowed from the committee, the review committee, Mr. 
Speaker. We continue to work through those recommendations 
in an attempt, Mr. Speaker, to try to find the best possible 
resolution and recommendations to this difficult and, I know, 
emotional issue. 
 
What we’re trying to find, Mr. Speaker, is the best possible 
compromise that deals with not only just around the issues of 
pricing, because surely changes in the recommendation . . . 
changes within the plan itself, Mr. Speaker, will have impact on 
premiums and cost for the consumer. 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

But in addition to that, Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure that 
people are served the best as well, and that’s why we continue 
to work through these recommendations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, for those accident victims and their 
families who are listening to these answers and are losing hope 
that this province will ever be rid of this pure NDP no-fault 
system, let me just say that today we are announcing that a 
Saskatchewan Party government will get rid of NDP no-fault 
insurance in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We will restore victims’ access to the courts. We can and we 
will restore the primacy of health care professionals to diagnose 
treatment. We’ll bring fairness back to the auto insurance 
system in our province. And we can achieve this while 
maintaining affordable auto insurance rates. 
 
We can and will move towards a model similar to that laid out 
in the premier option as presented by The Coalition Against 
No-Fault. Mr. Speaker, NDP dithering on the no-fault review 
may be a blessing in disguise, because while we know that the 
next election will get rid of no-fault insurance, he can do the 
right thing now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister join us today and commit to 
getting rid of no-fault insurance in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that member will 
clearly define the difference between opposition and 
government, Mr. Speaker. If they want to lay out exactly what 
they will do in advance of consultation, I guess that’s up to 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have received some 111 recommendations. We will 
continue to work through them, Mr. Speaker, to try to find, Mr. 
Speaker, the best possible plan for the people of Saskatchewan 
and those that purchase Saskatchewan government insurance, 
Mr. Speaker, taking into account first of all, of course, the 
pricing. We want to ensure that people are able to buy insurance 
at a fair and reasonable rate. And we want to ensure that people 
have the best possible coverage as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to take this opportunity to 
welcome all the visitors to the gallery but respectfully request 
that members in the gallery that are visiting to not participate in 
the discussions or in any manner whatsoever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can’t imagine, I can’t 
imagine this government talking about consulting with people 
on this issue when not one of their members — not anyone in 
the front bench, not one backbench MLA — made it to even 
one of the meetings organized by the coalition of victims on this 
very issue. They weren’t at one meeting, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we know we have at least one ally 
over there today. In an internal NDP caucus memo from 
February of 1994, the member for Saskatoon Idylwyld and the 
current Minister of Finance offered his colleagues an alternative 
to no-fault. He wrote, and I quote: 
 

We can avoid rate increases, improve coverage, and 
preserve rights to claim income loss without creating a new 
Workers’ Compensation Board, without depriving people 
of access to the law in the cases of disability and death. 
 

He wrote, and I quote: 
 

SGI does not agree with my proposal but they do 
acknowledge it is workable (Mr. Speaker). They prefer 
no-fault. 
 

His memo confirms that notwithstanding his research and 
rational argument, frankly, the NDP was buffaloed by SGI. 
 
I’ll ask the minister again: with the considered opinion of the 
Minister of Finance as our backup, will you commit to getting 
rid of no-fault insurance in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if the member wants to be 
political in talking about not meeting, I am aware and advised 
and was aware at the time. Unfortunately I wasn’t available; I 
was in other meetings. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the committee for no-fault, Mr. Speaker, did 
meet with our government caucus committee. They made 
representation. I’m told they made a good presentation, Mr. 
Speaker. Those concerns were passed on to me in turn as they 
should be, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, we continue to work through the some 111 
recommendations. We’ve worked through many of those 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker, but there’s still work to be 
done in attempt to strike a balance between cost and premium 
and insuring that the public gets good coverage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. 
Even with no-fault insurance, there remains one party in this 
province that is surely at fault and it’s the New Democratic 
Party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Rates have increased under this system. Victims 
have been stripped of their rights even in the case of reckless 
drivers or drunk drivers. Doctors’ treatment prescriptions are 
being overruled by adjusters. Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the 
Premier to stand up to SGI. 
 
Does the Premier have the courage to do the right thing today? 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2257 

 

Will he join with the official opposition, countless accident 
victims, The Coalition Against No-Fault, his own Minister of 
Finance, and his partner in the coalition government and 
commit to get rid of no-fault insurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the truth is, and the 
member raises it, is that there were many concerns, legitimate 
concerns raised by a whole host of individuals from across 
Saskatchewan both pro and opposed to the plan that currently 
exists, Mr. Speaker. That’s the matter of fact and that’s the truth 
of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also in my constituency office receive a number of calls from 
people who say they appreciate the plan that’s in place. I 
appreciate that’s their perspective and there will be people who 
hold other views, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, we have many recommendations put forward by the 
review committee. We continue to work through those in 
attempt . . . in an attempt, I should say, to strike a balance 
between cost, Mr. Speaker, and adequate and good coverage for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Gaming Agreement with the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of Liquor and Gaming. At the end of 
March the NDP government announced that they were 
extending the gaming agreement between themselves and the 
Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations until July 31. Last 
November the minister stated that no negotiations on new 
gaming agreements would take place until SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) had made significant progress in the 
areas of accountability, policies, procedures, and financial 
management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the new expiry date for the gaming 
agreements fast approaching, will the minister tell this House 
whether or not SIGA has made enough progress to start 
negotiations on a new gaming agreement with the FSIN? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank 
the member opposite for the question. 
 
As we outlined very early on, there were benchmarks for SIGA 
to meet every step along the way in this process, and the one 
that she would be talking about and that we had outlined 
carefully following the intensive audit was for significant 
progress to occur for the extension of the agreement, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
SIGA has made great progress in many areas. There’s a board 
now constituted with three members that have been put forward 
by the SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority), 
with four members put forward by the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations. 

They have . . . the Provincial Auditor is their auditor of record. 
They have an internal audit committee with an external auditor 
providing those services. 
 
There is much, much work that has been done to outline new 
conflict of interest guidelines and policies and procedures that 
are consistent with the Provincial Auditor. 
 
It’s my understanding, as the regulator, SLGA is working 
carefully with SIGA, and we’re a number of days away from 
making certain that those significant benchmarks have been 
met. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when the 
original gaming agreement was extended in March, the minister 
said that SIGA had made good progress implementing some of 
the directives that SLGA had laid out for them. But it wasn’t 
enough progress to begin negotiations on a new agreement. 
 
The minister released a list in which she called significant 
benchmarks that SIGA would have to reach before the 
government would consider a new agreement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has now been over one year since the 
mismanagement in SIGA’s casino operations was revealed, and 
although the minister says that good progress has been made, it 
would appear that there still is a long way to go. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why SIGA has not been 
able to make the significant progress that will enable us to reach 
the benchmarks and help us establish a new gaming agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To the 
member’s question, Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to leave the 
impression that progress hasn’t been great and great strides 
have been made since the auditor put forward his report. But 
much, much work had to be done once a new board was in 
place and constituted. 
 
They are operating under all of the guidelines the Provincial 
Auditor put forward and complying with all of those 
recommendations. 
 
It’s my understanding they’ve gone out now for their new CEO 
and the chief financial officer, and they’re doing that in 
conjunction with Liquor and Gaming Authority in looking at 
the requirements for those individuals and the process to have a 
hiring that is happening very, very soon. 
 
So with all of that in mind, the new board constituted, all of the 
auditor’s concerns addressed and complied with — there are 
just a few steps missing to the significant progress that we 
outlined and benchmarked. That will be made . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister finally released the annual report of the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming report last week. The payee list of anyone 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

who received public money from SIGA which was to have been 
included in that report, but the minister says it was withheld due 
to ongoing police investigation into SIGA. But that was one of 
the benchmarks listed and was a specific recommendation of 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And the minister seems to be hedging on reporting the progress 
SIGA is making on many areas in question. So I wonder, Mr. 
Speaker, if any new gaming agreement between the government 
and the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) is 
simply on hold until a police investigation into SIGA is 
completed? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: will the NDP government begin 
negotiations with the FSIN on a new agreement before the 
police investigation into SIGA is completed? If so, when does 
the minister expect those negotiations to begin? And how long 
will the negotiations take? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, one of 
the recommendations made by the Provincial Auditor was that 
on an annual basis a payee list would be provided. And as the 
member opposite knows — because she’s asked before — at 
the lateness of the reporting, I would say that we have all of the 
auditor’s recommendations complied with. And that that payee 
list was put forward by SIGA as part of the information 
supplied to Liquor and Gaming Authority. It was then looked at 
by the RCMP and Justice and for this year, as she knows 
because of some of the information contained that will not be 
released as yet until that has been completed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we are days away from having all of the 
benchmarks that were outlined to the member opposite and to 
the Assembly, fully complied with. A new board in place. There 
are new practices being adhered to. Their auditor of record 
being the Provincial Auditor — a new CEO, a new financial 
officer. Mr. Speaker, when we see from the duly constituted 
regulator, the legally constituted regulator, SLGA about 
significant progress; negotiations could begin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to the 
Minister of Liquor and Gaming: could you tell me . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would the member start again 
please and just rephrase the question? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell the House 
what specifically is missing which would prevent her from 
reaching an agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, there was a great 
checklist of things that must be addressed before we would 
move forward and say this is significant progress. Much of that 
has been met. Compliance with all of the Provincial Auditor’s 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But it’s my understanding from the regulator that they’re 

finalizing now the chief financial officer and the CEO for 
SIGA, and when those are finalized, Mr. Speaker . . . I don’t 
know if there’s just one or two additional details because it 
seemed to me all of that list had been met and it’s those two 
positions to be filled on a full-time basis. We are days away 
from having that happen and then we would be able to say to 
everyone with confidence that significant progress on all of the 
things we requested SIGA to do as a new board have been met, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Assistance 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
questions this afternoon are for the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a large part of the province is now facing severe 
drought conditions. Agriculture Canada’s drought watch map 
shows extremely low precipitation levels on at least half of 
Saskatchewan’s farmland. 
 
Last week the Minister of Agriculture attended the ag ministers’ 
conference in Whitehorse, yet I didn’t hear one word about 
drought relief coming out of that conference. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture: did you raise the 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member rephrase his 
question please through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Did the minister . . . Mr. Speaker, did the 
Minister of Agriculture even raise the drought problem with his 
federal and provincial counterparts, and if so, what plans are in 
place to assist Saskatchewan farm families facing a drought in 
large parts of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the House 
and to the member opposite that last week when we attended 
the ag ministers’ conference, we talked about a whole host of 
issues, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Not only did we talk about the safety nets which will in fact 
address the kinds of issues that the member talks about — 
which is about drought and which is about flooding in the 
province and which is about loss of crop, about NISA (Net 
Income Stabilization Account) and crop insurance — we also 
talked about a broader picture. 
 
We talked about what we can do on the environmental front, 
what we can do around the area of food safety. We talked about 
what we’re going to do with renewal across Canada today with 
the farming community, and we talked about science and 
technology, and we also talked about marketplace, and we also 
talked about transportation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we talked about the whole broad concept of 
how we can deal with Canadian agriculture, not only agriculture 
in terms of primary production, but also in value added. 
 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

 

Yes, we talked about drought. But in a broader perspective, we 
talked about how we can make this industry the strongest and 
the best in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
certainly sounds like the Minister of Agriculture has talked a lot 
about agriculture. And while he was doing so, the Alberta 
government was responding to the needs of their producers with 
a drought relief package for their livestock producers. Now they 
are looking at an even more significant package for the grains 
and oilseed producers in their province. Meanwhile, our NDP 
government appears to be doing nothing. 
 
Once again, the NDP ag minister is following the pack when he 
should be leading the pack in terms of policy, and 
Saskatchewan farm families are paying the price. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what specific steps is the NDP putting in place to 
deal with the growing drought problem in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite and to the House that Saskatchewan announced this 
drought package as it relates to the livestock industry last week. 
 
And I want to say to the member opposite and to this House, 
Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan farm families are, in fact, 
paying a price. They’re paying a huge price in this province. 
And part of it, Mr. Speaker, is because of who’s over there. 
 
And I say this, Mr. Speaker, the leader of this opposition party, 
the leader of this opposition party is one of the guys who stood 
up in the House of Commons and talked about how we should 
get rid of the Crow. And we got rid of the Crow, all right, in 
this country; $300 million to Saskatchewan farm families out of 
their pocket and gone, Mr. Speaker; gone — $300 million. 
 
That member of the opposition, Mr. Speaker, stood up in the 
House and talked about how he doesn’t support subsidies while 
the other major players in the world are subsidizing their grains 
and oilseed people. He doesn’t support subsidies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That member opposite and the ag critic have taken more money 
out of Saskatchewan farm families than any other province in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course the minister 
knows that that is not correct, that Alberta indeed pays the 
highest percentage per capita of any province in this nation and 
not Saskatchewan any longer. 
 
And the loss of the safety net, the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) program, has resulted in the loss of safety 
and the most significant safety net program that this province 
had for farm families. 
 
The ministers of Agriculture, provincially and federally, are 
talking about a vision for agriculture, and we see the new 

minister . . . or the federal Ag minister saying that there will be 
500 million less federal dollars next year for farm families. And 
the NDP appears to be withdrawing $120 million as well and 
that 2001 budget including $95 million for farm sector 
initiatives and $25 million in agriculture property tax relief. 
However, this money has not been allocated in next year’s 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this one-time funding? Does the Minister of 
Agriculture plan to leave this $120 million out of next year’s 
budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
House, this year in this budget we have 95 million more dollars, 
95 million more dollars from Saskatchewan farmers and 
producers across the province. Of which, Mr. Speaker, that 
member, and those members across opposite voted against. We 
should remember this, Mr. Speaker. So more money for farmers 
is not what that operation is for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite and he should remember 
this. We tried to negotiate additional package to get out of the 
AIDA (Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance) program, Mr. 
Speaker, which took out of this province 120 million less 
dollars for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And what was the member opposite and the Leader of the 
Opposition doing? They were voting against — against, Mr. 
Speaker — the opportunity for us to get an additional $120 
million, and drag this down the AIDA path. Drag this down. 
 
And what happened when we were in CSAP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program) Mr. Speaker? Just 
recently, on the CSAP program we said to the people of 
Saskatchewan and to our farm producers, we should have more 
dollars in CSAP. The member opposite doesn’t support 
subsidies in CSAP, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t support it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Let’s just, Mr. Speaker, let’s just review how the 
NDP and this Minister of Agriculture and the Premier stick up 
for agriculture. 
 
First the Premier calls for $500 million in new funding from 
Ottawa, and then just before the Ag minister’s meeting in 
Whitehorse, he abandons that call. And now the federal Liberals 
say they’ll be $500 million less next year, not more. 
 
The NDP has absolutely no plan for drought relief. No plans for 
the 2001 . . . beyond the 2001 budget for agriculture. And the 
NDP says now that they will have to cut $120 million in ag 
funding out of next year’s budget. 
 
So instead of $500 million more, Saskatchewan farm families, 
between the federal and provincial government, can expect 
$620 million less. And at the same time they’re dealing with 
drought, higher power bills, and higher energy bills. 
 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, is this the Premier’s new vision for agriculture? 
Has the NDP completely abandoned Saskatchewan farm 
families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the House 
and to the member opposite that just recently he and I had an 
opportunity to attend the Standing Committee on Agriculture in 
Ottawa and make a presentation there. 
 
And what the member opposite said is that as he was driving 
around, as he was driving around in his tractor on his farm, 
doing seeding, he was thinking about ag policy. And this is 
what the member opposite said, Mr. Speaker, to the committee. 
 
He said, and I note, programs have been put in place in our 
province like AIDA and CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program), and others, and have been in large part a measure, I 
think, that are very well accepted, Mr. Speaker. That were very 
well accepted. 
 
Now I say to the member opposite, you say to me to stand up in 
this House . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Would you 
continue your remarks through the Chair please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And I say now the member opposite tells 
me, Mr. Speaker, I was dreaming. And I thought that I was 
dreaming when I heard him say it, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely. 
Because what the member opposite says is that CFIP and AIDA 
in this province have worked well. And I say to the member 
opposite, you are so out of touch with . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please, order. Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 
Bill No. 58 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 58, The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Later this day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, 
with leave to do a condolence motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. At the close of 
my remarks, I will move the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this legislature and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 

 
Mr. Hugh James Maher, who passed away on May 11 
this year, was a member of this legislature from 1950 until 
1952, representing the constituency of the Battlefords for 
the Liberal Party. 

 
Mr. Maher was born on October 5, 1910 in North 
Battleford. He received his schooling at local elementary 
and secondary schools before graduating from the North 
Battleford Collegiate Institute as the Governor General’s 
Gold Medallist. Mr. Maher then furthered his studies at the 
University of Saskatchewan, completing a degree in 
mechanical engineering in 1933. 

 
On October 18, 1935, Mr. Maher married Florence Showell 
and they had two sons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as is well known in the Battlefords, in his 
private life, Mr. Maher was a very successful 
businessperson. He worked for many years for the family 
insurance and real estate business, the Maher Agencies Ltd. 
and then in later years, his business grew to include travel 
and construction units as well as Designex Buildings Ltd. 

 
Mr. Maher was also an active participant in the affairs of 
his community. He held a variety of positions from member 
to secretary-treasurer to president in a number of local, 
provincial, and national organizations. Mr. Maher was a 
particularly active supporter of the Kinsmen and its band 
program, both as a local founding member of the North 
Battleford Kinsmen Club and as a provincial district 
governor. He also donated his time to the Rotary. Mr. 
Maher also served on the North Battleford Separate School 
District Board. 

 
Mr. Maher lent his municipal experience to the Battlefords 
Chamber of Commerce, the Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association, and the Canadian Federation of 
Mayors and Municipalities. At the provincial level, Mr. 
Maher served on the Price and Compensation Board and on 
the Local Government Continuing Committee on the 
reorganization of municipal government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Maher first held elected office as an 
alderman in North Battleford, and later he held the 
distinction of the longest serving mayor of his community 
with a total of 18 years in office. 
 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2261 

 

Mr. Maher won election to this Assembly in a by-election 
in 1950 but served only until the next general election 
which, as I said, was in 1952. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of Mr. Maher’s family. 
 

And therefore I move, Mr. Speaker, seconded by the Leader of 
the Opposition: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency and to the 
province. 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the 
official opposition I want to rise with the Premier in extending 
the sorrow and regret at the passing of a former member of the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Hugh James Maher, who passed 
away on May 11, 2001. 
 
Reading Mr. Maher’s record of service to the province of 
Saskatchewan, one is impressed that he truly did bear the spirit 
of many of the builders of this province. And the Premier 
outlined many of his accomplishments. Some of them bear 
some repeating. 
 
Mr. Maher was educated . . . born in Saskatchewan, and 
educated in Saskatchewan right from his elementary education 
through to his post-secondary education. 
 
Mr. Maher wore many hats. He was a successful businessman 
in the North Battleford area. He was very much involved in his 
community, whether it be in service organizations such as the 
Kinsmen Club, or the Rotary, or whether it be in his local 
chamber of commerce. 
 
And then he went on to serve the Canadian Federation of 
Mayors and Municipalities, as well as serving in SUMA 
(Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association). Mr. Maher 
also was involved in local politics, in municipal politics in the 
city of North Battleford, serving as the mayor. And he has the 
distinction of being the longest serving mayor of his 
community. 
 
It is a true loss to the province of Saskatchewan to recognize 
that Mr. Maher has passed from our province, but we certainly 
do want to remember his great contribution not only to his 
community, but to the entire province. 
 
He had the privilege of serving in this Assembly for two years, 
and we certainly respect this man for the work that he has done 
in making Saskatchewan a better province. 
 
So on behalf of the official opposition, we too express our 
sincerest condolences to the family, and certainly wish all the 
best for them as they truly remember a remarkable man. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, move to move a 
transmittal motion. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Cannington: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with the transcripts 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved family on behalf of this 
Assembly by Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, leave of the 
Assembly to move to government motions. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Supply Resolution for Department of 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Saskatoon Nutana that: 
 

Pursuant to the report of progress of the Committee of 
Finance as reflected in the Votes and Proceedings for June 
26, 2001, this Assembly instructs the Committee of Finance 
to reconsider the supply resolution for Vote 45 for the 
Department of Economic and Co-operative Development. 

 
I so move. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what we have today with this motion is an attempt by the 
government to rewrite history. 
 
Last Tuesday night a vote was held in this House dealing with 
the Committee of Finance and the estimates for Economic 
Development. In that time, Mr. Speaker, at that point in time 
when the vote was called, that vote was taken and the results 
were 22 people in favour of that vote out of the government 
side of 30 members, Mr. Speaker, and 26 members, Mr. 
Speaker, against, allowing for the funding of the Economic 
Development department. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that was clearly an expression of the will of the 
majority of that House that night, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
that was a defeat of that particular item. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are a number of precedents before this 
House that would say that you cannot bring forward and again 
revisit a vote that has been negative, Mr. Speaker, or that has 
been approved in the affirmative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the government is doing is trying to . . . 



2262 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wartman: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wartman: — I would like to thank the hon. member from 
Cannington as well for giving leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to you and through you 
to the rest of this Assembly two very special people in my life, 
my wife Gail and my son Daniel who is celebrating his 17th 
birthday today and has come here to observe what’s going on in 
the Assembly. And then I know this afternoon he and his mom 
are going to do some tours of this building and museum. 
 
So I would like all of you to please join with me in welcoming 
them to the House on this special day for Daniel. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Supply Resolution for Department of 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what the NDP government opposite is trying to do is rewrite 
hundreds of years of parliamentary tradition and history. To say 
that because we lost the vote, we’re now going to have the best 
of one out of two, the best two out of three, whatever it may 
take, Mr. Speaker, as long as they get their way, Mr. Speaker, 
this is not the way parliament works. 
 
But it’s interesting to note though, Mr. Speaker, on this 
particular issue, that the rules were changed arbitrarily in this 
legislature in 1992 by the Speaker of that time, Herman Rolfes, 
to disallow extended vote calls. The rules were changed that on 
a substantive motion, that the rules would be 30 minutes, and 
that on non-substantive motions such as the vote on last 
Tuesday night, that the bells would only be ringing for 10 
minutes. 
 
It’s ironic, Mr. Speaker, that that government is caught on the 
horns of the rules they changed themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I ask the members of this 
House to give consideration to what the Government House 
Leader is asking them to do, to change the traditions of 
parliaments — not just in Saskatchewan but parliaments, Mr. 
Speaker, across this Commonwealth. 
 
The rule, Mr. Speaker, up till now has been, once a vote is taken 
either in the affirmative or in the negative, that that vote stands 
for that session, that you have to, if you want to make a change 
to any of those, Mr. Speaker, that you have to make a 
substantive change to a similar motion. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what the government is trying to do today is 
wrong, it’s unparliamentary, and I ask the members to vote 
against this motion by the Government House Leader. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to on division. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert, Mr. Speaker. Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 238 is converted to motions for 
return (debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 239 is converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — 240 is converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — All right, 241 is converted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Economic and Co-operative Development 

Vote 45 
 

The Chair: — The first order of business is instructions by the 
House. 
 
Pursuant to an order of the Assembly passed this day, I am 
instructed to propose the question on the supply motion for 
Vote 45, Department of Economic and Co-operative 
Development, and I invite the Minister of Economic and 
Co-operative Development to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. To my right is the deputy minister of Economic and 
Co-operative Development, Larry Spannier. To my left is 
Doreen Yurkoski, director of administrative and financial 
services. Immediately behind me is Jim Marshall, assistant 
deputy minister of policy, and to his right is Bryon Burnett, 
assistant deputy minister, community, economic and business 
development. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Chairman, on a point of order. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member for Cannington on a 
point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Chairman, this is a very important issue and I have a 
substantive statement to make here on this point of order. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I believe the motion currently before the 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2263 

 

committee is out of order. The question currently before the 
committee is the exact same motion that was defeated one week 
ago today on June 26, 2001. 
 
Mr. Chairman, section 558 of Beauchesne’s Parliamentary 
Rules and Forms, 6th Edition, reads as follows, and I quote: 
 

An old rule of Parliament reads: “That a question . . . once 
made and carried in the affirmative or negative, cannot be 
questioned again but must stand as the judgment of the 
House.” Unless such a rule were in existence, the time of 
the House might be used in the discussion of a motion of 
the same nature and contradictory decisions would be 
sometimes arrived at in the course of the same session. 

 
Mr. Chairman, that’s exactly what the government is asking the 
committee to do — arrive at a decision that completely 
contradicts a decision taken earlier in this legislative session. 
 
Mr. Chair, section 593 of Beauchesne’s speaks further to this 
matter. It reads, and I quote: 
 

The only means . . . by which a negative vote can be 
revoked is by proposing another question similar in its 
general purport to that which has been rejected but with 
sufficient variance to constitute a new question. 
 

In other words it is in order for the committee to consider a 
similar motion, but it is not in order for the committee to 
consider the exact same motion. According to Beauchesne’s, 
the motion must be sufficient variance. 
 
For example, the committee could consider a motion calling for 
the approval of a slightly different budget amount. But a motion 
calling for the exact same amount as the motion defeated on 
June 26 is not in order. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I know the government has done some research 
on this matter and has cited a similar situation, which occurred 
in the British Columbia legislature in June of 1986. Mr. 
Chairman, in that case the budget estimates of the BC (British 
Columbia) Department of Tourism were in fact . . . were not in 
fact defeated. In that case, the committee voted to amend the 
budget for the Department of Tourism to one dollar. And then it 
passed the amended budget estimate. 
 
When the matter was later referred back to the committee for 
further consideration, the committee was not overturning the 
defeat of an earlier motion, it was instead considering a motion 
with in Beauchesne's words: 
 

Sufficient variance from the one dollar estimate motion 
which was originally passed. 

 
So, Mr. Chairman, that case cannot be used as precedence in 
this situation. In this case, the budget estimate was not 
amended: it was defeated. 
 
In any motion to overturn the earlier vote to defeat this 
particular budget estimate is not in order according to 
Beauchesne's. Again, I emphasize that a motion to approve a 
different budget estimate for the Department of Economic 
Development would be in order. 

Mr. Chairman, I understand the government believes the rule 
against considering the same question twice in the same session 
does not apply because the motion is being considered in 
committee, not before the House. To refute this argument, I 
would like to cite the 21st Edition of Parliamentary Practice by 
Sir Erskine May. May deals with this matter on pages 326 and 
327. May says, and I quote: 
 

A motion or an amendment which is the same . . . as a 
question which has been decided during a session may not 
be brought forward again during that same session . . . 
Whether the second motion is substantially the same as the 
first is . . . a matter for the judgment of the Chair. 

 
Mr. Chairman, it is extremely important to note that May uses 
the term Chair in this particular instance. When May wishes to 
refer specifically to the Speaker, he uses the term Speaker. 
Conversely he uses the word Chair to refer to either the Speaker 
or the Chair of a committee as the case may be. 
 
By saying that this matter is left to the judgment of the Chair, 
May is clearly indicating that the rule applies in both full 
Assembly and in committee. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I have been unable to find any precedent for any 
parliamentary government doing what this government is 
attempting to do, namely, considering the exact same question a 
second time in order to achieve a different result. There is good 
reason for this which Sir Erskine May states as follows on page 
364: 
 

. . . parliamentary government requires the majority to 
abide by a decision regularly come to, however unexpected, 
and that it is unfair to resort to methods, whether direct or 
indirect, to reverse such a decision. 
 

May could have been talking about the vote we took last 
Tuesday and the requirement that the government must live 
with the unexpected results. 
 
(14:45) 
 
In a footnote to this section, May cites a similar vote, which 
occurred in the British House of Commons on February 11, 
1976. During consideration of supply for the Secretary of State 
for Industry, the opposition moved that the salary of the 
Secretary of State of Supply be reduced by the sum of 1,000 
pounds. The motion caught the government with not enough 
members in the Chamber and the opposition passed the motion 
by a vote of 212 to 209. 
 
The government subsequently tried to have the earlier vote 
overturned, but on February 17, 1976 the Speaker made the 
following statement, and I quote: 
 

It is of course open to the House to modify the effect of a 
decision after it has been taken, or indeed to nullify the 
decision provided that the same question is not again 
proposed in identical terms. 

 
Mr. Chair, the rules are clear. The precedent is clear. The 
government is perfectly within its right to refer the matter back 
to committee. However, the committee cannot simply pass the 



2264 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

exact same motion, which it has already been defeated. 
 
The government must bring forward a new motion, which, in 
the Chair’s opinion, is of sufficient variance from the defeated 
motion. The motion currently before the House is identical to 
the defeated motion. 
 
I understand the government has an embarrassing problem on 
its hands. There are remedies for addressing this problem. 
However, simply asking the House to ignore hundreds of years 
of parliamentary precedence is not the appropriate remedy. 
 
I know I have cited a number of references here today from 
Beauchesne’s, from Erskine May, from the BC legislature, and 
the British House of Commons. Accordingly, this is a situation 
which future parliamentarians will look at in the years to come. 
 
I would ask the Chair to take all the time he needs to rule on 
this very important matter. I would specifically ask him if he is 
able to find a single precedence for a committee voting on the 
exact same question a second time in the same session. 
 
I have been unable to find such a precedent because I do not 
believe one exists. I hope the Chair will follow precedent and 
not set precedence by ignoring one of the most fundamental 
rules of parliament: that a question, once decided, cannot be 
considered a second time in the same session. Thank you, Mr. 
Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — To speak to the point of order, Mr. Chair. 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the member from Moose Jaw North 
on a point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to speak to the point of 
order put by the House Leader of the Opposition. And I draw to 
your attention, Mr. Speaker, his reference to the question not 
being put in the same session. 
 
But let us take note of several things, Mr. Speaker, as we 
consider the question that he puts. First of all, I think there will 
be no one in this House who will dispute that the Committee of 
Finance is a creature of the Legislative Assembly, created by a 
motion of the Legislative Assembly, to consider estimates of 
the Executive Council departments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remind . . . Mr. Chair, I remind you that in 
considering the estimates of the Department of Economic and 
Co-operative Development, then each of the subvotes, Mr. 
Speaker, each of the subvotes — subvotes (EC01) through 
(EC10) — each of those subvotes, Mr. Chair, and as indicated 
by page 2187 of Hansard, indicate that each of the subvotes 
was approved. It was then in summary, Mr. Chair, that the 
question was put and that the question was lost. 
 
Let’s keep in mind, Mr. Chair, two things: one, each of the 
subvotes has already been carried for the estimates of the 
Department of Economic and Co-operative Development. And 
secondly, that the Department of . . . that the Committee of 

Finance is a creature of, created by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Now I draw your attention, Mr. Chair, to the fact that just 
moments ago in this Assembly a motion was passed by this 
Assembly directing its Committee of Finance to proceed. And 
in that motion, Mr. Speaker, I repeat, pursuant to the reported 
progress of the Committee of Finance as reflected in the Votes 
and Proceedings for June 26, this Assembly instructs — this 
Assembly, Mr. Chair, which has instructed the committee 
which is where we are now — instructs the Committee of 
Finance to reconsider the supply resolution for vote 45 for the 
Department of Economic and Co-operative Development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the authority of the Legislative Assembly to 
direct its committees — be they Committee of Finance or other 
committees — to conduct their mandates and to perform their 
duties and to carry out their affairs as mandated by the 
Legislative Assembly. And I repeat, the Legislative Assembly 
just moments ago passed a resolution mandating the Committee 
of Finance to reconsider, to reconsider the — and I quote the 
words: 
 

to reconsider the supply resolution for vote 45 for the 
Department of Economic and Co-operative Development. 

 
On those grounds, Mr. Chair, I think the Legislative Assembly 
has clearly expressed its will, its democratically decided will, to 
direct its Committee of Finance and therefore I would ask that 
you would find the point of order raised by the hon. member for 
Cannington to be out of order and that we proceed with the 
consideration of the vote 45 for Economic and Co-operative 
Development, as instructed by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Respond to the point of order. 
 
The Chair: —Briefly on the point of order. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, I think after listening to the 
member opposite, if you look in Erskine May, page 326, 327, 
and 394, it simply talks about the committee structure and it 
talks about the legislative structure and how when rules apply to 
one, they also apply to the other. 
 
Whether we’re in committee or whether we’re in the legislative, 
in the formal sitting, that the rule still applies, that if a vote was 
taken in the affirmative or negative, that that vote stands 
whether you’re in committee or whether you’re in the House. 
 
And I don’t feel that it’s fair then and it’s not parliamentary to 
have the committee then overrule a previous vote. It’s asking 
the committee to do something that is unparliamentary. The 
vote had been taken and whether it sided on the side of 
government or opposition, that vote stands and until the matter 
that we are to vote on next is different than the first vote, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, that there’s no reason to revote on the same item 
until they get the result that they need. 
 
The Chair: — Order. I thank the members for their points of 
order and their response to the point of order. I think this is an 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2265 

 

important question and warrants some consideration, so I will 
take this matter under advisement. And in the meantime I would 
request that the Government House Leader rise and report 
progress . . . move that we rise, report progress, and ask for 
leave to sit again; and then we can come back with the ruling. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
rise today to move second reading of The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
The Highway Traffic Act regulates roads and their uses in 
Saskatchewan to meet safety needs and to promote the safe and 
efficient flow of traffic. The proposed amendments to the Act 
will work to reduce traffic and create safer neighbourhoods in 
those areas of our local communities that are high traffic zones 
for street prostitution. 
 
This legislation follows the examples of Manitoba and Ontario 
where programs of this kind already exist. This group of 
proposed amendments comes from the work of the Special 
Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children 
Through the Sex Trade. 
 
I am bringing forward these changes to The Highway Traffic 
Act and The Vehicle Administration Act in conjunction with 
the Minister of Justice and the Minister of Social Services. This 
is another step in our government’s response to the problems 
associated with street prostitution. 
 
Cruising in motor vehicles is the preferred method for 
communicating with prostitutes. Traffic congestion created by 
this activity and the impact this activity has for the children 
within the local community are among the most visible signs of 
the harm caused by street prostitution. 
 
Through the province’s ability to regulate the highways, this 
Act seeks to impound and forfeit vehicles using the highways to 
engage in this activity. In effect, removing these vehicles from 
the public roadways is one step toward removing the harm 
created by this activity. 
 
The special committee, Mr. Speaker, has proposed a number of 
changes in order to allow for the impoundment or forfeiture of 
motor vehicles used in the commission of prostitution-related 
offences. 
 
Proposed amendments will enable a peace officer to seize a 
motor vehicle when it is being driven in the course of 
committing prostitution-related offences. The vehicle may 
remain impounded until a criminal charge against the person is 
addressed. If an individual is convicted of a prescribed offence, 
the vehicle is forfeited and the individual faces a licence 
suspension. If the individual is not convicted, the vehicle is 
released and any costs the owner incurs in obtaining the vehicle 
will be reimbursed. 
 
An individual may obtain the early release of a vehicle if he or 

she agrees to attend an educational program designated for this 
purpose. There are special provisions in these amendments to 
respond to situations where it would not be appropriate for the 
vehicle to be impounded, such as where the vehicle has been 
stolen or where the impoundment or forfeiture would result in 
an undue hardship or a health risk. 
 
The proposed changes, Mr. Speaker, will also provide for the 
amendments to The Vehicle Administration Act to suspend the 
driver’s licence of drivers convicted of prostitution-related 
offences. 
 
We believe licence suspension and a vehicle impoundment and 
forfeiture program of this kind will seek to reduce some of the 
major problems that result from this activity and will contribute 
to safer neighbourhoods for everyone and a safer environment 
for children in Saskatchewan. 
 
That concludes the outline of proposed amendments found in 
The Highway Traffic Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of an Act to amend The 
Highway Traffic Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party and certainly myself are very, very pleased 
to have the tabling of this amendment to The Highway Traffic 
Act today in the legislature. As you understand, Mr. Speaker, 
and all the people in Saskatchewan understand, there has been a 
call by the general public to enact tougher legislation against 
perpetrators of the crime of sexual abuse against children and 
this Act is but one step, a very important step, in deterring those 
offenders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have certainly, I guess, strengthened the 
legislation that was in Manitoba by incorporating into this 
legislation the ability to suspend a person’s licence if they have 
been convicted of offending our children. And so that is a sign 
that we in Saskatchewan are very serious about this matter, and 
I think it’s a very commendable sign and was of course brought 
forward to us, like I said, by the number of people in 
Saskatchewan who presented to the committee. 
 
(15:00) 
 
There are a couple of questions that I’d like to put forward to 
the government in regards to the wording of the Bill, and I 
would be very pleased to do that in Committee of the Whole. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I too would like to implore the 
government to consider a fall session so that we can act on the 
other recommendations that have been put forward, because it 
is the composite recommendations and their good effects that 
would in fact be putting Saskatchewan on the federal map as the 
province that indeed is prioritizing this issue in order to protect 
our children. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I would just move that we move to 
Committee of the Whole at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 



2266 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 42 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Lorjé that Bill No. 42 — The Métis 
Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure this afternoon to rise and to make a few comments on 
the Bill No. 42, this new creation by the NDP government, The 
Métis Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has been quite some time in coming, an Act 
such as this. It has been clamoured for, for many, many decades 
by the Métis peoples of Saskatchewan to have an Act that 
would help them as they try to establish themselves throughout 
Saskatchewan as one of the founding peoples. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as we’ve gone through the Act . . . And 
certainly we’ve spent a considerable amount of time taking a 
look at it. We’ve done an extensive amount of work with our 
constituents throughout Saskatchewan as we take a look at this 
Act to see how well it’s going to benefit the Métis people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and the long-term ramifications 
that such a Bill is going to have in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have some concerns though, Mr. Speaker. We understand 
that the Bill of course is looking to establish a rapport between 
the government and Métis Nation of Saskatchewan in some 
semblance, Mr. Speaker, so that long-term planning can take 
place to right some of the wrongs that, so to speak, Mr. 
Speaker, that took place amongst the Métis Nation, certainly 
during the 1950s, Mr. Speaker, when the right to own land in 
northern Saskatchewan was removed by the Tommy Douglas 
government, and certainly an Act such as this may have some 
potential to correct that. And I say may have, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s exactly what we see in here is a great deal of 
ambiguity as to how this Act will be able to accomplish that 
process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the problems that sometimes arises when 
Bills are brought forth that changes the Acts is whether people 
out there are that interested in them and how much response we 
get from them. Some of the Acts as they are brought forth by 
this NDP government certainly have received very favourable 
reviews and some of them have mixed reviews and some of 
them are received with a great deal of distain. Mr. Speaker, this 
Act, Bill No. 42, The Métis Act, was certainly one of the Acts 
that has received one of the most notoriety of all the Bills, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Métis Nation of Saskatchewan and the Métis people of 
Saskatchewan have brought forward to us many, many concerns 
about this Bill. And I guess what we should do now, Mr. 
Speaker, is try to get into a great deal of these concerns and 
there are a great deal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, certainly last fall one of the concerns that was 

brought forward to many MLAs, certainly on this side of the 
House, was the problems that surround the elections that take 
place for the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan and the election of 
their board of directors, their directors, presidents, their 
executive office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so one of the complaints that was brought, certainly on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, was how can this government 
be able to facilitate the Métis people in being able to bring forth 
an electoral process that would provide them with an open and 
honest democratic process, for everyone in this province to 
understand that elections for the Métis people in their Métis 
Nation would have the transparency that is necessary, Mr. 
Speaker, to provide them with the credibility that is necessary to 
work in the communities at large and certainly to speak on 
behalf of the Métis Nation with this NDP government. 
 
But this Bill, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t address that in any way, 
shape or form. In fact, Mr. Speaker, what it talks about is the 
creation of a 16-member, all-powerful secretariat that is for all 
intents and purposes unaccountable to the rest of the Métis 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Métis people were asking for transparency and 
responsibility in their democratic elections. Instead what we see 
is a proposal by this NDP government, endorsed by an extreme 
small number of Métis people in the so-called leadership, that 
talks about a 16-member secretariat that does not . . . is not 
spoken to in this Bill, Mr. Speaker, as being elected. 
 
Now we have a great deal of concerns when we talk about a 
small group of people who are supposed to represent the Métis 
peoples of Saskatchewan and suddenly, Mr. Speaker, we find 
out that they’re not even . . . they may not even be elected. How 
is this going to be able to speak to the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, about democracy and transparency? 
 
What we need, Mr. Speaker, is the opportunity for the Métis 
people to be able to speak for themselves in an open and 
transparent process, to be able to work with this government as 
they try to create economic opportunities, especially in northern 
Saskatchewan. And rather than have a democratic process, we 
see a Bill being brought forth that speaks . . . that leaves a lot to 
be desired when it comes to accountability and democracy. 
 
We also understand, Mr. Speaker, that there was a lack — a 
severe lack — of consultation and a severe lack of discussion 
prior to the drafting of this Bill. In fact those of us on this side 
of the House were . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like to 
introduce four very special people in my life. Seated in your 
gallery are my mom and dad, Fred and Elma Vicery, my 
greatest supporters. And also my sister Audrey and her 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2267 

 

husband, Gordon Thompson. 
 
So I’d like all members of the Assembly to join me in 
welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Métis Act 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As I’ll 
reiterate, the last little part that I was speaking about is the 
complete lack of consultation. In fact it was clear to us, made 
very clear to us, Mr. Speaker, that there were only three people 
in the Métis Nation who were actually consulted in regards to 
this Act. 
 
These three people, Mr. Speaker, made it very clear to those of 
us on this side of the House that they were the only ones that 
were necessary to be consulted; that they knew what was best 
for their people and they could speak very clearly on their 
behalf even though — even though, Mr. Speaker — there was 
massive concerns about the responsibility that these people 
have taken on behalf of the Métis Nation, and a great deal of 
concern by the Métis Nation how these three people were able 
to get themselves in a position, Mr. Speaker, to be able to even 
speak on behalf of the people of the Métis Nation, considering 
the skulduggery, Mr. Speaker, that went on in the last round of 
elections in regard to the Métis Nation. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we think we need to be awfully cautious when 
Bills like this are brought forward with an extreme lack of 
consultation, when the government said we’ve consulted when 
actually they’ve only talked to three people, and these people 
were actually part of the drafting of this Bill. They’re very 
proud of this Bill, they say, and very clear that they also know 
what’s best for the Métis Nation. 
 
And certainly we’ve noted, Mr. Speaker, in this House that 
there is a great deal of displeasure with this Bill. Mr. Speaker, 
the same people who are showing displeasure are also the same 
people that at one time, even as late as last fall and during the 
round of elections, Mr. Speaker, where these people were also 
supporters of this triumvirate that helped draft this Métis Act. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, even though we’ve heard a great deal of 
concerns by members of the Métis Nation, we also went so far 
as to seek outside input, Mr. Speaker, as to what this Act means 
and to its legitimacy. Now, Mr. Speaker, in Canada, under the 
constitution, First Nations people are recognized in our 
constitution. And one of the things that has taken place over the 
last several years since the adoption of the constitution by most 
of the country, Mr. Speaker, is that there is an understanding in 
the constitution, Mr. Speaker, that First Nations people will be 
negotiated with in the large part by the federal government. 
 
And I say a large part, Mr. Speaker, because the constitution is 
very clear that First Nations people are the responsibility of the 
federal government to ensure that all treatments that they 

receive are fair and equitable on a national basis, and certainly 
we on this side of the House recognize the federal responsibility 
in this area. 
 
We see in this Métis Act though, Mr. Speaker, where this NDP 
government is talking about setting precedence, a national 
precedence, in reaching an agreement with the Métis Nation on 
a bipartite basis, when we know for a fact that it’s already been 
well established that in the dealings with Aboriginal peoples in 
this country that those issues need to be addressed, Mr. Speaker, 
in a tripartite manner. 
 
And nowhere, as we go through the explanatory notes and we 
go through the Bill, do we see at any time that this NDP 
government has used any sort of a consultation process with the 
federal government in Ottawa to work towards a resolution of 
the great many of the issues that are being brought forth by the 
Métis Nation. 
 
And so, because they have the complete lack of consultation 
with the federal government — we have heard nothing from the 
minister at this time in this NDP government; we have heard 
nothing in the explanations that we received from the so-called 
leaders of the Métis Nation as to the involvement of the federal 
government in the drafting of this Bill, this Bill No. 42, The 
Métis Act — so, Mr. Speaker, we’re wondering as to whether 
there’s going to be any constitutional legality for this Bill. 
 
And in this process of establishing an agreement with the Métis 
Nation, we feel, on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that in 
all likelihood the federal government is obliged to be a part of 
the process. And now, Mr. Speaker, what we have here is an 
agreement, we see, or an Act working towards an agreement 
with the Métis Nation that completely leaves out the federal 
government. 
 
And we are very concerned that when it comes to First Nations 
people, to the Aboriginal people of this country, Mr. Speaker, 
that the leaving out of the federal government is going to create 
a great deal of problems in the very near future because it’s 
incumbent that when we’re working with First Nations people, 
that these agreements must be tripartite as has been well 
established by the Constitution and the Supreme Court of 
Canada. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we are going to have to spend some time, of 
course, in the very near future because we know that we need to 
start wrapping up the process of working in this House, Mr. 
Speaker. But we need to try to help this government to 
understand the loopholes that they brought forth and whether 
they even have any constitutional legality working in these 
areas, especially in the areas of land entitlement. And this Act 
speaks very clearly that they’re talking about land entitlement. 
And certainly we are very concerned whether this government 
has any legal constitutional ability to be able to even negotiate 
those type of agreements. 
 
And so then when you get the chance to go into Committee of 
the Whole, Mr. Speaker, we’re certainly going to be asking the 
minister to be able to explain herself as to what the vision this 
province has. And certainly we’re very concerned about the 
vision in this province from this NDP government; we’ve seen 
a great deal, a lack of it in the last while, and so we’re going to 



2268 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

be wondering whether there’s any vision at all. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now there is one more area that I just want to cover off here, 
Mr. Speaker. In this Act, as we went through the fine details of 
it, this NDP government was looking at a way of appeasement. 
Now the creation of this so-called 16-member secretariat — as 
yet to be established how they’re going to even exist, and leaves 
a great deal of concern on this side of the House when they 
won’t even speak about in this Act, Mr. Speaker; whether 
they’re going to be elected or just simply appointed by the 
minister — but in its ability and inability to be able to 
understand democracy and transparency, what has gone into 
this Act, Mr. Speaker, is a small clause here that speaks to the 
Métis people and their ability to be able to address issues with 
the secretariat. 
 
Now apparently, should this Act come into effect some time in 
the future, Mr. Speaker, what’s happening is that the Métis 
Nation is going to be able to call special meetings. Mr. Speaker, 
when a group of the Métis individuals — 250 they need a 
minimum of, Mr. Speaker — is going to be able to call a special 
meeting or ask for a special meeting, and the secretariat is going 
to have to abide by that. 
 
But one of the huge loopholes in this Act, Mr. Speaker, is that 
even though that the meeting . . . special meeting will be called 
and questions can be brought forth by the Métis people as to the 
direction that the secretariat . . . the secretariat is — but we still 
don’t know whether they’re going to be appointed or elected; in 
all likelihood appointed, Mr. Speaker — is that any decisions 
reached by the Métis people at that meeting are simply being 
taken under advisement. 
 
Now what would be the point, Mr. Speaker, of calling a 
meeting when the reality is that it’s simply used as an 
opportunity to rent a hall, pay out a hall rental, and nothing 
more is to be accomplished by that? 
 
The fact of the matter is that we feel quite strongly on this side 
of the House, Mr. Speaker, that the concerns of the Métis 
people need to be heard clearly. And when we see a clause like 
this brought in and all that’s going to happen, Mr. Speaker, is to 
create more gasoline usage in this province for people to drive 
around and nothing more, then we have to have a great deal of 
concern as to the direction that an Act like this is going to bring 
to the Métis Nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have met with the Métis people of 
Saskatchewan. We’ve met with them on a multitude of times. 
What we hear from them is that throughout the province, 
throughout their communities, they have a democratically 
elected government, elected through a transparent process. 
These governments have been established for generations, Mr. 
Speaker, to look after their communities. It is their 
responsibility to take part in their communities, to look after 
their infrastructure, to ensure that the welfare and the health of 
their communities are always the mainstay. 
 
What we’re seeing in this Act, Mr. Speaker, is that this 
government is going to be sidestepping that democratic process. 
What they’re saying in this Act is that when they’re talking 

about land and capacity is that what they’re talking about, Mr. 
Speaker, is the need to sidestep the democratic processes that 
are already taking place in communities throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we don’t think that that’s an appropriate type of process to 
have when the people of Saskatchewan, especially the Métis 
communities of this province, have already made very, very 
clear to us that they are democratically elected; they already 
have the mandate from their municipalities to be able to do the 
job creations or the wealth creations that are necessary for the 
health of communities throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as much as we could talk about this Bill for 
hours, what’s really necessary is an opportunity for those of us 
on this side of the House to be able to have a chance with the 
minister to have her explain, so we can get her on record as to 
her vision of what this Act is going to do for the Métis peoples 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Motion agreed to on division, the Bill read a second time and 
referred to a Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Tobacco Control Act 
 

The Acting Chair (Mr. Thomson): — I would invite the 
minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I’m 
pleased to have with me today: on my left, April Barry, who’s 
the director of health promotion for the population health 
branch of Saskatchewan Health; and on my right, Kathleen 
Peterson, who’s the legislative policy analyst with the policy 
and planning branch of Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. And 
Minister, welcome, and to your officials, welcome here this 
afternoon to discuss Bill No. 56. 
 
Mr. Minister, I just want to briefly, as we’re starting, just say a 
few comments, and not to belabour the points that we tried to 
make in second reading debate, but first of all to say for the 
record that the official opposition is very, very much in favour 
of the intent of the work of the Tobacco Committee in terms of 
denormalizing tobacco use in this province. 
 
And particularly we’re in favour of reasonable steps and 
progressive steps that’ll denormalize tobacco for our young 
people, and especially young people in school when they’re in 
the informative years and are at the age where opinions about 
lifestyles and about some of the habits that they may think are 
acceptable or cool or whatever are debunked in terms of a 
mythology that this is really something that has no health 
ramifications into the future. And I think we’ve got to do 
everything that we reasonably can to make sure that we send 
that message out in a very strong way. 
 
And, Minister, I guess as you know and I did . . . we are going 
to promote . . . or to propose a number of motions or 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2269 

 

amendments today. We’re going to propose motions in three 
main areas. Actually one area requires two motions, just for 
technical reasons. And I did provide the minister beforehand 
with copies of those amendments so that hopefully the minister 
can consider them and see his way clear to support them. 
 
The major areas that I want to talk about are twofold. One is the 
area that is so important when we talk about denormalizing 
tobacco use and consumption for young people is to make sure 
that we’re doing everything that we can to educate these young 
people as to the perils of making that choice in their lives. 
 
And I understand that the government is relying on the 
Department of Education to send that message out. And 
certainly I have no objection to work that the Department of 
Education is doing in terms of promoting healthy lifestyles and 
in terms of, you know, really putting in an education program 
that takes away any of the mystology or whatever about the 
allure of tobacco. 
 
And I think that that’s all well and good but, Mr. Chair of 
Committees, I think it’s important to say as well is we think that 
this is so important, and it was an integral part of the Committee 
on Tobacco that said this has to be done in an even stronger 
way, and we want to see a special emphasis put on education 
programs right from the elementary level; not something that 
just happens in the middle years or junior high, but right from 
the elementary level that this gets done and it has its origin in 
the Department of Health. 
 
And so an amendment that we’re going to put forward, Mr. 
Speaker . . . we’re advised by the Law Clerk that this is a way 
that it can be done and a responsible way to ensure that an 
educational program is a required part of the curriculum in our 
schools in Saskatchewan to make sure that that message of the 
dangers of tobacco consumption and smoking in this province is 
something that starts in the elementary school level. And we 
think that that’s very important. 
 
The second general area that we’re going to propose an 
amendment in is the whole area of co-responsibility for actions 
by our young people. We think that it is a very normal situation 
in life in general that there has to be, if you like, a cause and 
effect. There has to be a mutual responsibility, not only by the 
people that are responsible as adults and charged with the 
proper selling of tobacco, we also have to see to it that those 
young people who are potentially possessing or securing, 
purchasing tobacco also realize that this is unacceptable 
behaviours. 
 
And so we think that there should be a penalty imposed on 
young people who are indeed purchasing or possessing tobacco 
products. We think it’s an important part of the message that 
has to go out. 
 
And we say as well, we’re not very interested at all in seeing to 
it that we somehow criminalize the young people of this 
province. But there has to be a penalty, and we’re saying that it 
should be no greater than a fine of $100 but it could include 
things like confiscation and things like that which give the 
people that are in charge of programs in this province an 
additional tool and an onus of responsibility that doesn’t just 
fall on the retailers but also falls on the shoulders of the young 

people themselves who are, by this Act, not allowed to purchase 
tobacco but there’s no penalty when they do that. And we think 
that that’s an important area as well, Mr. Chair of Committees, 
that this legislation has overlooked and we’ll be proposing 
amendments in that area. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, we think on a balanced way that the 
clause that puts all of the responsibility on retailers in this 
province is also short-sighted in terms of what its impact is 
going to be in the final analysis. 
 
We think that there has to be a reasonable balance and we think 
that clause 6(3) goes too far in putting the responsibility solely 
on the retailers and forces them to do things that are 
extraordinarily difficult for them for very little perceived 
purpose, and particularly in light of the fact that the government 
is unwilling to introduce the amendments that we are suggesting 
in these other two areas. And so we have a great deal of 
difficulty with that. 
 
And finally, the other area that we want to talk about today, I 
would like to ask my colleague, the member from Saltcoats who 
was a member of the Tobacco Committee to reiterate. And 
again it is in result or in response to concerns that have been 
expressed by a specific group of people who provide a very 
unique part of the industry. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. I’d like to join my colleague from 
Melfort-Tisdale, Mr. Minister, with a number of the very same 
concerns that he brought forward. 
 
And as a member of the committee, I think we put a lot of time 
and a lot of hours and a lot of miles out there to hear what 
people had to say and listen to their concerns. And I think by 
neglecting, number one, for putting penalties in place for the 
purchasing of tobacco products underage, I think we’re remiss 
by neglecting that in the legislation. 
 
Another part of the legislation that we’re getting a lot of 
feedback, Mr. Minister, and I would believe you are probably 
too is from businesses all over the province about the displaying 
of cigarettes in, you know, in view of the public. And I think 
businesses out there are very concerned how that’s going to 
affect their business, the costs to that business. And really, I 
think the feeling of those people out there is it’s going to have 
very little effect on whether someone would smoke or start to 
smoke or continue to smoke, Mr. Minister. 
 
Another area, Mr. Minister, where I felt we had pretty well 
complete agreement in committee was on the idea of 
tobacconists where they sold mainly solely tobacco products 
out there. And I find in the legislation we really can’t find in 
one area where we address that issue. And I think tobacconists 
out there would like something in this Bill to say that they 
would actually be exempt from this because what they are 
doing is providing a service to adults and adults only. It would 
be very easy to keep young people out of their stores if they 
went to 18 or 19 years of age, whatever the prescribed age is 
going to be in this legislation and only deal with adults. And 
therefore, I think it would not be that big of a detriment to what 



2270 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

we’re doing here to keep tobacconists completely exempt from 
that. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I join with my colleague from Melfort-Tisdale 
in the agreement on every one of the concerns that he has. But I 
would go one step further and we’ll be bringing a couple of 
amendments forward that we have given you a copy of earlier, 
Mr. Minister, that would actually be fine, that tobacconists meet 
the criteria now and would be exempt from this legislation. 
 
So as the clauses come up, Mr. Minister, we will be presenting 
our amendments. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Clause 4 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
move that a new Clause after Clause 4 of the printed Bill: 
 

Amend the printed Bill by adding the following Clause 
after Clause 4: 
 

“Restrictions respecting minors 
4.1(1) No person who is a young person shall: 
 

(a) purchase or attempt to purchase tobacco, 
directly or indirectly; 
 
(b) except as authorized by this Act or the 
regulations, possess or consume tobacco; or 
 
(c) present false identification when 
attempting to purchase tobacco from a person 
lawfully authorized to sell tobacco. 

 
(2) Any person who is a young person who 
contravenes any provision of subsection (1), is 
guilty of an offence and liable on summary 
conviction to a fine of not more than $100.” 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We’ll take the amendment as read, but I’d 
like to speak against the amendment. 
 
I thank the members opposite for providing me with 
information about the amendments that they’ve proposed. And 
we have had a chance to discuss this issue briefly, I think, last 
week. 
 
Basically, our goal is to denormalize the use of tobacco, but we 
want to do it in a proactive way and a positive way, not in a 
way that criminalizes our young people. And so we are going to 
continue to work in that way and therefore we’re not in favour 
of this particular proposal. 
 
I guess what I would say is that the proposal would end up 
criminalizing young people. Our Justice department officials 
have looked at this particular issue and basically say that this is 
an area where we would further bring children, young people, 

into the criminal system. There would also be a differential 
impact on Aboriginal young people and other cultural 
minorities. But what we would do is also maybe make smoking 
even more attractive to these young people than it is already. 
 
One of the things that we know is that the youth smoking rate in 
Saskatchewan is about 24 per cent, so this ended up with about 
one in four of our young people who could be charged with 
possession and/or use of this. So basically our position is that 
we are not going to go along with a blame-the-victim approach. 
We know that the Alberta government has already passed 
legislation like this but they have not proclaimed it. They are 
waiting for a jurisdiction or an area within their province who 
would be willing to pilot this, but they haven’t received that at 
this point. 
 
In Ontario there have been some private members’ Bills that 
have been introduced around youth possession, but none of 
them have gone beyond second reading. So at this point we are 
not willing to participate in this particular proposal. 
 
And we know and we have very clear rules around the sale of 
tobacco that includes the retailers but it also includes people 
who buy from the retailers and then distribute it to the young 
people. Those people will be caught by this particular 
legislation. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, we’re opposed to this amendment and we will 
vote to defeat it. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I find it 
somewhat perplexing that you would not take a closer look at 
this motion. You made a comment a moment ago about — if I 
heard you correctly — that a young person going into a store 
asking or with the intent of purchasing cigarettes of being a 
victim. The victim in this case, Mr. Minister, is not that young 
person who is purposely going to purchase cigarettes; the victim 
is the store owner. 
 
And here again, here’s another case of where government says 
that we’re going to punish the victim. You used that term, 
punish the victim. Now, Mr. Minister, is it, well on one hand 
you say if you’re under 18 you cannot purchase cigarettes, but 
we know that young people do go in the stores and certainly 
store owners have come to me, and I know my colleagues have 
had the same thing, where someone has come and they don’t 
necessarily look that young, and yet after they’ve made 
inquiries, they are younger. And most store owners now are 
going under the age of 25. If they don’t think you’re 25, they’re 
making sure they ask for identification. 
 
However, Mr. Minister, if you have a new employee in the 
store, that’s where store owners tend to have a problem because 
that new employee may not be totally familiar with all the 
guidelines. And then government comes along and tries to 
entrap the store owner. Here again, you abuse the victim. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I would ask that you give second thought to 
this. You’ve indicated you’re not going to change it. You’ve 
basically said the victim’s going to be . . . continue to be the 
victim. They’ll be held accountable and be charged. Well it’s 
about time, Mr. Minister, that those who abuse the system are 
held accountable and the victims are protected. 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2271 

 

And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, to give second thought to 
this motion put before the Assembly so that the retailers out 
there are not forever held accountable for their actions even 
though they do everything as diligently as they can to make sure 
that they are not selling to minors. But if minors are going to try 
and beat the system that . . . there needs to be a message out 
there that they are accountable for their actions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m taking that as a 
question that would require some further comment from me 
around this particular issue. 
 
And I think one of the things that we need to recognize when 
we’re looking at the whole area of denormalizing the use of 
tobacco in society is how do we get to the next generation of 
kids to make sure that they . . . or fewer of them . . . are 
addicted to the use of tobacco in its various forms. 
 
And we very much appreciate the work of the committee, and 
all of the ideas and suggestions that they have. And what we 
know is that this particular piece of legislation is one piece of a 
bigger puzzle. And as the members opposite have said, it 
involves education; it involves many other parts of that. 
 
But clearly one of the areas does relate to the role of the retailer 
of the tobacco products, and how do we deal with this particular 
question of the young people who have access to tobacco. 
 
I think we can thank the retailers in Saskatchewan who have 
done a pretty good job of making sure that . . . especially 
cigarettes, but other tobacco products as well, are not sold to 
those who are under 18 years of age. And I think the latest 
survey shows somewhere in excess of 80 per cent of all of the 
transactions were appropriate. 
 
But one of the things that we also know is that the whole issue 
around having a law like the amendment suggests doesn’t 
include, well how much money will you expend enforcing it? 
And we know that we have some resources, hopefully 
significant resources for the whole education process and all of 
the other parts. 
 
But when we put money into prosecuting young people, trying 
to catch young people with . . . around the kind of amendment 
that the members opposite have proposed, those resources then 
go for that particular job as opposed to some of the broader 
educational kinds of issues, some of the issues around the 
recognition of some of the disease and other things that are 
involved. And so what our job here is, is to try to look at, well 
what are the things that are most effective with the resources 
that we’ve got. 
 
Now we know that extra funding would be required to deal with 
the particular amendments as proposed. We’d end up having to 
employ even more tobacco enforcement officers. We’d end up 
having to create more judicial staff in the court system. We’d 
end up having more administrative staff around the ticketing 
system. There’s also the whole issue of how you collect tickets 
which we know is not an easy . . . collecting fines after tickets 
which is not an easy situation. And we also know that it would 
increase the amount of people who are involved in the fine 

options program. The level of fines in this particular suggestion 
would not cover the costs of administering the program and so 
that there would not be sufficient funds coming in that way to 
do it. 
 
So I think the most telling reason why we’re not interested in 
getting involved in this particular one though is that at this point 
there isn’t anybody who has introduced this kind of a system 
and have worked with the whiles . . . with it for a while so that 
we have some information based on experience that would 
show that it works. 
 
And we know that in Alberta they passed legislation, I think it’s 
called Bill 208, which is known as The Prevention of Youth 
Tobacco Use Act. It’s the first one of its kind in Canada, but it 
hasn’t been proclaimed and there isn’t anybody who in the 
various areas of Alberta that are interested in using this 
approach. 
 
(15:45) 
 
So our position is that we’re not going to go down that path 
without some better knowledge of the kind of effect that it 
would have. We want to use our resources in some of the other 
areas, in the education areas, working in a more positive way. 
And we’re not going to proceed with this method of 
criminalizing young people. 
 
So on that basis we’re opposed to this particular amendment 
because it . . . we don’t think that it will have the effect that the 
members opposite say that it will. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I think it’s rather 
unfortunate that in Saskatchewan we always want to be 
followers. Just because another jurisdiction hasn’t taken the bull 
by the horns and maybe tried to address this question, we’re 
going to wait until somebody else gets ahead of us and comes 
up with a plan, maybe similar to the amendment that’s been 
brought forward, and it shows that it can work, and then we’re 
going to follow. 
 
Why don’t we take some leadership? Why don’t we take the 
bull by the horns and move forward with this proposed 
amendment of this type? 
 
And what you would be saying, Mr. Minister, is Saskatchewan 
is sending a serious signal across this country in regards to sale 
of cigarettes to minors. 
 
And the other point, Mr. Minister, is the one around the cost of 
enforcement you talked about. What is your department 
spending right now in the process of trying to entrap businesses 
to see whether or not they’re selling cigarettes? 
 
I know there are officers and individuals out there right now. 
You’re spending the money to see who in the world who may 
slip up and sell to a minor through the use of minors, which is 
an entrapment process. What does that cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well thank you for that particular 
question from the member, because the answer is zero. The 
amount that’s spent by the province is zero. The federal officers 
who enforce that law are using monies that are approved 



2272 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

through the House of Commons and through the federal 
government. 
 
And so what we’re, what we’re proposing to do is continue to 
work and build on that particular aspect of what’s happening. 
But I think the point is that we don’t have resources right now 
that are being directed in that area. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. I think, Mr. 
Minister, your comment just points out the fact how committed 
you are to really addressing this question. And yes, Mr. 
Minister, I was quite aware of the fact that that money was at 
the federal level. The fact that there’s none at the provincial 
level just indicates that this province, while we use a lot of 
platitudes, really hasn’t given any major commitment to 
addressing this question. And indeed we continue to point the 
finger at the innocent victim, the proprietor who unwittingly 
and unknowingly at times may find themselves in a situation 
where a new employee isn’t as familiar with the guidelines and 
may mistakenly sell a pack of cigarettes without asking for 
identification. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think it’s time we had some real leadership 
here in regards to this question if we’re going to be serious 
about addressing the concern of the number of people smoking; 
and certainly minors or young people who possibly, because 
they start young, end up being addicted to the habit of smoking 
versus, as my colleague had mentioned, beginning the process 
at the younger ages of really pointing out through the form of 
education the problems associated with smoking so that we can 
get young people geared towards moving away and not getting 
involved in the habit of nicotine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the member opposite will have 
a chance to vote for the budget for the Department of Health 
later this week and it includes in there $584,000 for dealing 
with this particular issue. It’s going to have money for 
prevention, education, enforcement, and cessation services, 
which we’ll work with the districts upon that. That’s a 300 per 
cent increase from last year so I encourage the members 
opposite to vote for the budget at that point. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, just to 
follow up on a point that was made by my colleague, the 
member from Moosomin, I’d like to join with him in 
encouraging you to reconsider this amendment here today. 
 
He talked a little bit about employees of retail outlets, new 
employees unwittingly, unwittingly selling cigarettes to minors. 
And I just want to invite you to consider a true case that 
occurred in my constituency with a particular convenience store 
and a new employee there, who was very grateful for the job 
that she had as a young person I think coming out of high 
school. 
 
She had gone through some of the great special programming at 
the Swift Current Comprehensive High School and was very 
grateful for the chance to work, but she was also for various 
reasons very susceptible to peer pressure and to those of her 
former schoolmates who were still in school or perhaps recently 
graduated who were also trying to buy cigarettes. 
 
And on several occasions, Mr. Minister, she sold cigarettes to 

young people, even after her employer had told her that this 
wasn’t allowed and that she should take certain steps to avoid 
that from happening because she was susceptible to this kind of 
peer pressure based on a whole variety of reasons that were 
very unique, but I think probably repeated in other places 
around the province. 
 
The end result was she was unable to sort of withstand that sort 
of pressure and continued to sell tobacco to minors, and the 
employer had to let her go. And I talked to her father, and her 
father didn’t bear the employer any ill will, but he did have a 
concern with the law. At that time his focus was on the federal 
law, because as you pointed out, that’s what was in place. He 
was concerned that all of the onus was on the retailer and none 
on the minor. None on the underage person, none on the young 
person buying the cigarettes. 
 
And in this case the young woman who had this as her first job 
paid the price. She paid the price and lost that first job. I don’t 
know what her status is currently. This was a fairly recent 
development. And meanwhile those who applied that pressure, 
those who got cigarettes . . . got her to sell them some 
cigarettes, of course went unpunished. 
 
So literally those who would enforce this law . . . the federal 
law and now the provincial law would walk by a group of 
young people smoking . . . could technically walk by a whole 
group of young people, underage people smoking . . . right into 
the establishment and either levy a fine and take action that 
force employers to indeed fire people like the constituent I’m 
talking about. 
 
And I wonder, based on your comments so far, on the 
amendment proposed by the member from Melfort-Tisdale, 
what would you say to those parents in Swift Current who faced 
— and frankly to the young woman — who faced this situation 
in what seemingly is a completely one-sided enforcement 
against retailers and their employees, many times young people, 
and not those actually purchasing the products? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The goal that we 
have with this particular legislation is to prevent the sale of 
tobacco to young people but, more importantly, to prevent the 
use of tobacco by young people. And that is ultimately our goal. 
 
It’s unfortunate that we know that the retailers of the product 
itself, plus then all of the people they use for their distribution, 
have as a goal to hook these young people on cigarettes, 
because that’s their next generation of customers. 
 
And so what I would say is that . . . what I would say is that we 
here are going to continue to work towards our goal of a 
smoke-free society. And what happens is if there are young 
people who are not in a position or strong enough to work in a 
particular retail outfit, well then maybe that’s not the 
appropriate job for them, and so that the place . . . they should 
go to another place. 
 
But basically what we are going to do is work with the retailers. 
We know that the retailers ultimately will have the power here 
to work with their employees. What we’re going to do is 
continue to make sure that young people have as little access to 
tobacco as possible and if that requires some change in the staff 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2273 

 

in a particular operation, well, then that’s part of what’s going 
to happen. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well I’ll pass along that answer to the parents. 
I’m not entirely sure they’ll see that as very fair. 
 
I also want to give you a chance, Mr. Minister, to clarify what 
you just said because what I heard clearly, and what my 
colleagues heard you say, is that it’s the goal of retailers to 
hook, to hook young people on cigarettes. That’s what you said. 
 
Is that the position of you and your government that retailers 
across our province and all businessmen and women and their 
employees, their goal — or perhaps just owners even — their 
goal is to hook young people on cigarettes? Is that your position 
and the position of the government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What I . . . I made a distinction, Mr. 
Chair, between retailers and the distributors and I think what 
you’re asking about is the local distributors and I used the term 
retailers to talk about the tobacco manufacturing companies. So 
if there was a concern around that definition, what I am talking 
about is the tobacco companies have as a goal to sell cigarettes 
to as many people as possible. They spend much money on 
advertising to end up getting more people to use their product. 
 
And so our goal in this province is to move towards having 
fewer and fewer young people smoking with an ultimate goal 
that we’ll have fewer people smoking in our society, period. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, when we 
talk about the denormalization of tobacco products, I’d like to 
make the comparison with the denormalization of alcohol. As 
you know anyone under age in possession of alcohol is charged 
a fine. And what is the problem with doing the same thing? No 
one is made a criminal of because they’ve paid a fine for having 
alcohol in their possession if they’re underage. 
 
I think all you and your government is doing is encouraging 
people to buy and supply the underage. That’s happening all the 
time. We’ve had letters on it; I’m sure you have too. And I 
honestly believe the onus must be on the purchaser. They must 
be responsible for their actions instead of always pushing 
everything on to the shoulders of the business people who, with 
the high energy rates and everything else, high taxation, is on 
the verge of bankruptcy and leaving this province. So I think 
that some of the onus has to be on the purchaser. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you say that no other jurisdictions have 
brought in this type of legislation. What is wrong with us being 
a leader in this field? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I have stated on a number of 
occasions that we’ve looked at this particular issue because it 
was clearly part of the report that came forward. But after much 
discussion, including with many of the people who are involved 
in the health fields and who know about how to deal with young 
people and prevent them from starting smoking, and basically 
the recommendation to us and through our discussion is that we 
are not going to get into the business of criminalizing young 
people. 
 
And what we’re going to do is we will watch. If other 

jurisdictions find that this particular method works, then we 
would revisit that. But at this point we’re not going to be the 
first people to do that. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, pardon me. Mr. 
Minister, as you know, I was Vice-Chair of the Special 
Committee on Tobacco Control. And throughout our meetings, 
countless people said that some of the responsibility must be on 
the purchaser. That was one of the recommendations that we 
had in our report and it was one of a few recommendations that 
wasn’t followed. 
 
I don’t buy your reasoning; the retailers of this province don’t 
buy your reasoning. And you are just going to be another nail in 
their coffin and they will be leaving — packing up and moving 
to Alberta. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’d just like to make the point 
that this particular legislation does not prevent the local store or 
the local seller of tobacco from selling that product to adults. 
But it does make it a crime for them to sell it to young people. 
 
We’re in that business. Basically those people who sell tobacco 
products can comply with the law and basically continue in 
their business. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, or 
Mr. Chair of Committees, it is certainly a concern in this area 
where we talk about furnishing of tobacco to young people 
prohibited is the general heading of this section. And I’m 
disappointed in some of the comments that were made by the 
minister in considering our amendment. 
 
He takes great pleasure in commenting that the Health 
department’s going to have a half a million allocation for funds 
in order to deal with the whole issue surrounding the 
denormalization of tobacco. 
 
And yet I note in the Health Estimates document from the 
Minister of Finance that the province of Saskatchewan is going 
to collect this year $124.6 million on the income end, and I 
wonder who is the greatest beneficiary of this whole issue and 
who is least interested in seeing to that tobacco is denormalized. 
 
The minister sort of likes to blame everybody else. If it’s the 
retailers, no matter how he defines it, it’s really unfortunate that 
the government does not put some balance and responsibility 
into its own affairs. 
 
The other thing that I’d like to point out is the minister seems to 
imply that all of these issues are something . . . about this 
balance that we’ve suggested is something that’s come from the 
opposition. I would like to point out to him that the member 
from P.A. 
(Prince Albert)-Carlton was a member of the Tobacco Advisory 
Committee. The member from Regina Qu’Appelle, the member 
from Saskatoon Sutherland, and the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow — all four government members who voted in 
favour of the recommendations of this report that the minister 



2274 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

has chosen to completely ignore. And so, Mr. Chair, I definitely 
want to make sure that this is set straight. 
 
In terms of a detailed question, I’m wondering, first of all, how 
the minister can reconcile his comments about $500,000 being 
spent and recognizing that not one red cent is spent on 
enforcement. It’s all for federal officers. He has no money for 
that. 
 
He has no money to consider the fact that maybe there should 
be some penalties and that it might take something to enforce 
them. And he has no money to implement an education program 
sponsored by the Department of Health. And yet, he isn’t afraid 
to collect $124.6 million from tobacco revenue. How does he 
square that to the people of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I thank the member for that 
question. This clearly is an issue that we are starting to work on 
together with all of the people in the province. 
 
About half of the amount of money that’s in the Health budget 
this year will go towards the education issues; just under, I 
think, under a hundred thousand will be related to increased 
enforcement. 
 
We will continue to work to secure more funds to deal with the 
overall policy that we have, and that’s something that we’re all 
working at together. And I encourage the members to vote for 
this budget so that we can get the project underway. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate what the minister’s 
comments were, but he didn’t answer the question. 
 
How does he reconcile the fact that he’s spending less than a 
half a million dollars on denormalizing tobacco, when his 
Minister of Finance proudly puts in his budget that you’re going 
to collect $124.6 million on tobacco tax revenue? 
 
How do you reconcile the fact that there’s zero for enforcement 
and the total, no matter how you square it, is only $500,000 
when you’re collecting 124.6? It isn’t the kids and the people 
that smoke in this province that are addicted to tobacco; it’s this 
government that’s addicted to the revenues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the comments 
from the member opposite. 
 
What we do know is that there are added costs within the health 
system that relate to the use of tobacco. We have recently seen 
information become public after some research that shows 
contrary to what many people say about shorter lives of people 
who use tobacco costing the system less, there’s also a lot of 
information to show that those last 10 years of life of people 
who have used tobacco products are very expensive for the 
health system whether it’s in Canada, the US (United States), or 
in Europe. 
 
And so what I would say is that there are substantial costs to the 
public purse around the use of tobacco, and that is part of the 

reason that we are very concerned about denormalizing the use 
of tobacco in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Chair, the minister talks about the fact 
that people that become addicted to tobacco over a lifetime, or 
even in the extended period of time, increase their risks of 
serious health problems that they’re going to have at sometime 
in the future. And that’s absolutely correct, and all the more 
reason to take preventative action; all the more reason to rather 
than treat the disease after it’s become part of someone’s life 
and has taken over their life; all the more reason to treat it in 
terms of a preventative kind of relationship; and all the more 
reason why this Bill is out of sync with what needs to be done. 
 
Everybody is very much committed to the objectives of the 
legislation and the objectives of the panel that looked at this, 
but unfortunately as usual this government gets it wrong. And 
the Premier sits in his seat day after day and says, well where is 
some constructive suggestions from the . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I do not want to curtail debate but 
we’ve already passed clause 1 which is the broader debate, and 
I think what the member is talking about in the last number of 
questions had been . . . would be better asked under part IV 
under administration enforcement relating to enforcement 
officers. So I would ask the questioner to either bring the 
comments back to clause 4 which is specifically related to 
furnishing tobacco to young persons. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And I 
realize that the sections are certainly interwoven and one has 
implication on the other. The general heading is: furnishing 
tobacco to young people prohibited and that was the general 
reference that I was talking about in terms of how that relates to 
this whole issue. And I will try to be more specific to this 
clause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the objective of this section is laudable. The 
objective of having prohibitions against the furnishing of 
tobacco to young people is laudable. And what we’re saying 
that we have no problem with that objective, but the section as 
outlined falls short of that laudable target. And we think it’s 
important that that is pointed out. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve talked about these other issues and the 
clause we proposed has been dealt with. It says in the clause 
that no person shall furnish tobacco to . . . or tobacco-related 
product to a person who appears to be a younger person, etc., 
about age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does this . . . or, Mr. Chair, I want to ask the 
minister: does this take care of people who are of age who 
purchase tobacco and in essence bootleg it to people underage? 
Are the same prohibitions and penalties that are envisioned in 
section 20(1) also going to apply to these individuals. And if it 
does, how are you going to enforce it given the fact that you 
have no money to spend? You simply have a one-way valve 
that takes money from tobacco tax, and you’re spending less 
than 500,000, and none of which is on enforcement except 
relying on four federal inspectors. 
 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2275 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, the law is drafted to include 
both the person in the corner store plus the person who buys 
and then furnishes, sells . . . which for . . . the term furnish 
includes many other words including barter, and so it is meant 
to cover that particular person. 
 
What we know in this particular year is that we have the 
amount of money that I stated previously to deal with some of 
these issues. But practically, it will take us a number of months 
to get all the regulations in place and to actually get involved 
with the enforcement. 
 
We will be looking at this for next year’s budget, for a further 
enhancement of the amounts of money that are involved. And 
we would ask that you provide your support as we move 
forward in that endeavour. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Chair, you know, I am aware of 
problems that exist and I think the minister is as well. A 
convenience store operator related to me a story of where an 
individual came in — a young person to purchase tobacco — he 
was challenged in regard to his age, he presented the 
appropriate documentation and verified that he is of age. 
 
He purchased four different packages of tobacco, four different 
brands, and was observed when he left the store giving those 
packages of tobacco to four individuals who obviously looked 
younger then he did. 
 
And the minister — so this is bootlegging of tobacco — and the 
minister says under this section that the penalties of section 
20(1) would apply. Well just two or three questions ago the 
minister said, well, we don’t want to put any penalty on the kids 
that are going to purchase the stuff because it’s impossible for 
us to enforce this, it’s impossible to do it. 
 
Here’s an 18-year-old kid that is obviously — or 19-year-old 
kid — who is young enough to still have friends underage, but 
was also bootlegging tobacco. How in the world is the minister 
going to enforce this when he just said he couldn’t enforce 
young people from purchasing directly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair. This legislation is drafted to 
specifically deal with that particular person. We want to deal 
with those people who are older than 18, who get involved in 
this particular business. If you look at the definition of the 
word, furnish, it does include the words sell, lend, assigned, 
give, or send, with or without consideration. 
 
And basically the law is saying that you can’t do that. The 
corner store operator or the person who’s selling the tobacco 
will end up, as long as they sell it to somebody who is of age, 
not have any problem. But if that person then goes themselves 
and distributed to another person or even goes further down the 
line, they will get caught by this legislation. 
 
And this is a particular area of concern, as we know, for many 
of the people who are in the business of selling tobacco legally. 
And so that will be an area that will be targeted by the 
enforcement program that is set up. 
 
Clause 4 agreed to. 
 

Clause 5 agreed to. 
 
Clause 6 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like 
to move an amendment to: 
 

Clause 6 of the printed Bill by adding the following after 
Clause (3): 

 
“(4) This section does not apply to a tobacconist shop that 
meets the exemption criteria prescribed in the regulations”. 

 
I’d like to just take a minute, Mr. Chair, to repeat my comments 
earlier. Tobacconists and tobacconist shops out there are 
actually out there for the purpose of providing a service to 
adults in this province. There’s absolutely no reason that 
anyone underage would need to be in these shops and I think 
it’s just another way that we can help business in this province 
without putting a handicap on them that they can’t handle. 
 
No young person needs to be in these shops. I think the 
tobacconists themselves have said really it wouldn’t affect their 
business at all because they’re catering to adults. They’re 
selling tobacco products to the adults but not to young people 
anyway. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I would hope the minister and the government 
would see fit to accept this amendment and for once help 
business out in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the chance to 
speak against this particular amendment. I think the description 
of the amendment by the member opposite shows that that’s 
actually what this law proposes. 
 
Speciality tobacco product shops and tobacconists can continue 
to display tobacco or tobacco-related products if they restrict 
access to those individuals who are 18 years or older. So 
basically, there is no restriction on them. 
 
They will not be able to have big displays in their windows. 
And this will be something that will have to be worked out 
together with the people in this particular industry because if 
the displays are visible outside the premise, then it will offend 
the law. But within the particular shop, they’ll be able to have 
whatever displays they would like and there is no problem 
because basically the people who would be in their shop would 
all be 18 years of age or older. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. To the 
minister, Mr. Chair, I think if I was a tobacconist out there, I 
would feel much more comfortable with this amendment as part 
of the legislation because it clearly states what the intent of the 
legislation is. If this is not part of the legislation, tobacconists 
out there have no idea just where they fit into this new piece of 
legislation. And I think they are very uneasy about what this 
government may come along and decide to . . . what part they 
may classify them in. If this was part of the legislation, it’s 
clear, straightforward, that they are exempt from this part of the 
legislation, Mr. Chair. 



2276 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, we have had some conversations 
within Saskatchewan Health with some of these retailers. And 
clearly, one of the things that happens when you pass legislation 
is that you do work at the regulations to set up the appropriate 
procedures that relate to the particular tobacconist industry. 
 
It’s our position that we don’t need the amendment as proposed 
and so therefore we’re against the amendment. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. 
Again on section 6, there are three subsections or clauses within 
that, and I would like to speak to them in general now and I’d 
like them voted separate if we could. 
 
Certainly, I think that the overall objective of inordinately 
promoting and advertising tobacco products, which is envisaged 
in this section, is again worthy of support in a general sense. 
 
I think that it’s important to say that sections 6(1) and 6(2) in a 
general sense about, you know, having billboards and obvious 
advertising displays in the windows of stores or outside of the 
store advertising the sale of tobacco products as prohibited in 
section 6(1) and 6(2) particularly make sense and are something 
that I think not only ourselves but retailers also understand that 
this is part of this denormalization process. 
 
Article 6(3) unfortunately is somewhat different in terms of 
what its intent was. I think retailers understand that the process 
here is denormalization and they’re particularly offended that 
the government has sort of not got this in balance in terms of 
saying everything is falling on the retailer’s lap and all within 
the realm of retailer’s responsibility in this legislation. 
 
We’ve seen already the government’s unwillingness to deal 
with the issue of having some mutual responsibility in terms of 
the young people who are purchasing tobacco, and you’re not 
willing to look at that. And so retailers feel that all of the 
responsibility of this whole legislation is something that the 
government is putting on their lap. Government talks about how 
much money they’re spending on denormalizing tobacco, and in 
essence it is just a fraction, a tiny fraction of what they’re 
collecting through tobacco tax and retailers are concerned about 
this. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Chair, retailers are pragmatic, 
reasonable people. They’re saying in 6(3), which is going to 
prohibit any tobacco being available where anybody can see it 
at all in a retail establishment. In many instances, in many of 
the convenience stores, they have a low-rise shelf behind the 
counter and that’s where they have tobacco products that they 
can easily reach and access when someone comes in to purchase 
tobacco, and they’re saying if we don’t have it there, where in 
the world would you like us to put it? 
 
And if anybody is in the retail business — and I doubt very 
much if any of the members opposite have been in any of these 
situations — they would realize that in many instances on the 
front counter of a retail establishment, underneath that counter 
is where many of the support mechanisms for a retail 
establishment are kept. There could be a floor safe in order to 
take money out of the till to minimize the opportunities for 

burglaries and for the safety of the clerks that are working in 
that place. 
 
Many times the point-of-sale cash register systems are 
supported by a computer system or a printing system. The 
software and hardware that drives that is located underneath the 
counter. Many times there is other demands for the under front 
counter space. That space is literally at a very high premium. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, it is very difficult for retailers to even 
conceive as to how they could possibly, in a practical way, take 
the tobacco products that they offer for sale now and move 
them somewhere out of sight underneath the front counter. 
From a practical standpoint while this may look good on paper, 
what you’ve got to understand is what this means, in a 
pragmatic sense, for retailers across this province and what 
we’re asking them to do and the kind of onus and responsibility 
we’re putting on them to say to them somehow you’ve got to 
hide this product. 
 
And I know there have been some government members 
opposite who have met with some retailers and said, well, that’s 
no problem, you can leave the display where it is; you’ve just 
got to put a shelf or a sliding door, a curtain in front of the 
product so you don’t see it. 
 
Well if you want to interpret this section directly, as soon as 
you open the curtain to pull out a package of tobacco to sell to 
someone, you’ve exposed it to view by other clients and now 
you’re in breach of the section of the Act. 
 
And so these sorts of things are very troubling and they’re very 
much a concern for retailers. I think there’s a point that can be 
made, and it has been made by many of the groups as saying 
that in some establishments there are these power walls that 
have blown the display of the actual product way beyond what 
the need is to actually have the product and easy access in 
functional way. And I think that that probably is a very good 
point. 
 
The problem is, is you can’t specifically put in common sense 
legislation that says the power walls have to go, but a 
reasonable display with reasonable access considering the 
logistics of a retailer and safety of the clerk, etc., should be 
considered. It’s pretty hard to do. 
 
And you can look at it anyway you like in terms of saying, well, 
we’re going to deal with this and we’ll include that and not the 
other circumstance. It’s a real difficult challenge to do. And 
once again, retailers are saying all of this is falling on our backs 
and our responsibilities. 
 
And the question we have to ask, if this is indeed the way it’s 
going to be, to what purpose? Is there going to be a real value in 
terms of diminishing and denormalizing tobacco? 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, first of all we said if . . . unless you’re 19 years 
of age, you can’t purchase tobacco, or 18 years of age, you 
can’t purchase it. So if you’re a younger person than that, you 
don’t come into a retail or convenience store and say I’m going 
to make . . . I’ve got some money and I’m going to decide when 
I get to the counter . . . I’m going to have a chocolate bar, I’m 
going to buy a package of cigarettes. That isn’t just in people’s 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2277 

 

thought processes. People simply do not start smoking because 
they decided to buy a package of smokes instead of a chocolate 
bar. 
 
So I mean it’s just a spur-of-the-moment purchase of tobacco. 
It’s simply not a big issue in reality. Tobacco is an addictive 
substance, and people have learned to smoke because they’ve 
gotten tobacco because someone furnished them, because there 
was no penalty if they were in possession of it and they become 
addicted to it. So when they are addicted they know exactly 
what they want, and if it’s hidden under the counter or in a 
display behind in order to have easy and safe access by clerks is 
immaterial. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, again we have to say we’re in general 
agreement with the intent of this section in terms of not overtly 
displaying tobacco, not overtly trying to promote it through 
display and posters and all the rest of it. But once again, this is 
unbalanced in terms of common sense and directly an affront 
against the common sense realities of people who are trying to 
make a living in the retail business. 
 
And again we would like to respectfully submit that this clause 
be deleted so that it can be dealt with in a reasoned way. 
Sections (1) and (2) of subsection 6 adequately deal with that. 
And I think we’ve got to listen to the concerns that retailers 
have brought forward because they simply make sense. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. This particular 
section, all three clauses in section 6, implements one of the 
recommendations that was set out by the all-party committee in 
their first report, May 2000. And if I can just read it from 
recommendation, 5.2k: 
 

All displays, signage and promotional material associated 
with the sale of tobacco products should be prohibited in 
locations where tobacco is sold and where youth have 
access. Tobacco products should be kept in a manner where 
they are not visible to the public. This includes signage and 
promotional materials that advertise the price and/or 
availability of tobacco products on, or within the vicinity of 
the retail establishment. 

 
And then there’s a . . . the next recommendation deals with the 
tobacconist issue that we talked about previously. 
 
Basically what is happening here is that we are requiring that 
tobacco products not be the main object of the attention when 
you show up at your cash register at a local store. And there are 
a number of different ways of dealing with this, and I think the 
member opposite understands it, has actually described those, 
whether it’s includes curtains or cabinets or frosted glass or 
cardboard or cover or whatever. And all of these things will be 
worked out together with the various individuals who are 
involved in this. 
 
The regulations will probably spell out in more detail if there 
are concerns, but clearly the goal is to remove the visible 
display of tobacco products in those situations where youth 
have access to the store. And that’s one of the goals of our 
legislation and we will not be backing down on that. 

Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, am I 
hearing you say correctly then, say, for example, a retailer has 
currently just built a new display for their tobacco products; it 
happens to be on the back wall. If that retailer were to put 
sliding doors on that display case and the doors were kept shut 
other than to retrieve a pack of cigarettes if they were 
purchased, are you saying then, Mr. Minister, that that’s all that 
would be required even though it exposes those packages for 
the moment that they’re purchased? 
 
I think that’s what . . . the retailers that have come to see me 
brought this to my attention. They’ve just nicely built these 
display cases and that’s the concern they have about having to 
go through a whole new expensive process. And we need a 
clarification on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the member 
for Moosomin for that question because the answer is yes. I 
mean, basically, this is practical legislation that is there to 
remove tobacco products from the visibility of the public 
generally but specifically children. 
 
If they’re in a situation where they have a cabinet that they can 
open and close, that would satisfy what the requirements are 
here. But we’re going to work together with the retailers so that 
they end up understanding what the rules are. Ultimately the 
goal though is to remove the signage from the prominent place 
that it has at this point. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. That clarifies a lot 
of, I guess, the questions we had on that. So I just . . . so the 
person comes in and they want to buy cigarettes and, whether 
it’s a curtain or sliding doors, they leave them open. They get 
the cigarettes, they sell it to the person of age, everything’s 
perfectly fine. The doors aren’t shut for five minutes, two 
minutes. 
 
How is that going to work? Because the next person walks in 
there and says, you know, that vendor was displaying tobacco 
products. How does that work? They’re an avid anti-smoker 
and they’ve let the RCMP know and I know it opens up a whole 
lot of difficulties. 
 
I’ve had a number of vendors, a number of small town stores in 
my constituency that said if I have to keep them in the back 
room — most of the time they’re in the store by themselves — 
and I have to go back there to get a package of cigarettes and 
bring it up, meanwhile, I come up and the person’s gone along 
with three loaves of bread and a quart of milk. And so I guess 
the question is what . . . I mean if you’re going to allow a 
certain amount of time, how much time is allowed then? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Chair, this legislation will have to 
work in the community. The tobacco enforcement officers who 
are involved will, like any new legislation . . . and I think the 
member opposite actually knows a lot about the laws around 
seat belts and the use of seat belts and how that was an 
education process as well as an enforcement process. And you 
continue to work with the community to get the compliance. 
 
I think that’s the same kind of process that would be used here, 



2278 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

so that if it happened to be, you know, five minutes or two 
minutes or whatever those kinds of things, that’s not really the 
issue. But if it becomes a blatant exercise in contravening the 
law, well then that’s where the enforcement officers would, 
would step in. 
 
But clearly this is all going to be an education process for all of 
these local store owners to learn what the rules are. And that 
will be done in conjunction with the people who have to enforce 
the rules. Ultimately the goal though is to keep the visibility of 
the product away from young people when they’re in the store. 
 
Clause 6 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 7 to 16 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 17 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Your counting kind 
of had me nervous there. 
 
Mr. Chair, again this section talks about tobacco enforcement 
officers. And certainly the powers are fairly broad in terms of 
enforcement of the Act as it’s written. But we think that there’s 
an important part, and this we felt was an appropriate way of 
dealing with the issue of developing an education program 
that’s specifically tailored to denormalization of tobacco. 
 
And as I said earlier, I do appreciate the efforts of the 
Department of Education to have the whole discussion about 
tobacco and tobacco products as part of a health curriculum or 
whatever part of the curriculum that they see appropriate. And 
that’s not only appreciated — it is important. 
 
But, Mr. Chair, what we also said needs to have happen is if 
we’re going to send a strong message of denormalization, we 
need to make sure that there are programs that are developed 
not from so much a Department of Education standpoint, but 
from a tobacco denormalization standpoint. And who better to 
do this than those individuals who are charged with its 
enforcement under this legislation — the tobacco enforcement 
officers. 
 
Just as we end up with a situation in many of our schools right 
now where you have people that come into the schools — the 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) or city police — that 
talk about law enforcement in a general sense, that talk about 
drug abuse and alcohol abuse and how the law should be 
respected and the implications not only for the individual for 
being in breach of those laws, but also the harmful effects on 
society as a whole by the abuse of these issues. 
 
And so we see a situation where we have RCMP come into a 
school, or city police people come into a school, we have 
community leaders come into schools, we have public health 
nurses come into schools. And so for the government to say that 
this is an unusual practice and that the Department of Education 
will handle these things, then how in the world do they justify 
the fact that public health nurses come into schools and teach 
specific parts of a curriculum? Or not even specific parts of the 
curriculum, but teach specific topics that are more related to the 
delivery of public health in this province than it is into a general 
school curriculum. 

And so, Mr. Chair, what we envisage is to say again: if we’re 
going to denormalize tobacco and send a strong message out 
there, we have to ensure that this is given special attention and 
the special attention that the problem requires. And so we 
believe that there should be, not an optional, not a 
get-to-it-if-you-like-to program developed by the Department of 
Education, but as we worded it in our amendment, a required 
education program that is anti-smoking in nature and that must 
be taught in the schools starting at the elementary level. 
Because we think if we start any later than that, it’s simply too 
late to get the message of denormalization out in front of us. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, I would like to move that we: 
 

Amend Clause 17 of the printed Bill by adding the 
following after Clause 17(4): 
 
“(5) A tobacco enforcement officer appointed pursuant to 
this Act, who is designated as the educational coordinator 
shall develop a required anti-smoking educational package 
of materials that must be taught in school starting at the 
Elementary level”. 

 
I so present, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to speak to 
this particular proposal, and the way that it’s worded. I think 
basically I’m going to have to speak against this particular 
amendment at this place. But I’m not opposed to the principle 
behind what is recommended and I would like to explain how 
we are doing this, which fits within the laws of Saskatchewan, 
whereas this would cause some difficulties for my colleague, 
the Minister of Education. 
 
Basically what we’re doing in this whole area of denormalizing 
the use of tobacco is to use the various tools that are available. 
The Tobacco Control Act is one part of a broad picture that 
we’re painting to use in the denormalization of tobacco. In 
addition to what’s being done in this Tobacco Control Act, 
Saskatchewan Health and Saskatchewan Education are 
developing and promoting curricular resources that integrate 
tobacco education into the various disciplines within the 
secondary school curriculum, and they’re also providing 
specific modules for use in the early and middle years health 
curriculum. 
 
I think that that second point is what the intent of this 
amendment is, is that there be in early and middle years of 
school particular modules around anti-smoking information for 
the use of the children. 
 
Basically what we have in Saskatchewan is an Education Act 
which does not specify individual topics that are mandatory in 
curriculum. The core curriculum for kindergarten to grade 12 is 
defined in policy, not in the legislation. And it has seven 
required areas of study which includes health education. 
 
The aim of health education from kindergarten to grade 12 is to 
enable students to apply health knowledge in daily life in order 
to increase health-enhancing behaviours and decrease 
health-risking behaviours. So students are required to enrol in 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2279 

 

this health education from grades 1 to 9. Included in that 
particular education are modules that relate to the anti-smoking 
suggestions that the member opposite is talking about in this 
particular legislation. 
 
The department, Saskatchewan Health, Department of Health 
and the Department of Education have already been working 
together to continue to re-evaluate and enhance the educational 
materials in this area and that will happen whether this 
particular clause is in this legislation or not. 
 
But I’m speaking against it because this goes contrary to our 
Education Act and how we define and develop curriculum in 
our province. 
 
Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Clause 17 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 18 to 26 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 27 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m proposing an 
amendment, a House amendment, to clause 27, which reads as 
follows, the amendment would: 
 

Amend Clause 27 of the printed Bill by adding “and that 
the accused exercised all due diligence to prevent its 
commission” after “knowledge”. 

 
I so move, and I’d like to speak to it after. 
 
I’m making this proposed amendment at the request of some of 
the federal officials that are involved in this same area. They 
recommended that we make this change, which puts it more in 
parallel with federal legislation, and it deals with some of those 
situations that they’ve run into. And so basically we 
recommend that this go ahead. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. First 
of all, I’d like to thank the minister of giving me a copy of their 
proposed amendment. And I would like to say that I do 
understand the concerns that were raised by the federal people 
in this regard. And unlike the government, we are much more in 
a spirit of being open to constructive amendments, and we will 
support this amendment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 27 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 28 to 37 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to, 
before I make the motion, just take a brief moment to thank a 
number of people who have contributed. And especially I 
would like to thank the Special Committee on Tobacco Control 
who provided the report and gathered much information. And 
so the particular members that were involved with that are the 
member from Prince Albert Carlton, our Speaker; the member 

from Estevan; the member from Saskatoon-Sutherland; the 
member from Weyburn-Big Muddy; the member from 
Saltcoats; the member from Moose Jaw Wakamow; and the 
member for Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
I think all of us who are involved in developing public policy 
need to thank these people for the very good job that they’ve 
done in defining many of the issues which allowed us to come 
forward with a piece of legislation like this particular Act with 
as few disagreements as, as we had. 
 
And so with that I’d like to thank the members opposite. I’d 
also like to thank all of the members of the community, some of 
whom are present in the gallery today, for their unwavering 
support in helping us define what is needed in Saskatchewan to 
denormalize the use of tobacco among our young people with 
the ultimate goal of a tobacco-free society. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Before we go to the 
final motion, I too would like to rise and thank the members of 
the tobacco committee for their efforts and work. They spent a 
great deal of time listening to people across this province and 
we think, in the official opposition, that they came forward with 
a pretty strong and balanced report. 
 
Our support for the overall intent of this legislation has been 
unwavering and our suggestions today have been to actually 
strengthen and put a little more balance and fairness into this 
legislation because I think we all share the same broad 
objectives of denormalizing tobacco. And particularly to 
sending a very strong message to our young people that this is 
not the kind of thing that’s going to lead to a healthy lifestyle. 
And it’ll be a large mistake in their life if they engage in the 
habit of using tobacco. 
 
So in recognition of the work of all of those, I certainly would 
like to echo the minister’s appreciation for committee members 
and for community people who have raised their concerns and 
issues about this important legislation. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill as amended. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Justice to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. On my right is 
Susan Amrud who you will all know, director of legislative 
services, and on my left, Ross Macnab who’s Crown counsel in 
the Department of Justice. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees and 
welcome to the minister and to his officials. 
 
In dealing with this particular Bill and some of the discussion 



2280 Saskatchewan Hansard July 3, 2001 

 

that’s had in the past, there’s a question that I think needs to be 
answered right near the beginning, and that is when we’re 
dealing with domestic relations, in the discussion we’ve had 
we’ve sort of put forward the proposals why aren’t other 
possible situations allowed. And I want to know why 
specifically those were left out of this legislation at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thanks for 
the question from the member. 
 
The member and I have discussed this question in a tentative 
way and he knows that I would favour some investigation of 
this question. Primarily the answer to the member’s question, 
why would we not include other types of relationships — for 
example, siblings who might live together for a number of years 
or adult children and their parents or other family relationships 
or unrelated people in similar circumstances — the short answer 
is that these legislative amendments respond to a decision by 
the Supreme Court of Canada in M v. H and we are then doing 
what the Supreme Court of Canada has advised us to do in 
order to bring our legislation into compliance with the Charter. 
 
With regards to those other relationships that the member 
raises, we have not received any direction from the Supreme 
Court of Canada. That’s only one part of the answer. I think we 
need some more investigation of the consequences of those 
relationships and I think too we need to see where the law 
doesn’t assist the participants in those relationships. 
 
At the moment, the law of constructive trust would recognize 
the kinds of financial dependency that the member is talking 
about in the context of relationships giving rise to certain 
expectations so that the law that has been developed, case by 
case, would address the issues in mind. 
 
But I think the main answer is we haven’t been directed to by 
the Supreme Court and we haven’t looked as effectively as we 
might into these questions as a result of not being directed. 
 
But I think the member knows that I’d be interested in pursuing 
this matter further, and if there are needs . . . if needs are 
identified in responding to them . . . and the member will know 
that in Hawaii, for example, some legislative changes have been 
made with regards to these kinds of relationships. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you and I guess first of all there’s no 
question that the need is there. I think all we have to look 
around is our neighbourhoods and possibly our families, any of 
our communities, and these other sorts of domestic relationships 
exist all over. 
 
To say that it’s good enough to let them take some other avenue 
through the courts, I don’t think it’s treating these people fairly. 
To say, well, if this isn’t working out right for you, you can sort 
of go through a different system of courts and try and appeal 
your situation. I think if it was valid to address these two 
situations that are addressed in the domestic relations Bill is just 
as valid to address the other ones. 
 
The other statement that was made that this is in response to 
federal direction is in itself a valid argument for doing what we 
have done, but it’s not a valid argument in not doing what we 
should have done or what we could have done. And I’m really 

quite disappointed that when government looked at domestic 
relations they didn’t look at this whole package because we 
weren’t breaking new ground in this area. We were probably 
following what’s happened in some of the other States — I 
believe two of them — and also what’s happened in some of the 
Maritime provinces. 
 
So we could have dealt with that very effectively without 
breaking new ground, using some other situations as samples 
and examples to go from. 
 
In Manitoba, Mr. Minister, there’s I believe a similar situation 
developing. They amended only 10 Acts; we amended 24. Now 
that’s a substantial difference in the number of Acts that were 
amended, and I guess the question is why the difference and are 
we going much further than we need to? Because I’m sure 
Manitoba went at least as far as they needed to in putting their 
legislation in sync with what the federal government had. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Chair, in response to the 
member’s question, the . . . I think the member may be aware or 
may not be aware that in discussing the legislation in Manitoba, 
the Minister of Justice there talked about more work needing to 
be done in Manitoba. And for example, while we’re 
encompassing changing of names, matrimonial property, and 
wills, Manitoba’s not doing that. So they’re leaving . . . they’re 
not doing some of the things that the Supreme Court of Canada 
will be suggesting we do, and they will have to do that later. 
 
In terms of adoption, the member will know that there is a 
committee looking at that particular issue; was appointed about 
two weeks ago, I think. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. I think as we indicated earlier on 
in a vote on this previously, we went back to our constituents 
and addressed some of the concerns of this particular Bill. I 
think in principle as it deals with domestic relationships and 
such, we felt it should go a whole lot further. We basically 
support the direction that it’s going on that area. 
 
On the area of adoptions, I know there’s some concerns in our 
caucus on that area. And as we go through this particular Bill, 
clause by clause, I think we will be taking our direction from 
some of those bits of information that were given to us. 
 
So having said that, Mr. Chairman, that concludes the 
questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to on division. 
 
Clauses 3 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2) 

/Loi corrective (relations domestiques) de 2001 (no 2) 
 

Mr. Chair: — I see the minister does not have additional 
officials. 
 



July 3, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2281 

 

Clauses 1 to 12 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(17:00) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 56 — The Tobacco Control Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I move that the amendments be now read 
the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that Bill No. 56 be now read the third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 

Bill No. 47 — The Miscellaneous Statues 
(Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The next sitting of the House, Mr. 
Speaker . . . No, now, be now read, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 48 – The Miscellaneous Statutes 
(Domestic Relations) Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2) 

/Loi corrective (relations domestiques) de 2001 (no 2) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — I move this Bill be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Chair: — It being now past 5 p.m., this committee stands 
recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 


