















































Hansard: May 08, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 983 
 May 8, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today on behalf of people from the Consul region of the 
extreme southwest of my constituency. They’re concerned 
about the implications of the EMS (emergency medical 
services) report and the impact it would have on ambulance 
service in that very remote area. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition today 
concerning the Fyke report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctoral services 
available as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, and long-term services available to users 
from our district and beyond. 

 
People that have signed this petition are from Wadena, Rose 
Valley, Margo . . . (inaudible) . . . Thank you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I rise on behalf of citizens 
concerned about the high energy costs. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, St. Brieux, Watson, and Naicam. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the possible conversion of some 
paved highways to gravel. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 

aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Avonlea; Ottawa, Ontario; Smithville, Ontario; Mossbank; 
Swan River, Manitoba; and Moose Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
petitioners concerned with the state of the hospital in the 
community of Swift Current. Mr. Speaker, the prayer of this 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition today . . . these petitions today 
were signed by people from the city of Swift Current, from 
Pennant, from Fillmore, from Ponteix, from Cabri, Rush Lake, 
Cadillac, and Waldeck. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy 
who are very concerned at the lack of in-patient treatment 
centre for drug and alcohol abuse. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre in the city of 
Weyburn and provide funding for the same. 

 
And it’s signed by citizens from the city of Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present petitions 
on behalf of citizens of the province regarding the EMS report. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that the Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the 
Maryfield, Redvers, Bellegarde, Tilston, Antler areas. 
 
I so present. 



984 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petition 
from the Redvers Health Centre. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available as well as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our district, 
southeast Saskatchewan, and southwest Manitoba and 
beyond. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petition, Mr. Speaker, comes from the good people of 
Bellegarde, Redvers, Storthoaks, Antler, and Wauchope. I so 
present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand to read a 
petition from citizens who are concerned about the EMS report. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good citizens of LeRoy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of concerned constituents. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
Signatures to this petition come from the community of 
Wynyard, Roblin, Manitoba, and Spruce Grove, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition 
regarding the energy rate rebate program. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Leoville, Meeting Lake, Stranraer, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I have a petition with 
concerned citizens, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise again 
also with a petition from concerned citizens reference the 
Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from the good citizens 
of Willow Bunch, Limerick, Coronach, Lisieux, Mossbank, and 
Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) is hereby read and received. 
 
This is the petition of citizens of the province asking the 
Assembly: 
 

To abandon plans to reduce health care services in the 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. 

 
And further petitions are submitted that are addendums to 
previous petitions as of sessional papers no. 3, no. 4, no. 10, no. 
58, and no. 121. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 37 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: how many times in the past year 
did the city of North Battleford report discharges of raw 
sewage into the North Saskatchewan River to SERM as 
required by provincial regulation; and what were the dates 
of those reported discharges? 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 985 

 

I have a second question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: is SERM aware of any discharges 
of raw sewage by the city of North Battleford into the North 
Saskatchewan River which were not reported to SERM as 
required by provincial regulation; and if so, what was the 
date of those discharges? 

 
A third question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: when did SERM first become 
aware that the city of North Battleford occasionally 
discharges raw sewage into the North Saskatchewan River; 
and what specific steps has SERM taken to ensure that 
these discharges do not compromise the safety of the 
drinking water in North Battleford? 

 
A fourth question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: which Saskatchewan communities 
are currently under a precautionary drinking water advisory 
of an emergency boil-water order; and in each case, what is 
the reason for the advisory or order? 

 
And a fifth question, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on 
day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: how many times in the past year 
did any municipality report discharges of raw sewage into 
any water body to SERM as required by provincial 
regulation; and what were the dates of those reported 
discharges? 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 37 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how much agricultural land 
in acres does the provincial government currently own or 
lease; how much agricultural land in acres in Saskatchewan 
does the federal government currently own or lease; and 
how many acres of agricultural land does Ducks Unlimited 
currently own or lease in Saskatchewan? 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a written 
question also. I give notice that I shall on day no. 37 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing: how 
much funding was provided to the Office of the Fire 
Commissioner during the 2000-2001 fiscal year? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
very pleased today to stand in the House and introduce to you 
and to my colleagues here in the Assembly and to everyone 

here that’s watching the proceedings, 10 Powerview area 
students from Manitoba who are getting ready, being escorted 
by members of the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police). 
 
They’re going to be here in Regina to tour the training academy 
and other attractions in and around the Queen City. 
 
Powerview 2001, Mr. Speaker, is a project that identifies high 
school students who are interested in a career in law 
enforcement or in the justice field. I want to commend these 
young people for being here. 
 
Just a couple of comments with respect to this program from the 
previous year, some of the comments that I’d like to quote off 
the communiqué. Last year eight students were selected for this 
trip. Some of these people have never been out of Manitoba, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the comments was: 
 

When we went to where the cop cars are kept, did the guys 
ever drool; and 
 
We watched cadets in drill class and all agreed that the 
female drill sergeant yelling had a wicked voice; and 
 
The RCMP training is not all fun and games. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members of this Assembly to 
welcome these people and their chaperones who are Keven 
Burke and Tammy Burke, as well as Cst. Anthony Hernandez 
and Cst. Rudy Gegenfurtner. I hope I’ve pronounced that right. 
 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Weyburn Women of the Year Awards 
 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On May 2 the Quota 
Club of Weyburn held its Women of the Year awards luncheon. 
The Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, Her Honour Lynda 
Haverstock, was the guest speaker, and she brought a special 
prestige to the awards ceremony. 
 
I’d like to extend sincere congratulations and best wishes to this 
year’s winners of the Women of the Year awards. 
 
The award for Weyburn community service was presented to 
Linda Rydachuk. The award for exceptional entrepreneur went 
to Janet Ledingham. And the award for workplace excellence 
went to Shelley Hippe. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m particularly pleased and proud that Shelley 
received an award this year because when she was still 
attending high school, she was an employee of mine at the 
Weyburn Dairy Queen. I’m honoured to have had the 
opportunity to work with her, and I wish her, along with the 
other award recipients, much success in their future endeavours. 



986 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

Congratulations also to the Quota Club for putting on a 
first-class event and for its commitment to enhancing and 
recognizing outstanding women in the Weyburn community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

North American Occupational Safety and Health Week 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week, May 6 to 
12, is the fifth annual North American Occupational Safety and 
Health — or NAOSH — Week observed in Canada, the United 
States, and Mexico. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year too many Saskatchewan people die and 
thousands more are injured or become ill in their workplaces. 
While we can’t undo the suffering and grief caused by 
workplace illness, injury, or death, we can help prevent these 
terrible accidents from occurring. 
 
Prevention efforts such as education, training, and public 
awareness campaigns like NAOSH Week are important tools to 
help reduce the unacceptable human toll and the rising financial 
cost of workplace illnesses, injuries, and deaths. 
 
NAOSH Week reminds everyone — employers, workers, and 
the public — of the critical importance of workplace safety. 
This year’s theme, Prevention is the Cure, appropriately 
reminds us of the three rights of Saskatchewan working people. 
The three rights are: the right to know about hazards in the 
workplace, how to identify them, and how to protect 
themselves; the right to participate in occupational health and 
safety decisions; and the right to refuse work believed to be 
unusually dangerous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, safety is everyone’s business because everyone 
pays the price when there is a breakdown. I invite all hon. 
members to recognize NAOSH Week by supporting efforts to 
reduce illnesses, accidents, and deaths in our workplace. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Accomplishments of Swift Current Youth 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise in 
recognition of the accomplishments and character of Swift 
Current youth this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on Wednesday, April 25, I was honoured to be 
invited by the grade 8 students in Fairview School to participate 
in a panel, along with several local distinguished residents from 
Swift Current, to talk about what it means to be Canadian. 
 
The discussions were a part of the “So You’re Canadian, Eh” 
unit of study undertaken by the grade 8 students of Fairview 
School at the time. They asked excellent questions of the 
panellists in order to get us ready to make our presentations; 
questions that had all of us taking stock and value of our own 
Canadian citizenship. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to recognize the efforts of the 
Swift Current Comprehensive High School music department 

who, between the dates of April 25 and 30, competed in the 
Heritage Music Festival competition in Colorado Springs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you with some pride that four 
groups from the Comp High School went — the Meistersingers; 
the wind orchestra; Thursday Night Jazz Band; and the vocal 
ensemble, By Design. And each of the four groups won first in 
their respective category. 
 
So congratulations to the McLeans, the directors of the music 
program at the Comp, all of the students in the music program 
there; and to the grade 8 students at Fairview School for their 
excellent study of Canadian citizenship. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shaunavon Credit Union 
 

Ms. Higgins: — More good news for the province of 
Saskatchewan. This time it’s from Shaunavon and their local 
credit union. The Shaunavon Credit Union enjoyed a successful 
start to the millennium, reporting a banner year in 2000. 
 
This local financial institution saw its assets grow by almost 3 
million to reach 72.1 million by year-end. Mr. Speaker, member 
deposits totalled 65 million at year-end, representing an 
increase of 2.5 million from the previous year. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, total revenue for the credit union was 5 million, an 
increase from the previous year. 
 
The board also announced the approval of a 10 per cent return 
allocation to its members. A total of 462,000 is being allocated 
to members in retained equity and cash payouts. 
 
Along with the strong, positive fiscal report, the Shaunavon 
Credit Union has also continued to maintain a supportive role in 
the community. It helped sponsor and made donations to more 
than 30 different projects, events, and organizations last year 
alone. 
 
The credit union is also continuing its high school bursary 
program, handing out $2,000 worth of bursaries to students in 
the area. 
 
The credit union’s commitment to work in partnership with the 
community and its commitment to the education of 
Saskatchewan youth are both great examples of the path the 
credit union movement has always taken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, congratulations to the Shaunavon Credit Union. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Supernumerary Special Constable Sworn In 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on April 12, 2001, Mr. Will Collins was sworn in as a 
Supernumerary Special Constable by Chief Superintendent R. 
Holdright, criminal operations officer for Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Collins has been hired to work as an investigative assistant with 
the Saskatoon commercial crime section. 
 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 987 

 

He is trained as a lawyer and will be providing advice and 
taking an active role in various complex white collar crime 
investigations. Mr. Collins’s previous training and experience 
as a lawyer will benefit the RCMP in providing an enhanced 
legal perspective in their investigations. 
 
This opportunity will provide Mr. Collins with an insight into 
the RCMP and how investigations are done. He will be taking 
an active role and working closely with commercial crime 
investigators who are mandated to look into allegations of 
commercial and securities fraud, theft, counterfeiting, 
telemarketing, and other federal statutes and programs. 
 
The hiring of Mr. Collins is a pilot project designed to attract 
people with specific skills into specialized programs such as the 
commercial crime and to encourage them to pursue careers with 
the RCMP. 
 
Mr. Collins is the first legally trained person hired under this 
initiative. I would ask all MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) to join me, Mr. Collins’s father, Bill Collins, and 
Bill Collins’s partner, Teresa Lindholm, in congratulating Mr. 
Will Collins on this historic appointment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aboriginal Employment Opportunities 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to 
announce that a fourth post-secondary institution in 
Saskatchewan has signed on as a partner with the Aboriginal 
Employment Development Program. And in doing so, the North 
West Regional College will be playing an integral role in 
shaping the employment future of our province. 
 
The North West Regional College covers the entire northwest 
region of the province, including the constituency of Meadow 
Lake. Ours is a diverse population, and the college is designed 
to serve the needs of everyone. As part of its mandate, it has 
agreed to prepare its workplaces for the Aboriginal workforce 
and to work with the Aboriginal community to promote and 
provide training linked to employment. 
 
In Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, we believe that every person 
should be able to fully participate socially and economically. 
The purpose of the Aboriginal Employment Development 
Program is to increase the number of Aboriginal people in our 
workforce and to ensure that they are represented at all 
occupational levels in proportion to their numbers in the 
provincial population. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it should be emphasized that the purpose of 
this program is to enable Aboriginal people to compete for and 
gain jobs based solely on their skills and qualifications. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the AEDP (Aboriginal Employment Development 
Program) is a far-sighted program that is dealing now with the 
nature of our province tomorrow. Twenty-eight business, 
health, union, co-operative, and educational partners have 
signed on. This is very good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Unity in National Communities in Bloom Competition 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The town of Unity has 
been invited to enter into the national Communities in Bloom 
competition for communities of population from a thousand to 
3,000. 
 
The town of Unity will be competing against communities like 
Burin, Newfoundland; Cardinal, Ontario; Souris, Prince Edward 
Island; Gibbons, Alberta; Millet, Alberta; Sundre, Alberta; 
Picture Butte, Alberta; Fort Smith, Northwest Territories; 
Watson Lake in the Yukon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the national judging competition for Unity is July 
23, 2001. Two years ago, Unity won the provincial 
Communities in Bloom competition. We wish Unity the best of 
luck in the national competition. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Mobility’s Cellular Expansion 
in Rural Saskatchewan 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
rural Saskatchewan. SaskTel Mobility is investing $24 million 
over the next three years to expand its digital cellular network 
in rural Saskatchewan, resulting in a complete overlay of 
today’s analog cellular network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will be the largest expansion project ever for 
SaskTel Mobility. When the project is complete each and every 
community SaskTel currently serves with analog cellular 
service will be served with digital, offering all customers 
wireless products and services as advanced as anywhere in the 
world, Mr. Speaker. This digital service continues to 
revolutionize mobile communications. 
 
For this year, SaskTel Mobility will invest $7.7 million for 
cellular expansion in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This 
project is good news. When it is completed SaskTel Mobility 
will have invested more than $54 million dollars in our digital 
network, offering digital cellular service to more than 90 per 
cent of Saskatchewan’s population. 
 
This expansion is another example of the Crown corporations 
working for the benefit of all the people in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. This investment goes hand in hand with our 
commitment to long-term plans to provide the people and 
communities of this province with the tools they need for the 
future, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Assistance to Improve Water Quality 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Yesterday the Premier travelled to the city of 
North Battleford to meet with the mayor, members of city 
council, and discuss the contaminated water situation. 



988 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

Media reports say that the Premier said that there may be 
provincial money to help the people of North Battleford. He 
said there may be some money to help people buy bottled water 
or there may be some money to help the city deal with 
temporary solutions to the water problem, such as the water 
filtration stations being brought in from Colorado. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier detail how much money the 
provincial government is prepared to present the city of North 
Battleford to deal with their water problem and what it is to be 
used for? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to the 
House today that I did have an opportunity to meet with the 
mayor and the city council of North Battleford in addition to 
other citizens of North Battleford. 
 
I want to report also to the House that the mayor and the city 
council were appreciative of the fact that we have initiated the 
process of a judicial inquiry that will probe all of the matters 
surrounding the circumstance in North Battleford. 
 
And in conversation both with myself and the minister of 
Municipal Government, we talked about a variety of ideas that 
might assist the community of North Battleford. I cannot 
document for the House today any specifics because no 
specifics were actually presented or discussed. We talked about 
the need generally of, first of all, restoring quality drinking 
water to the people of North Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Of course the 
Premier knows that the needs are pretty immediate and I would 
hope that in light of the nature of this situation, that he wouldn’t 
ponder this for weeks and weeks and months. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week in this House during estimates, the 
Minister of Environment said that besides North Battleford and 
the towns of Battleford and Weirdale, 37 other Saskatchewan 
communities were under boil-water advisories. 
 
It is our understanding, Mr. Speaker, that several of these 
communities have been under such advisories for many months 
and people in these communities are either boiling their water 
or, like the people in North Battleford, purchasing bottled 
water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. Will the Premier be clear? Is he 
extending financial help to the people of North Battleford with 
their water difficulties, and will he be extending this offer to the 
other 37 communities in Saskatchewan who also are under 
boil-water advisories? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is a very 
serious challenge for all of Saskatchewan. In reference to all the 
communities that have boil-water advisories, I want to inform 
the House that we will continue having those boil-water 
advisories until the problem is settled. 

We will not take any risk of any community and any lives of the 
people of Saskatchewan. And if we have those boil-water 
advisories in place for the next year, they will stay in place for 
the next year, until the water is safe. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water Quality in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Environment minister. Mr. Speaker, a few minutes ago I 
tabled a number of written questions regarding the routine 
operating procedures of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management. Now given the current crisis in North 
Battleford, the minister should be able to answer these 
questions today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when did SERM first become aware that the city 
of North Battleford occasionally discharges raw sewage into the 
North Saskatchewan River? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As a minister 
I was first advised that the city was discharging sewage on 
April 30, which is roughly eight days ago. 
 
I think the most important thing that we want to also point out, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we are trying to get to the bottom of this. 
We welcome the inquiry as announced by our Premier. This is 
very important work. 
 
But in the meantime we’re going to continue working very hard 
to make sure: (a) that the city of North Battleford does not have 
the continuing health problems; and (b) that their water is safe. 
Those are our priorities. 
 
And as a government member we welcome the inquiry. We 
want to see what went wrong, where, and when. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
prior to the current problems with the North Battleford water 
supply, what specific steps did SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) take to ensure that the 
discharge of raw sewage into the North Saskatchewan River did 
not compromise the quality of the North Battleford drinking 
water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
One of the things that’s very, very important is that the inquiry 
will answer a lot of questions. And we have welcomed the 
inquiry. 
 
The most important thing here, Mr. Speaker, is that we need to 
know what happened when and where. And one of the things 
that we spoke about as a government is we called for the 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 989 

 

inquiry. Our Premier went down to the Battlefords and 
announced the inquiry — very important work. 
 
The opposition called for the inquiry and today now they’re 
saying now it’s a cover-up. So what is it? Do you want the 
inquiry to happen? If you want the inquiry to happen, the 
inquiry is going to happen. We take our role very seriously, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And what I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, is that we not play 
politics with this very important issue. This is a challenge all 
across Saskatchewan, and I would ask that member to do a 
decent thing and come on board and help us with this inquiry 
and get to the bottom of the problems with water quality in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, is 
that minister suggesting that all department operations and 
policies will be suspended for the duration of the inquiry and 
every municipality in this province will be on their own until 
then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the last thing we should 
afford this process is speculation. We have asked, we have 
asked to do a very thorough analysis of what went wrong. That 
inquiry is going to be . . . it’s going to happen. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Speaker, we are going to continue 
working with the city of North Battleford and with all the 37 
communities. And what we’re not going to do, Mr. Speaker, is 
not play politics with this whole issue. This is very important. 
 
And I ask the members opposite, please show some decency 
and let us work together to solve this particular challenge 
because it’s facing all of our communities. 
 
However, in the meantime, the inquiry’s going to happen, the 
standards are there, the SERM staff are out there now as we 
speak. We responded very, very quickly. And again the most 
important thing is we are going to make every effort possible on 
this side to make sure this doesn’t happen again. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again on a matter of routine operating policy and 
procedure where the department requires that these types of 
events be documented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many times in the past year did the city of 
North Battleford report discharges of raw sewage into the North 
Saskatchewan River to SERM as required by provincial 
legislation? And could the minister provide us with all of the 
dates of these reported discharges? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — As I’ve indicated, April 30 was the first 
time that I was notified that there was some problems with the 

manner in which they were disposing of their waste water. 
 
That being said, Mr. Speaker, I want to point out that the 
inquiry will get to the bottom of this. We have welcomed the 
inquiry. We want to see where we are able to improve our 
system as a government. 
 
Number one is I’ve always believed, and I’ll continue to believe 
that the most important point I want to make, is that our 
standards are national and we ensure that people are following 
the standards. And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, if there are some 
deficiencies, which I doubt there will be, we want to hear about 
them. We are prepared to learn from this. 
 
But the most important thing is, I would ask; let us not allow 
politics and speculation to play a role here. Let’s have some 
very broad-based facts and some solutions in front of us as 
quickly as we can so we can help all of Saskatchewan and all of 
the country lead in a fashion in which we are able to respond to 
water quality problems. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was in North 
Battleford last evening, Mr. Speaker, and the one thing that is 
very evident is, is that people want answers. And the answers 
that they are looking for today and that we are looking for 
today, Mr. Speaker, do not relate to the findings of an inquiry. 
They relate to regular, routine operating procedures and policies 
of Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management. 
 
One of the questions that was asked, Mr. Speaker, last night 
was: were any discharges of raw sewage reported to SERM 
during the period in late March and early April that the water 
treatment plant was not functioning properly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is on April 30 
we were advised that this problem was occurring. And number 
one, Mr. Speaker, is what the people of North Battleford want is 
they want to be able to ensure that the public health is not at 
risk. What the people of North Battleford want, they want to 
make sure that their water quality is safe and within standards, 
Mr. Speaker. And then they want answers as to how this 
happened. Those are the processes in which we’re working 
towards. 
 
As the government we’re going to work with the city, with the 
district health. We’re going to work in SERM. We’re going to 
make sure that we take a collaborative approach in how we can 
fix this problem right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I would suggest, I would ask that member once again, to 
not play politics or speculate on this. Allow the inquiry to do 
the work. As the Minister of SERM, I am looking forward to 
the inquiry, I’m looking forward to the inquiry to see what went 
wrong, when, and where. 
 
And what I’d also say, Mr. Speaker, this is not about scrutiny of 
the facts. This is about mutiny of decency in terms of trying to 
get to the bottom of this particular matter. And I would ask 
those members across to please, be part of that team to find 



990 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

solutions that will benefit all of Saskatchewan residents to water 
quality. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister’s 
answers are cold comfort to all the other communities out there 
who are relying on his department for guidance and for the 
regulatory leadership that they are supposed to be providing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect, with respect to the discharge that the 
minister is indicating that he is aware of. Was that discharge 
reported to the minister, Mr. Speaker, by the city of North 
Battleford? Or was he made aware of it through some other 
third party? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Once again, Mr. Speaker, April 30 was 
the day that I was advised that this problem was occurring; 
April 30 was the day that the minister was advised. 
 
And what I would again ask, Mr. Speaker, the inquiry will go 
through all these questions. The inquiry will have a lot of 
answers to the questions that people have and I welcome the 
inquiry. 
 
Now the most important thing, Mr. Speaker, is I’ve asked that 
member three or four times today, is please allow the inquiry to 
do the work. Do not allow speculation, do not allow speculation 
to dictate the value of that inquiry. Do not allow politics to get 
in the way of trying to make sure this never happens again. 
 
Let us work together to ensure safe water to all Saskatchewan 
residents. And I implore the members opposite to do exactly 
what we’re trying to do — get to the bottom of this, fix it up, 
and make sure it never happens again. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well perhaps I 
will take a little different approach. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to ask the minister when was his 
department and when were his officials aware of any discharges 
by the city of North Battleford? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve mentioned three 
or four times, April 30 was when I was first advised by my staff 
that we were advised that the sewer was being dumped into the 
river and we had to make certain of those facts, Mr. Speaker. 
That is the most important thing. And I’m prepared to share that 
information, as I’ve mentioned time and time again, with the 
media. 
 
Now what I would say to that member is this whole process, 
Mr. Speaker, in the initial stage, it should not talk about 
assessing blame, not pointing fingers, not saying this went 
wrong or that went wrong. We are not prepared to do that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
What we are prepared to do is to work with the city to make 
sure this problem is rectified and it never happens again. And 

we welcome — as the Minister of SERM —we welcome the 
inquiry, but we encourage you to not play politics, and to not 
speculate on this very challenging issue for all the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s important that people understand what the minister 
and what the department knew, and when they knew it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we now know that the minister was aware of a 
discharge a number of days ago. Mr. Speaker, did the minister 
and did any of his department officials understand, or were they 
aware of any discharges in the period in late March and early 
April, while the water treatment plant was not functioning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday we attended a 
news conference in the building here, and we explained exactly 
some of the challenges facing this whole process. 
 
And one of the things that was reported at that conference was 
that there was a document that was being forwarded by the city 
to various people interested in finding out what exactly 
happened in the Battlefords area. And I’m prepared to share that 
document at any time. 
 
What we told the media was we’re going to be open, honest, 
and accountable. We want to find out exactly what went wrong, 
where, and when. And I’m prepared to share with all those 
members across, this document that talks about that. 
 
But what I would be very, very careful on, sir, is make sure that 
you don’t speculate, and make sure that you don’t politicize . . . 
politicize the process and the problems. We want to find out 
what went wrong, when, and where, and we also want the 
inquiry to come back and give us some good, solid points in 
terms of how to rebuild our confidence with safe water in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
time after time this morning in North Battleford, the minister 
kept saying that the policies and procedures were adequate. Yet 
over the past few minutes the minister has clearly demonstrated 
he can’t answer the most basic questions about those policies 
and procedures. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely incredible. We have the biggest 
water quality crisis in Saskatchewan history, and the minister 
can’t answer basic questions about routine — routine operating 
practices and procedures, which he has declared to be adequate. 
He doesn’t even seem to know what they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the minister suggest that they are 
adequate, and how can he expect the people of Saskatchewan to 
have confidence in them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again, the report is 
here, and I’ll share it with all those members. It’s a public 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 991 

 

document. Okay. And the document says that April 30 we 
found out that there is a problem with the sewer and that is the 
point I made here about four or five times. But the most 
important point, the most important point I’m making today, 
Mr. Speaker, is this government, this Premier announced an 
inquiry and as minister I welcome the inquiry because if there 
are things that we have to learn or things that we could do 
better, we certainly want to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that’s the most important thing and I implore at this time 
all members opposite to stop playing politics and to stop 
speculating because you’re doing more damage to this process 
by doing that. Let us take a rational, common sense, together 
approach to fix this problem once and for all so all future 
generations can benefit from safe water guidelines and practices 
throughout the province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
response to the question of the Leader of the Opposition, the 
minister indicated there are currently 37 Saskatchewan 
communities under a boil-water advisory. Will the minister 
provide us with a list of all 37 of those communities and why in 
each case they are under a boil-water advisory? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the 
communities that are under a boil-water advisory or order will 
stay under the order until we’re absolutely certain that the water 
quality are within standards. We are not going to take any 
chances. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what I also said a number of times is that we 
want to make sure that the inquiry does their work, thorough 
work. We want to know what went wrong, where, when, and 
how. Open, honest, and accountable — that’s what we want, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I’ll also point out, Mr. Speaker, on two occasions — 
now this is the third occasion, Mr. Speaker — first they wanted 
the inquiry, then next day they say it’s a cover up. Then the talk 
about tax cuts, then we hire ten extra people to help with the 
water quality problems. They complain about it. Now once 
again, Mr. Speaker, they’re playing politics with a very 
important issue 
 
And I ask you, I ask you again . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to ask the minister in his total 
response to direct all remarks through the Chair please. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
aside from North Battleford, are there any other confirmed 
cases of people becoming ill due to bad water in any of these 
other communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I can say that 
we have got no official documents to suggest that, or telephone 
calls or any notices. Thank you. 
 
(14:15) 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last week there was a meeting in Winnipeg of provincial 
Environment ministers. One of the issues discussed was water 
quality. Mr. Speaker, as far as I know, the minister didn’t bother 
to attend that meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t the minister attend a provincial 
ministers’ conference on water quality? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that’s 
very important is the meeting that was held with all the 
ministers from across the country are very important meetings. 
And if the member would know, the Minister of the 
Environment was sitting here in these very Chambers 
answering questions on a number of issues facing SERM. 
 
And I think it’s very unfair, Mr. Speaker, to talk about the fact 
that we had to be here to do our duty in this Assembly and we 
could not be at a meeting a number of miles away. So it’s 
unfair, Mr. Speaker, to say why weren’t you at that meeting. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, a very important thing is that we did send our 
deputy minister and a number of other officials to that meeting 
to make sure that Saskatchewan’s interests were maintained and 
that our presentation was heard and our presence was felt, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — The minister talks about his duties to the 
Assembly. What about his duties to the people of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this seems to be a clear case of misplaced 
priorities. The NDP (New Democratic Party) has Crown 
executives globe-trotting all over the world trying to sell 
technology that doesn’t even exist. Meanwhile the Environment 
minister won’t go to Winnipeg to discuss water quality. 
 
It’s just like the ag crisis, Mr. Speaker. Once again we have a 
crisis in Saskatchewan and our minister isn’t even at the table. 
Mr. Speaker, why wasn’t he there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again, what an 
amazing opposition. Mr. Speaker, it’s an amazing opposition. 
First of all, they criticize us for hiring 10 additional people to 
talk about water quality. Secondly, they call for an inquiry and 
they say . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I think one of the things 
that’s amazing about this place is the opposition. You know this 
is a really misguided opposition, Mr. Speaker. First of all they, 
talk about the 10 people we hired for water quality testing. They 
say, oh that’s too much — fire them all. 
 
And then we ask for an inquiry and they say, oh, an inquiry is 
good. But the next day they say it’s a cover-up. 
 
And now they say why weren’t you at the meeting. Well the 



992 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

member knows very well, Mr. Speaker, I was here in the 
Assembly where I have to be, Mr. Speaker, as part of 
government. We’re answering questions in this very Assembly. 
And I think that’s not a very good tact at all for that member to 
talk about where we were instead of at a meeting. He knew very 
well we were here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And once again I would ask him, out of decency, say, please do 
not politicize or speculate on this particular issue. It’s very 
damaging. Let us work together to find solutions to these very 
strong and long-standing problems. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Statement by Member from North Battleford 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Premier, last week the member for North 
Battleford made some very serious allegations. He alleged that 
the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
officials had offered him and his wife a trip around the world in 
exchange for his silence when it came to criticizing certain CIC 
investments. 
 
Last week the Speaker ruled that this did not constitute a 
question of privilege, but that it can be brought forward in 
private members’ day. A similar case has been referred to the 
legislature in 1916. 
 
Mr. Speaker, later today I will call a motion of this Assembly to 
refer this allegation to the Standing Committee on Privileges 
and Elections for investigation. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you support our motion and allow a full 
investigation of these allegations? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to remind the member opposite about some of 
the facts and some of the occurrences that have happened in the 
past few days. And I want to begin by saying that the member 
from Battlefords has been backtracking so fast I’m afraid he’s 
going to lap himself. 
 
In this House, Mr. Speaker, he said, first of all, on hearing about 
this motion, he said that “I wasn’t bribed” — in a letter to you, 
sir. He also said that he does not want an investigation and he 
does not request an investigation. 
 
And I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, when that same 
member was asked by the media if there was ever a suggestion 
that he should take this trip and then be quiet, his quote was no, 
no, absolutely not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this is about, is this is about the opposition 
members who want to embarrass an already embarrassed 
member of this legislature. It’s nothing more than that. It’s 
nothing but petty political pricks by the members on that side of 
the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there were very serious allegations made by a member of this 

Assembly dealing with a Crown corporation. One way or 
another, Mr. Speaker, we need to find out what the truth of the 
matter is. It either impugns the members of this Assembly or it 
impugns the reputation of our Crown corporations. One or the 
other is the fact, Mr. Speaker, and we need to be able to 
determine which it is. 
 
In fact from the 1916 example, Mr. Speaker, and I quote, it 
says: 
 

. . . no particulars are given as to names, dates and . . . 
attendant circumstances. On the ground of the lack of 
specific detail, the Government would probably be justified 
in refusing to give the matter further consideration. 
(However) . . . the Minister in question, who has denied the 
allegation, prefers, however, to have it investigated and for 
that reason it has been . . . (referred) to Select Committee 
. . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, in that case again there was very little evidence 
but it was investigated to make that determination. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you allow . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member, would the member please 
rephrase his question through the Chair? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
will the Premier allow this motion to go forward and support 
the motion for an investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, what members of this 
House won’t do is be part of a political game that that member 
wants to initiate in this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he knows full well that any member of this 
legislature or any member of the general public has any, any, 
any evidence to suggest political or inappropriate activity, they 
have a responsibility to forward that to the proper process, 
which is the police. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a pick-and-choose opposition. 
There’s an issue before this province on health care. We have 
suggested a committee. We have suggested their participation. 
But, Mr. Speaker, they’ll have none of it, but they want to play 
political games with the committee that they’re suggesting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member has been backtracking. It’s not an 
issue. He has refuted every part of the allegation and, Mr. 
Speaker, that member knows it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 26 - The Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act 
 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 26, The 
Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act be now introduced and read 
the first time. 
 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 993 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 27 - The Corporation Capital Tax 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 27, The 
Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 28 - The Commercial Liens Act 
/Loi sur les privilèges à base commerciale 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 28, 
The Commercial Liens Act be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. MacKinnon: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. MacKinnon: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to the 
Assembly, through you, some very special guests in the west 
gallery. They are grade 5 and grade 7 students from Caswell 
Community School. And they’re here today with two teachers, 
Mr. Tim Gulutzan and Mr. Dion Pfeifer, and with a number of 
chaperones who are Mrs. Daelene Guttermson, Mrs. Wendy 
Loken, Mrs. Betty Myrfield, Mrs. Connie Wagner, and Mrs. 
Clothier. 
 
I would ask all members to give them a very warm welcome. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member from Saskatoon 
Southeast. Why is she on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. In 
your gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a gentleman that many of us met 
with this morning as part of the Saskatchewan Labour Force 
Development Board. 
 
He is also the sparkplug behind the FSIN’s (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) corporate circle, and I would ask 
all members to welcome Mr. Milton Tootoosis to this 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ELECTION OF DEPUTY SPEAKER 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, 
pursuant to rule 27, it is your duty at this time to elect a Deputy 
Speaker and Chair of the Committee of the Whole. The 
procedures to be used in this election are the same as those used 
to elect the Speaker. 
 
I now ask the Clerk to initiate proceedings. 
 
Clerk: — Members of the Assembly, pursuant to the 
procedures specified in Rule 27(1) and (5), the following 
members have declared their intention to stand as candidates for 
election to the Office of Deputy Speaker. 
 
The candidates are, in alphabetical order, Mr. Graham Addley, 
the hon. member for the constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
The second candidate is Mr. Ron Harper, the hon. member for 
the constituency of Regina Northeast. 
 
In preparation for the vote, the Sergeant-at-Arms will bring in 
the ballot box, it will inspected, and the sealed ballots will be 
opened. 
 
The list of candidates has been distributed to all members and 
has been posted in the polling booth. 
 
The registration Clerks will now enter the Chamber and take 
their places at the Tables. And then we will prepare for the vote. 
And I will give you that signal. Thank you. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, I will now ask those 
members who wish to cast their ballots to proceed to the 
registration table behind the bar on your respective side of the 
House, receive your ballot paper, and proceed then to the 
polling booth. 
 
And may I remind you, please, to print the first and last name of 
your candidate on the ballot paper. Thank you. 
 
The members proceeded to cast ballots. 
 
Clerk: — If there are any members who have not voted and 
wish to do so, would they please vote now. 
 
The Speaker: — All members having voted, the House will 
recess to the call of the bells while the Clerks at the Table count 
the ballots. The bells will ring for three minutes to recall the 
members to the Chamber when the results of the first ballot are 
ready to be announced. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
(14:45) 
 
The Speaker: — The House will now come to order to hear the 
results of the ballot. 
 
Members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my duty to inform 
you that you have elected Graham Addley, the Hon. Member of 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

the Legislative Assembly for the constituency of Saskatoon 
Sutherland, as your Deputy Speaker and Chair of the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Just a few comments. 
 
I’m very humbled by the trust that’s been placed in me by this 
Assembly and by the members of this Assembly. And I’m 
particularly grateful to the support, given the quality of the 
candidates that have let their names stand. 
 
And just to assure the House that I will endeavour to work as 
best as I can for all members of this Assembly as your Deputy 
Speaker. So thank you very much again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to congratulate my colleague from Saskatoon Sutherland on his 
victory here. 
 
I put on a fine campaign. I’m pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the 
campaign was intense but short and I offer my congratulations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The House will now proceed with orders of 
the day. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 4 — Allegations by the 
Member for North Battleford 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise on a very important motion today that deals with the 
integrity of this Assembly, of its members, and of its 
institutions. This is not entered into lightly, Mr. Speaker, as we 
all understand the ramifications of this kind of motion and what 
it can do, where it can lead if it is allowed to proceed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the member from North Battleford 
is quoted in a newspaper article of having made the accusation 
that there was something untoward happening during his tenure 
in cabinet, that he was approached by a representative of the 
Crown corporation. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, the headline in the newspapers read, 
on May 1, and I quote: “Hillson alleges bribe to shut up.” The 
second line of that quote, Mr. Speaker, is: “Claims CIC offered 
world excursion to MLA in exchange for silence.” End of 
quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that allegation is very, very serious. It says that the 
members of this Assembly . . . that a member of this Assembly 
has been approached to seek his silence, to not perform his duty 
as a member of this Assembly. 
 

Mr. Speaker, that allegation also contends that the approach, if 
it happened, was presented to that member by one of this 
province’s own Crown corporations. Mr. Speaker, I guess the 
questions have to be asked. Why was the minister — because 
he was a minister of the Crown at the time — approached? 
What was the Crown corporation seeking to gain if they made 
that approach? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as was debated . . . not debated last week . . . as 
was brought before the House last week and ruled by the 
Speaker that this was not a point of privilege as indeed, under 
the rules, it is not. It was not an event that occurred in this 
Assembly. It was not an event that dealt with an issue currently 
before this Assembly. Nor was it an event that dealt with the 
results of an election. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the ruling that was made last week, it did 
point out some other very interesting things. I would like to 
read from Hansard so that everyone is familiar with the 
decision that was made last week. And I quote from page 877 of 
Hansard; it’s issue no. 28A. And I quote: 
 

Before concluding the question of privilege, I want to 
address the second part of the case made by the Opposition 
House Leader. The member states, and I quote: 
 

The member for North Battleford has made allegations 
that impugn the character of every member of this 
Assembly by suggesting that members’ support on 
important issues can be bought. 
 

Although the member for . . . 
 
Again quoting from the Speaker’s ruling: 
 

Although the member for North Battleford has stated that 
he does not call the incident in question a bribe, he . . . 
(nevertheless) makes a very serious allegation. As Speaker, 
I share the concern of the Opposition House Leader and 
feel that (this matter) is a matter not to be treated lightly 
because it diminishes the respect for the House and its 
members. 
 
It is stated in Erskine May, page 112, that: 
 
Any person who is found to have offered such a corrupt 
consideration is also in contempt. 

 
Again quoting from the decision last week: 
 

When allegations or bribery or similar misconduct have 
been made at Westminster, the House of Commons has 
referred the matter either to a select or privilege committee 
for investigation. In Saskatchewan we have a comparable 
precedent. 
 
In 1916 the member for Prince Albert City made an 
allegation that certain members had been offered and had 
accepted bribes in return for political support in the House. 
The issue was referred by direct reference to a committee 
for investigation. 
 
Although I have found that this case does not constitute a 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

 

prima . . . case of privilege and therefore should not take 
precedence over all other business at this time, members 
still have the opportunity to pursue this matter further by 
submitting a motion with the proper notice. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is exactly what we have proceeded to do is to 
present a motion to this House that would deal with this issue 
and ask that the allegations be referred to the appropriate 
committee of this legislature, that being the Committee on 
Privileges and Elections. 
 
This committee has been constituted for a considerable number 
of years; it is not a new committee by any means. It is a 
standing committee of the Assembly. Members are appointed at 
the beginning of every legislature, so there are, I believe, nine 
members already appointed to sit on that committee. 
 
While I do not believe that the committee has met up until this 
time — they would have to appoint a chairman at their first 
meeting — the rules and procedures for that committee have 
already been established and outlined in our standing orders. 
It’s not a new committee, it’s not a question of what their 
mandate or reference would be, Mr. Speaker. That has been 
established by the committee. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s not a question that we have to establish a 
special committee to deal with this. It’s already in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from the House of Commons 
Procedure and Practice book as it deals with these particular 
kinds of issues. Page 67, and I quote: 
 

Thus, the House also claims the right to punish, as a 
contempt, any action which, though not a breach of a 
specific privilege, tends to obstruct or impede the House in 
the performance of its functions; obstructs or impedes any 
Member or Officer of the House in the discharge of their 
duties; or is an offence against the authority or dignity of 
the House, such as disobedience of its legitimate 
commands or libels upon itself, its Members, or its 
Officers. 

 
Further, Mr. Speaker, another quote: 
 

In that sense, all breaches of privilege are contempts of the 
House, but not all contempts are necessarily breaches of 
privilege. 

 
And that is indeed the case that we are discussing before us 
today, Mr. Speaker. While the issue at hand may not be a 
breach of privilege, I believe, Mr. Speaker, that it is a contempt 
of this House and of its members. That if the allegation of a 
bribe is true, Mr. Speaker, then that is an insult and a contempt 
to this institution and to its members and must be dealt with, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:00) 
 
The allegation has been made. If the case is not true, Mr. 
Speaker, then that would clear the Crown corporation of 
wrongdoings that have been alleged that they have performed, 
Mr. Speaker. Either way we need to investigate to determine, 
Mr. Speaker, exactly what happened. Because until that occurs, 

Mr. Speaker, the cloud of suspicion will continue to remain 
over this institution. 
 
Is it possible for members to be approached and offered 
considerations for either performing their duties in the House in 
a particular manner or for not performing their duties, Mr. 
Speaker, in the manner that they were elected to do for the 
benefit of both their constituents and the people of this 
province? 
 
The allegation presented by the member from North Battleford 
says that there is a belief that members are susceptible to 
receiving compensations for either the performance of a special 
duty or for not performing their duties as they were elected to 
do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those allegations cannot be allowed simply to remain at large 
in the public without being addressed, Mr. Speaker. Nor can the 
allegation that the Crown corporations are prepared to further 
their own interests by seeking to corrupt members of this 
Assembly and its institutions. 
 
The questions need to be asked, Mr. Speaker. They need to be 
resolved so that we know one way or another, Mr. Speaker, 
exactly what happened in this particular case. 
 
Whenever a member either carries out his function in this 
House, asks a question or fails to ask a question, the question 
will out there in the public: what is the reason that that member 
did that particular item? What is the reason they didn’t do a 
particular item? Is it because they have been approached by 
someone to not perform their duties as they were elected to do? 
 
Whenever a member of this Assembly is absent from the House 
in the performance of their duties, are they absent because they 
have received some consideration from someone that allowed 
them to be absent, that they received a consideration from the 
Crown corporation that they might have visited some location? 
 
Mr. Speaker, every time a member performs a function in this 
Assembly or outside of it, the question can always be asked, 
unless we settle this issue, what is the purpose of that member’s 
performance of his duty? Was he given a consideration to do 
so? Or was he given a consideration not to show up at a 
meeting, not to ask a question in this House? 
 
Those are very serious. It impinges on our ability, Mr. Speaker, 
to perform our duties in this Assembly. We need to be able to 
perform our duties in the Assembly, both government and 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, in the manners that we were elected to 
perform, to perform the duties that are required by the people of 
this province, to carry out our duties without undue suspicion, 
Mr. Speaker, on what our motives are. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, both sides of the House are partisan. The 
public understands that. They understand when we raise issues 
with the government that we’re doing so both for the benefit of 
the public and in a partisan manner. And the government in 
turn, Mr. Speaker, responds in the best interests of the public 
and in a partisan manner. That is expected. 
 
But when members may or may not be performing their duties 
because of outside considerations, remunerations, bribes, Mr. 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

Speaker, those allegations bring contempt on all of us. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that we be able as an 
Assembly to look at these issues and to make a determination. 
Is there any basis for the allegation made by the member for 
North Battleford? If they are, then they need to be dealt with by 
the proper authorities. 
 
If the allegations are not true, Mr. Speaker, then that needs to be 
dealt with as well by the proper authorities. And in that 
particular case, Mr. Speaker, that may very well be this 
Assembly. But that is something that the Committee on 
Privileges and Elections needs to determine and needs to 
recommend to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore I call on all members, as happened in 1916, to allow 
this allegation to go forward to the proper constituted 
committee of this legislature, the Committee on Privileges and 
Elections. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Rosthern: 
 

That the allegations made by the member for North 
Battleford in the May 1, 2001 Saskatoon StarPhoenix 
article entitled “Hillson alleges bribe to shut up” be referred 
to the Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections for 
investigation. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been a member 
of this Assembly for approximately a half dozen years and I 
think what we’re doing today, and the issue that’s in front of us 
today is without a doubt by far the most serious. 
 
A lot of the things that we deal with and we discuss and we 
make speeches on — we’re vitriolic, we’re humorous, we’re 
bombastic, and we cover up sometimes a lack of information or 
answers with those sorts of things. But this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re dealing with things of the gravest concerns. 
 
As politicians, we’ve seen all sorts of ratings where we’re rated, 
as far as respect is concerned, with other groups and other 
occupations. And I’m sorry to say, Mr. Speaker, we don’t 
always rate as well as we would like. 
 
And I think today we have an opportunity to deal with that issue 
to some extent and to ensure that the one thing that we all want 
to have left when we’re through with this Assembly, or the 
public is through with us, is our integrity. The money will be 
spent, the speeches will be forgotten, but I think we want to be 
left with our integrity. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, the very same thing goes for the civil 
servants that we have in this province, and any civil servants in 
our country. Doing a job for the paycheque, doing a job for the 
province, doing a job for the company that they work for, they 
want to be seen by the public in the same light — that they are 
doing that because they are good employees and they’re doing 
their job well. And they don’t want to have anything happen 
that will hinder that particular reputation. They want to be seen 
as hard-working, diligent, impartial, and honest. 

When I look at the headline in the paper that was already 
referred to, “Hillson alleges bribe to shut up — Claims CIC 
offered world excursion to MLA in exchange for silence,” if 
today we do not take action on this particular issue, Mr. 
Speaker, that statement, or those two statements basically is 
what we’re left with. 
 
As politicians we’re left with “Hillson alleges bribe to shut up.” 
We will never know whether when we’re opening this 
particular situation about trips being offered or not being 
offered, how often that we as politicians go on trips and we 
know there’s a purpose for them — whether it’s CPA 
(Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) trips; there are 
trips to go ahead and attend committee meetings and learn how 
things are done in other provinces, in other countries. 
 
It needs to be made very clear to the public, Mr. Speaker, that 
those are not things we were given in return for services or in 
returns to keep our mouth shut. And I think as our public 
employees do their jobs, they need to be able to go home and 
face the people on their street knowing that no one there says, I 
think this might be one of that group of individuals that offered 
a bribe. 
 
If we don’t deal with this issue, Mr. Speaker, in front of us 
today, no one in this province is going to know what really 
happened. And because of that then, Mr. Speaker, they can look 
at any of the 58 of us and wonder, is a bribe being offered. The 
only thing that we can probably be left with when we leave this 
place, Mr. Speaker, is our integrity. 
 
And so we need to take this a step further and look into the 
issue. We need to look into the allegations and see what has 
actually happened there. 
 
When I look at the reference that was referred to earlier on, 
House of Commons Procedure and Practice, between 1913 and 
1958, when we look at that particular aspect, this whole thing 
became a frivolous thing where individuals would call that 
particular point on any issue that had no validity. 
 
And so in 1958, and reading from that and Beauchesne’s from 
page 63, that particular privilege was limited. It says: 
 

Whether on the first impression the matter raised appeared 
to be a matter of privilege and whether the matter was 
raised as soon as it could have been. 

 
So it’s taken very seriously that this can only happen in certain 
particular cases. While those applied . . . And we dealt with this 
last week, Mr. Speaker. Those are the two guiding principles. 
 
If we read the headline, okay, on first look, any person in this 
province, all million of them, read, “Hillson alleges bribe to 
shut up.” That raises the difficulty. 
 
The second part, this was raised as immediately as we possibly 
could, the ruling was given, and that brought us over to where 
we are today. 
 
The question this afternoon goes to the perceived integrity of 
each one of us. Our province and our country, Mr. Speaker, is 
full of incidents that have left questions unanswered — 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

 

unanswered questions in the minds of citizens. And often we do 
not have the opportunity to defend ourselves. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, if we follow through with this motion, we 
have that particular opportunity — the opportunity to defend 
ourselves and show that the MLAs of this particular province 
do not take bribes. And we need to take that step. 
 
Let us review . . . and if we look at some of the situations that 
are hanging over the heads of politicians, and in some way they 
hang over the heads of all of us. And I won’t go into detail on 
these but I’ll just briefly mention them. 
 
And as these are mentioned, we’re all very aware that when 
these are talked at on our street at home, in the coffee shop, at a 
family reunion, and someone brings these up, and they refer to a 
politician in a different sphere, in a different province . . . but 
there’s a question that’s raised that has never been fully 
answered. And then someone looks at us with that look on their 
face, and do you do that same sort of thing? And that question 
hurts all of us as politicians today. And I repeat, Mr. Speaker, 
we have that opportunity to deal with it in specifics. 
 
We have — and it comes up on the news fairly often, and it’s a 
federal issue — the matter of the golf course and the hotel. 
None of us know for sure what happened there because that 
matter has not been settled. And therefore the possibility that 
politicians may actually be involved in these sorts of things, 
hang over all of our heads. 
 
We look at the Channel Lake situation. And there was money 
that was never totally accounted for. And people kind of say, 
well exactly where did it go, who got it, where is it? And 
because it hasn’t been fully answered, that cloud hangs over our 
heads. 
 
And one more I would like to mention. We recently had the 
statement made in one of the newspapers that a particular union 
had underwritten a political party loan — it was the NDP loan. 
Well the question comes up, what favours had to be granted, or 
were any favours granted? But just like that, that cloud hangs 
over all of our heads, not just that particular political party. 
 
But the question is asked, who signs everybody’s loans or 
anyone’s loans, and what do they get in return for it? So that 
question is there and, Mr. Speaker, we can answer that today. 
 
(15:15) 
 
We as members need to carry out the jobs that we’ve been 
elected for. We do that sometimes, as was mentioned, with a lot 
of enthusiasm. Recently, Mr. Speaker — and recently I’m 
speaking as far as history of democracy — we had in 
Saskatchewan the Conflict of Interest office set up just to 
ensure that when politicians make decisions and vote on things, 
that there isn’t something hidden out there that would influence 
how we act and react. 
 
I think that was one of those things, Mr. Speaker, that gave us a 
lot of credibility. That when people back home asked us, well 
maybe he has something to gain by it, we can say . . . All of us, 
each one of us, all 58 of us, Mr. Speaker, have had to declare 
what our financial situation is. And there are people there that 

are prepared to look at that and declare where there’s a conflict 
of interest when we make a decision, when we vote in this 
House. That was one of those things that this House did, Mr. 
Speaker, that helped in a major way to clear our reputations. 
 
This afternoon, Mr. Speaker, we can go further. We have the 
allegation made, and I’ll read it one last time, “Hillson alleges 
bribe to shut up.” None of us want that hanging over our head 
for the rest of the time that we’re going to spend in this 
Assembly. And for that reason I would hope that the members 
of this House would support the motion that is before us today. 
And it is because of that this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, that I 
would like to second the motion made by the member from 
Cannington. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to begin my remarks by first of all saying that 
I’m very pleased to enter this debate today. And I want to say to 
all members of the House and to the people of Saskatchewan 
that government members do not take this issue lightly. We 
haven’t when it was raised and we haven’t subsequent to that. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that some of the words that 
were spoken by members opposite we agree with. The 
reputation of members of this legislature and the jobs that we do 
I think are of a very high calling, and the work that we do as 
members of the legislature is very noble work. 
 
And I also want to say that I agree that not on all occasions we 
are viewed as doing positive work for the people of 
Saskatchewan, and that sometimes our motives are questioned. 
And I think I understand that, and we need to do what we can to 
ensure that we as individual members, but as importantly as 
that, we as members of caucuses, whether we’re on the 
government side or whether we’re on the opposition side, 
maintain a high level of credibility. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, in entering this debate, that 
that’s what I believe this debate is about. It’s about credibility 
and it’s about believability. And I think, Mr. Speaker, no one 
can debate that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite indicates there are times 
when questions will be raised that perhaps there is no answer 
for. And he cited a number of examples, the member from 
Rosthern, some hypothetical. And I want to say that members 
on this side of the House hear those kinds of questions raised as 
well. Some are founded, perhaps, and some are unfounded. 
 
I can recall a conversation, Mr. Speaker, that I had with a 
gentleman some years ago who said to me and asked me, is it 
true that the Saskatchewan Party is funded by the two and a half 
million dollars that was left in the PC (Progressive 
Conservative) metro fund? And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
a legitimate question. 
 
I don’t know the answer to that, Mr. Speaker, but I want to say 
that it’s one of the issues that are outstanding, as issues were 
cited by the member from Rosthern, that gives some question to 
the credibility, Mr. Speaker, of members and of caucuses. And I 
want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that that is not the kind of 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

question that we want out there without answer. 
 
But I want to speak today specifically, Mr. Speaker, to the 
motion put forward by the Opposition House Leader. Now I 
know that we’ve all followed the media in the past few days 
and we all understand the partisanship that takes place in this 
legislature. And we all understand, Mr. Speaker, as well, that 
opposition members would like nothing more than to embarrass 
the member from Battlefords. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, there are far more important 
issues in North Battleford right now and there are far more 
important issues facing this province right now. And I want to 
say, Mr. Speaker, although the words were noble by both 
members, and claim that the actions are not of a partisan nature, 
we all know better than that. But I also want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have no intentions of being part of the 
opposition’s political gamesmanship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t see how supporting this motion would 
benefit the people of this province. I can’t see how supporting 
this motion would benefit the need for some dialogue and some 
solution with respect to health-care matters that have been put 
before members of the legislature and the people of 
Saskatchewan as a result of the Fyke report. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, on one hand members of the legislature on 
the opposition side are very anxious to introduce this motion 
that would bring the Privileges Committee to work. And on the 
other hand, they vehemently oppose any involvement in a 
committee that would listen to the people of Saskatchewan with 
respect to their comments as it relates to Mr. Fyke’s 
Commission that makes some recommendations in terms of 
health care. 
 
So I want to say, Mr. Speaker, not partisan? I think not. Totally 
partisan and clearly partisan, and shouldn’t be misrepresented 
for being anything other than what this motion is. And it’s pure 
Saskatchewan politics — Saskatchewan Party politics, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I said this has something to do with 
credibility, and I want to speak to the issue of credibility. I think 
there’s no doubt that people understand the member from 
Battleford’s history as it relates to these kinds of issues and 
statements that he would make, Mr. Speaker. I think we all 
remember back to the bouts of reality loss that that member has 
faced. And I mean who can forget his ridiculous comments in 
an attempt to link the company who purchased Channel Lake 
Petroleum with the Russian mafia. Mr. Speaker, he wanted 
everyone in this province to believe the Russian mafia was 
hiding under everyone’s bed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite are chirping, and 
that’s fine. I was quiet as they delivered their comments, and I 
expect the same from them when I am speaking. But if that’s 
not to be, I’ll speak over top of them. 
 
But I want to remind members opposite of that delusional 
episode and how much money that cost the Legislative 
Assembly in that action, Mr. Speaker. These outrageous 
comments cost the Legislative Assembly a $33,000 legal bill. 
 

And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that we’re not interested in 
adding to the costs incurred by comments made by the member 
from Battleford. That’s not what we’re about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this member has been back-pedalling since the 
media reported that, that very morning. Mr. Speaker, I think 
that member has been reversing himself so quickly, as I said a 
little early today, if he’s not careful, he may in fact lap himself. 
 
So what’s happened? Let’s look at the facts, Mr. Speaker. What 
happened since that newspaper article that is quoted in the 
Opposition House Leader’s motion today? And I want to quote: 
 

The allegations made by the member for North Battleford 
in the May 1, 2001 . . . StarPhoenix article entitled “Hillson 
alleges bribe to shut up” be referred to the Standing 
Committee on Privileges and Elections. 

 
And that’s what they’re asking. That “Hillson alleges bribe to 
shut up,” — that headline was the basis for their argument. 
 
Now what has happened subsequent to that newspaper article 
on May 1? Let’s consider the facts. Firstly, the member from 
North Battleford, when he heard about the opposition’s motion 
to refer this to the committee, stated clearly and unequivocally 
that he was not bribed. And I want to state what his quote was, 
Mr. Speaker: “The word bribe never crossed by lips, but was 
added by the media.” So, Mr. Speaker, that’s one issue, and 
that’s one area where there’s been a change. 
 
And what happened as well, Mr. Speaker, in the same statement 
to the Assembly, the member from Battleford indicated that he 
doesn’t want an investigation, and I quote: “I do not want an 
investigation.” 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, when he was asked outside of this 
legislature by the media whether there was ever any suggestion 
that he should take this trip and then be quiet, I want to read 
again into the record what his answer was. His answer was: “no, 
no, absolutely not.” 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that member’s position, the member 
from Battlefords position is quite clear. He’s been backtracking 
ever since he made these unfortunate statements outside of this 
legislature. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, so the question here, I believe, is one of 
credibility. This member has a track record. We should not 
forget that. And it would appear very much, to me, that this is 
another example of what occurred some time ago when he had 
to apologize for comments he made in a legislative committee 
with respect to allegations of a company incorporated in this 
province, and ties to the Russian mafia. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think the issue of credibility is quite clear. 
The issue of credibility is very clear. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that members on that side of 
the House used a headline in one of the major papers in this 
province as a reason to refer this issue to a committee. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, there are headlines that stand on the other side of 
that issue as well. And I want to quote from the Prince Albert 
Daily Herald, the fifth of the fourth of 2001, and the headline 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

 

is, “Hillson should put up or shut up on CIC.” That’s the 
headline. That’s the headline, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that might be a very valid and legitimate request. And why 
I say that, Mr. Speaker, is if the member from Battlefords or 
any member on that side of the House has any evidence of 
criminal activity or impropriety of an official of the Crown 
Investments Corporation or of any arm of executive 
government, they have a responsibility, Mr. Speaker, they have 
a duty. 
 
And what is that duty, Mr. Speaker? If there is evidence and if 
the evidence is clear, they have the responsibility to refer it to 
the police. Mr. Speaker, that is quite clear. 
 
Now we can debate here the validity and the role of that 
member as it relates to cabinet and what the function of a 
cabinet minister is as he sits or she sits on the board of a Crown. 
And we can describe what might be appropriate activity in 
terms of investigation of assets of that Crown, how they 
function, how they operate. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I say what we have here is no more or no less 
than a delusion. That’s what this is. We have an MLA who left 
the government, left the cabinet, and sits as an independent. 
And quite clearly, that member is starved for media attention. 
That’s what this is about; that’s what this is about. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that 
we are not interested in satisfying the approach that this 
member has taken with respect to this issue at all. I say this: if 
there is evidence of impropriety or wrongdoing, let that member 
take it forward to the police, and let the police investigate. And 
if there is improper action, let the results of that be determined 
in the courts. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are some things that members on this side of 
the House are interested in, and I want to tell you what they are. 
They’re in finding resolve to some of the issues as it relates to 
health care. And we’re concerned about the unfortunate 
circumstances in North Battleford that need this government’s 
and need this province’s and need the people of this province’s 
attention. Those are priorities, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we’re 
sent here. 
 
Members opposite can play their silly little games, and they 
will. And they will, and they do, and we’ve got evidence of that 
every day in this House, but they shouldn’t try to disguise them 
for any more or any less than what they are. To stand here and 
talk on the moral high ground with respect to this particular 
issue, Mr. Speaker, I think is not appropriate. Because people 
know what it is, they see it for what it is, and they see those 
members for what they are, Mr. Speaker. And that’s why 
they’re rapidly losing respect in this province, because it’s one 
issue after another. 
 
They want the Committee on Privileges and Elections to hear a 
non-issue, and at the same time they refuse to be involved in a 
committee that would hear the people of Saskatchewan with 
respect to the Fyke Commission and its report and 
recommendations with respect to health care. 

So, Mr. Speaker, people know who they are and, Mr. Speaker, 
people know what they are. They’re a very partisan group of 
men and women who seek nothing but political power at any 
cost. But, Mr. Speaker, I want to say that members of this side 
of the House will have no part of their political gamesmanship 
and their political opportunism. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I indicated in my 
remarks last week that we would abide by your ruling, and that 
we respected your ruling, and that we took this matter seriously, 
and we do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, following this thing from the 
day it started, it became very, very clear that this was a delusion 
created by a member who perhaps mis-spoke himself outside of 
this House. And, Mr. Speaker, I think if there’s evidence of 
criminal activity or wrongdoing on behalf of any official, I’ve 
said before, in terms of their employment in this government, if 
there’s any shred of evidence, if there’s any shred of credibility 
to that member, then every one of those members have a 
responsibility to forward that information to the RCM police or 
to the city police and that’s the process, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
appropriate in this case. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are not going to involve ourselves in a 
committee that will cost the taxpayers of this province 
thousands and thousands of dollars to no end — to satisfy their 
political desires. Mr. Speaker, we’re not about that and we’re 
not into that. 
 
And members should not count on members on this side of the 
House to be supporting this motion because we know what it is. 
It’s nothing more than cheap political gamesmanship. Mr. 
Speaker, this House has more important issues to deal with than 
the politics of members on that side of the House and the little 
tricks that they want to play in this legislature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re focused, Mr. Speaker, on passing what was the best 
budget in the province. 
 
We’re focused on reducing the small-business tax by 25 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker, which is what this budget does. 
 
We’re focused on passing a budget that will include a large 
increase for education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re focused, Mr. Speaker, on changing this province into a 
have province, developing this economy and building on this 
economy. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we have little time 
for actions of members on that side of the House as it relates to 
this motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the issue is clear. You have a member who 
has lost credibility across this province. You have a member 
who may have, Mr. Speaker, misspoken himself. I can’t speak 
for him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say there is no evidence. There is nothing to 
substantiate what may have been allegations with quickly 
backtracking. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I’m saying that 
members of this House will not support this motion. 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

I therefore move, Mr. Speaker, the debate on this motion be 
now adjourned. 
 
The division bells rang from 15:36 until 15:46. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 

Calvert Kasperski Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Thomson Prebble Belanger 
Crofford Axworthy Nilson 
Hamilton Junor Addley 
Jones Higgins Harper 
Trew Osika Lorjé 
Yates McCall  
 

Nays — 22 
 

Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Krawetz Draude Gantefoer 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken McMorris D’Autremont 
Weekes Bjornerud Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Huyghebaert   
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Motion No. 5 — Strategy for Early Childhood Development 

 
Mr. Prebble: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to enter into this 
important debate on early childhood intervention. And at the 
end of the debate, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be moving a motion: 
 

That this Assembly work with the Government of 
Saskatchewan to implement the Strategy for Early 
Childhood Development, a program built on initiatives 
begun with the Child Action Plan, a program that will 
support the healthy growth and development of 
Saskatchewan children. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what I’d like to do this afternoon is outline first 
the government’s plan for a significant investment on behalf of 
our children in this province, an investment that sees an 
intervention in the early years of life of our children, Mr. 
Speaker, and particularly children at risk. 
 
And I’d also like to talk, Mr. Speaker, about some of the 
benefits that we expect that this investment will result in. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to address the question of 
other initiatives in the future that we may look at taking in this 
early childhood intervention arena. 
 
But first, Mr. Speaker, let me say a word about the child action 
plan which essentially this new early childhood development 
initiative builds on. Because, Mr. Speaker, our child action plan 
is, I think, one of the real contributions that we have made on 

the national stage in the last decade since our government was 
elected in 1991, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The child action plan is a long-term strategy to enhance the 
well-being of Saskatchewan children, youth, and families. And 
essentially, Mr. Speaker, this action plan has first of all focused 
on reducing poverty in our province. 
 
For instance under the child action plan, we’ve initiated the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit and the Saskatchewan 
Employment Supplement, which have helped to take many 
work . . . low-income working families with children in the 
home to a higher income level and often an income level above 
the poverty line. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, the child action plan has focused on 
enhancing family literacy, fighting the sexual abuse of children 
on the streets, and it is also — and this is what I particularly 
want to focus on this afternoon, Mr. Speaker — it has also 
provided dollars to expand investments for early childhood 
development and for children at risk. So those are some of the 
areas that the child action plan has focused on. 
 
One of the examples of an initiative that’s gotten a lot of 
attention, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the investments that we’ve 
made in programs . . . in school lunch programs to help feed 
children, particularly at some of our elementary schools and 
also in other community contexts where children are not getting 
three good meals a day. And the funding through the child 
action plan has helped to finance nutrition programs and 
feeding programs. 
 
So those are some examples of areas that the child action plan 
has contributed to, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And what I’d 
particularly like to focus on this afternoon is the contribution 
that we’re now planning around a much more expanded 
initiative in the area of early childhood development, early 
children intervention, particularly focused on children at risk. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think traditionally in our province 
we’ve tended to focus our investments on children in the later 
years of life. So apart from the time of birth itself, we’ve not 
tended to invest heavily in the preschool years; rather our 
investment has tended to start at kindergarten and then, of 
course, throughout the elementary and high school years. 
 
And much of the evidence and research that’s built up in the 
last two decades increasingly points to the fact that we’ve been 
missing the boat and that our opportunity to have the greatest 
impact in terms of child development is in the very early years 
of life — in the first five years of life and particularly in the 
first three years of life, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when there’s a 
great deal of brain development. 
 
Most of the brain development in a child happens in the first 
three years of life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And therefore it makes 
sense to invest in those early years, and traditionally 
governments at the provincial and federal level have not done 
that. And what this early childhood initiative that we’re 
discussing this afternoon represents is an important investment 
in those years, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The research also demonstrates, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

 

benefits to taxpayers by investing in these early years is very 
significant. For every dollar that is invested in these early years, 
we can expect a return of $7 in terms of future savings to 
taxpayers. 
 
So if we invest in children when they are one, two, three, four, 
and five, we can expect to see for every dollar we spend, $7 of 
savings later on in terms of expenditures on the justice system, 
expenditures on social assistance, expenditures in health care 
later on in life. So there’s a lot of long-term savings with this 
kind of an investment, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And therefore I 
think it’s good for our children and good for all the taxpayers of 
this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to give some examples of the 
sort of cost that we face right now when we don’t support, when 
we don’t provide a high level of support to children at risk. And 
I want to just give two examples of children at risk in our 
communities and how difficult it is once children reach an older 
age, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if interventions haven’t been made 
early, how difficult it is to break the cycle of poverty in our 
communities. 
 
One of the things that we’re finding in this province, for 
instance, is that if children are in the care of a foster parent or 
the child welfare system, generally, 76 per cent of those 
children, when they’re adults, are likely to rely on social 
assistance at some point in their lives. That’s a pretty staggering 
statistic, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Similarly, of young offenders who are involved in the justice 
system, when they become adults, 69 per cent of them are going 
to rely on social assistance at some point in their lives. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are examples of two groups of youth 
in our community — older teens — one group who is in the 
care of the Minister of Social Services in a foster home; the 
other group who has gotten into trouble with the justice system 
and have had young offender status who, when they go on into 
their adult lives, find that for a significant portion of their life 
they end up relying on social assistance at much, much higher 
rates than the average citizen in our province. 
 
And that demonstrates how tough this cycle of poverty, once it 
starts, is to break, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’s why we’re of 
the view that we have to start early in our interventions. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have been investing through the 
child action plan in Saskatchewan over the last decade, 
significantly, in the area of early childhood development. And 
our potential to invest even more significantly in this area is 
now enhanced by the announcement of the federal government 
last year that they were willing to contribute financially to early 
childhood development initiatives across Canada. 
 
And so in Saskatchewan we’ll be receiving $10 million in new 
money this year from the federal government. For the first time 
we’re seeing an important federal contribution in this field. And 
we have made a decision as a government to take a coordinated 
approach between the Department of Health, Education, 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs, and Social Services 
to launch an expanded early childhood development initiative in 
Saskatchewan. 

And we’re going to . . . I wanted to say a word about the goals 
of this initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Because the focus is 
going to be on high-risk children, and we want to try to ensure 
that those children are born healthy and that to the greatest 
extent possible they remain healthy throughout their childhood 
and throughout their lives. 
 
We also want to support the families of those children, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . 
 
(16:00) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, a quorum call please. 
 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, a quorum is 
present. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, as I was saying, our goals in this early childhood 
development initiative are to give support to high-risk children 
and high-risk families with respect to enhancing their health, 
supporting the functioning of those families, reducing abuse and 
injury and the risk of disability and disease for these children, 
and ensuring that children who are at risk in our province have 
access to comprehensive and an integrated system of supports 
and services. 
 
So that is, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what we’re hoping to achieve 
here. And I want to say a word about the group that we’re 
trying to reach. And we’re hoping, I might say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, in the first year of this new initiative, to reach at least 
900 children who are at risk and to provide home visitation 
supports to about 500 children. 
 
I want to say that we’re focusing here on families and their 
children who are hard to reach. For instance, we’ve found that 
there is approximately 6 per cent of mothers in our province 
who don’t access any prenatal care during pregnancy. So that 
will be an example of a group of mothers in our province that 
we’re particularly trying to target and provide supports to. 
 
We’re also wanting to provide supports to teens who, of course, 
are having children early in life. Those teen mothers particularly 
need support, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And that’ll be another group 
that we’re targeting in this early childhood development 
initiative, is the children of those teen mothers and support for 
the mothers themselves. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to provide support to 
families that have a history of substance abuse, violence, and 
have had serious problems with addictions in the hope that we 
can reduce the incidence of domestic abuse in home situations. 
 
I might say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this initiative in part is 
modelled on work that has been done in some US (United 
States) states, and particularly the state of Hawaii where, 
through a home visitation and support program to high-risk 
families, rates of domestic abuse in the home have been sharply 
reduced by in excess of 70 per cent. And we’re going to be 
trying to achieve similar results here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in an ideal world we’d be able to 
provide these support services to the entire province. But as has 
been the case with other jurisdictions that have begun this kind 
of an initiative, we’ve started by targeting communities that we 
believe are . . . would most benefit from these services. 
 
So part of this early childhood development initiative will be 
province-wide. For instance, there’ll be universal screening of 
all children at birth to identify children that might particularly 
benefit from supports. But many of the specific programs under 
this initiative will be targeted at those communities that are . . . 
where it’s believed that it would be the greatest number of 
families who would benefit from the service. 
 
So communities have been selected based on the incidence of 
poverty in communities; communities with very high poverty or 
neighbourhoods with very high poverty have been given 
priority. Also we’ve been looking at neighbourhoods and 
communities where there’s been a high incidence of low birth 
weight, children born at birth with very low birth weights. 
 
We’ve been looking at communities and neighbourhoods where 
there’s been a particularly high rate of infant hospitalization, 
where there’s a very high incidence of families headed up by a 
single parent member, and we’ve taken all those kind of factors 
into consideration in targeting neighbourhoods and 
communities that are going to be our first priority in terms of 
benefiting from this early childhood development initiative, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what these communities will receive is more support in 
terms of preschool programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. More 
support in terms of daycare initiatives, daycare spaces. More 
support in terms of home visitation from lay workers who’ll be 
hired to visit families that are believed to be at particularly high 
risk and to provide those families with the kind of support that 
they need to raise their children in a healthy way. 
 
Now some of the communities that will be benefiting from this 
initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, include the communities of 
North Battleford and Nipawin, Moose Jaw, Meadow Lake, and 
Yorkton. All of northern Saskatchewan will receive these 
additional services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And then also some of the higher-risk neighbourhoods in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert where there’s a higher 
percentage of families where children are believed to be at some 
risk are also going to receive the support. That will include four 
neighbourhoods in Regina, six neighbourhoods in Saskatoon, 
and two in Prince Albert, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the approach that we’re hoping to use, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the approach that the government will be taking is, 
first of all, more attention in terms of prenatal outreach and 
screening. We’re particularly interested in reaching out, as I 
mentioned earlier, to the 6 per cent of women who we know 
right now don’t access any prenatal care during their pregnancy. 
 
There’ll be a universal screening service provided. All babies 
born in Saskatchewan hospitals will be screened to help identify 
those facing challenges such as poverty, low education levels, 
single parenthood, or dependence on social assistance. And 
those who are determined to be at higher risk will be given 

priority for follow-up support. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the focus will then be on home visiting. 
As I said, these visits will be done by lay workers, 
non-professionals from the community. And these visitors to 
families will be non-judgmental, and they’ll offer support and 
advice, helping parents access programs, wherever there’s an 
interest by the parent in doing that, to ensure the best possible 
development of their children. 
 
And these home visitors, Mr. Deputy Speaker, will also be 
offering friendly advice and support in helping parents of young 
children to develop their parenting skills and to overcome many 
of the challenges that one faces in the early years of parenting. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through this program 
which we’re calling Kids First, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’ll be 
additional support in terms of early learning opportunities, both 
through the expanded daycare spaces that I made reference to 
earlier and also through the enhancement of early learning 
programs for four- and five-year-olds in a preschool setting. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’ll be investments 
to support parents in terms of literacy training, nutritional 
counselling, and parenting programs. 
 
And all communities in Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
will benefit from some aspects of this initiative in the sense that 
there will be community developers hired who will work with 
communities to align existing programs and services and make 
sure that they are being accessed by all families that have 
particular needs. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re looking here then at an 
enhancement of prenatal services which will focus on things 
like preventing fetal alcohol syndrome, preventing fetal alcohol 
effect. We’re looking at the establishment of home visiting 
services to support families and to also connect them to 
important services in our community. 
 
We’ll be looking at an expansion of daycare services in 
neighbourhoods that are given priority in this early childhood 
development initiative, and we’re hoping this year to create at 
least 195 additional licensed child care spaces. And then we’re 
hoping to increase access to early learning opportunities in the 
neighbourhoods and communities that are targeted by this 
program. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to say a few words about 
some of the outcomes that we’re hoping for in terms of this 
investment. We’re hoping of course to improve parenting skills 
in families that often don’t have a lot of experience in parenting 
and may have come out of family situations themselves which 
were very difficult. We’re hoping, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
improve the lives of parents and to increase parental 
participation in both schooling and in the workforce. And of 
course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re hoping for some significant 
gains in terms of the lives of children themselves. 
 
So we’re hoping that through these initiatives, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, children will receive better grades when they enter into 
school, that there will be more children from families in . . . 
who are living in difficult circumstances that will be successful 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

 

in graduating; fewer children that will ultimately rely on social 
assistance; fewer children getting into trouble with the law; and 
much lower rates of domestic abuse and neglect in the home, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I might say in this regard that we are optimistic in light of 
the success that those US states that have made this kind of 
investment have achieved, particularly with respect to lower 
rates of domestic abuse and neglect in the home. As I was 
saying earlier, the case of the state of Hawaii, we saw 
reductions of as much of 70 per cent in many parts of the state. 
 
Now I want to say a word, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about how this 
program would be delivered, because the plan essentially is that 
the province has selected the communities where this program 
will be particularly targeted and we’re going to be allocating the 
funding by community. And as I mentioned earlier, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re hoping to invest $10 million in this first year of 
the initiative, and we’re hoping that by year four and five we’ll 
see an investment of as much as $16 million per year. 
 
We’ll be setting the overall policy and direction obviously for 
this initiative. But at the local level, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re 
hoping that Aboriginal government will play an important role 
in the planning and delivery of these services. We’re going to 
be fostering partnerships between our health districts, our 
school divisions, Aboriginal government, and of course, 
departments like Social Services and Education in terms of this 
work. 
 
And we expect the service delivery to take place at the local 
level, and we’re going to be encouraging an integrated approach 
by community organizations and local governments in terms of 
setting local priorities and delivering these services. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Let me just say a word, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the broad 
allocation of the monies for this year. We’re hoping to spend 
approximately 45 per cent of this year’s funding on supporting 
the home visitation program, which we really see as the core of 
this initiative. It’s the support that visitors in the home, 
knowledgeable visitors in the home, will provide to families at 
risk that I believe will make the greatest difference in terms of 
the successful functioning of those families and the kind of 
support that’s needed for them to raise healthy children in a 
successful way. 
 
We’re going to be investing about one and a half million dollars 
in the early learning initiatives in this early childhood 
development thrust, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we’re also 
hoping to invest approximately the same amount, about one and 
a half million dollars, in expanded child care. In addition, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, there will be an expansion of pre-kindergarten 
spaces where we’re hoping to invest at least another $200,000. 
 
And an expansion of the early childhood intervention programs 
which I believe these ECIP (Early Childhood Intervention 
Program) programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, play a very important 
role in our communities across this province. Working with 
children who have disabilities, diagnosed disabilities, and 
providing support to parents in terms of how to help their 
children, at least partially, overcome the disability and lead the 

fullest life that they possibly can. And again we found in these 
ECIP programs, which are targeted at children with disabilities, 
that intervening early makes a huge difference in the life of the 
child and their success later in life. So there will be an 
important investment there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are some examples of how we’ll be investing the $10 
million that I made reference to earlier that provides the overall 
funding framework for this initiative. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to provide an opportunity for 
other members who may wish to enter the debate to do that. 
 
But what I want to do is, in having explained the central 
framework of this initiative, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is make 
reference to, well some of the other important work that’s being 
done in terms of supporting children, and particularly children 
at risk in our province. And also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to 
make a few comments about where we might go in terms of 
building on the very good work that’s already been done 
through the child action plan. And this new initiative which I’m 
extremely excited about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because I think 
this is an expenditure of money that’s going to make a really 
concrete difference in the lives of many families across our 
province. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the things that our 
government has announced this year is that effective January 1, 
2002 — so towards the end of the fiscal year that we’ve just 
started — effective January 1, 2002, the child tax credit will be 
increased from $1,500 per child to $2,000 a child. And that’s 
something that will benefit every family with children, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. That’s an important initiative. 
 
I also want to say that . . . I want to report to the House on the 
difference that the investments in the children’s action plan 
have made in terms of reducing poverty in our province. And 
again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to say that we have 
now been the . . . last year we were the only province that 
showed a reduction in its rate of child poverty, and we’ve now 
had several consecutive years of reduction so that we’ve been 
able to take the child poverty rate down to about 18.7 per cent. 
There was a time just a few years ago when it was well in 
excess of 20 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so we are making 
some progress on that file. But it’s also clear that much more 
needs to be done. 
 
I want to give an example of the kind of concrete help that the 
investments that Saskatchewan has made in terms of tackling 
child poverty as part of the overall child action plan has resulted 
in. For instance, before the introduction of the National Child 
Benefit that we championed here in this province under the 
leadership of our former premier, Mr. Romanow, a 
Saskatchewan single parent with one child, working 32 hours a 
week at minimum wage, had an annual disposable income of 
$11,160. After the introduction of the National Child Benefit, 
including the Saskatchewan Child Benefit, and the 
Saskatchewan employment supplement, this same single parent 
with one child could now receive an annual disposable income 
of $14,760 from working in the same job at the same wage. 
 
Now here’s an example, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of a family that’s 
now $3,600 a year better off as a result of the kind of initiatives 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

that this government has launched in Saskatchewan and has 
persuaded the federal government to launch at the national 
level. And I think that is progress, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in a 
very concrete way. 
 
Now I want to say that if we are going to reduce the number of 
children at risk in our communities, I’m of the view that we 
have to go even further in terms of addressing poverty. What 
the early childhood development initiative is going to do, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is it’s going to help provide a lot of support to 
families in terms of improving parenting and it’s going to invest 
in reducing the risks that children face in many ways. But what 
it’s not going to do is provide families that need yet additional 
financial help with the kind of financial help that they need. 
 
And it’s my experience, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that many, many 
of the families that are at the highest risk are families who are 
on social assistance. I see frankly only two ways of providing 
those families with additional financial assistance. The most 
promising way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to provide those 
families with enhanced opportunities for employment and 
enhanced income supplements when they’re successful in 
getting jobs to make sure that they all live above the poverty 
line. 
 
The second approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker, which I believe we 
have to consider, more so than we’ve done today, is the need to 
increase social assistance rates for families with children in our 
communities because the practical reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
is that in some areas of the rate structure there’s been no change 
now for almost two decades. And in terms of the clothing 
allowance, the allowance for shelter, the allowance for food, 
those things have not changed for a very, very long time. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that until we decide, and I 
know this is not the most popular thing from an electoral point 
of view, but until we decide that we’re going to reinvest in our 
social assistance program and move families up, not necessarily 
to the poverty line but closer at least to the poverty line. We are 
going to continue to see a very disturbing level of family 
dysfunction in some of the higher risk neighbourhoods in our 
communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
In my home city of Saskatoon the rate of child poverty among 
the group of children that we’re considering here now, children 
zero to five, the rate of child poverty is 31 per cent. And this 
cannot be addressed just through this kind of early childhood 
development initiative. 
 
I think this needs to be addressed through an investment in 
employment opportunities for these families, and also where 
employment opportunities are not possible, which is the case in 
many families that may be headed by a single mother with 
several preschool children in the home, or headed by a parent 
who’s disabled, headed by a parent that’s got fetal alcohol 
syndrome or fetal alcohol effect. In many cases, full 
employment may not be an option for these families. And I 
believe we need to look at higher social assistance rates for 
them. 
 
I also want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I am very excited 
about the initiative here, that we’re talking about this afternoon, 
as it pertains to expansion of preschool programs and expansion 

of daycare programs. And I think we would do well to look at 
going beyond the enhancements we’re now planning and try to 
ensure that we have a high-quality preschool program and a 
high-quality daycare program with a much higher level of 
access to licensed daycare in the province as a real foundation 
of government planning, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We’re serious about investing in the preschool years. We need 
to look at expanding licensed daycare even further than this 
initiative proposes. And we need to look, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
at expanding our investment in preschool even further than the 
initiative proposes. 
 
So I think this initiative is an excellent start and I hope it’ll pave 
the way for an even greater investment. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s time for me to stop. But 
I’m very excited about this initiative and it’s my pleasure to 
move the motion. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is with a 
great deal of pride that I stand this afternoon to second the 
motion of the member from Greystone. Connecting to our 
future depends greatly upon enhancing the development of our 
children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In our early childhood development strategy, there’s a 
comprehensive, long-term plan to do just that, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
to ensure that children from birth to age five get the very best 
possible start in life, Mr. Speaker. That we do all we can to help 
children be the most productive citizens they can in our 
communities. 
 
The strategy will support the healthy growth and development 
of children in many ways. It will provide intensive support to 
high-need families through initiatives, partnerships among 
families, communities, schools, health districts, Aboriginal 
organizations, and of course, the government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Our strategy is a new approach to delivering services 
for high-needs families. It sets out long-term goals and actions 
and will guide our efforts and commitments to measure and 
report on progress towards these goals each year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we started down this path with a vision, a vision 
of what we want for our children and for our children’s futures, 
Mr. Speaker. Our vision is that vulnerable children enjoy a 
good start in life and are nurtured and supported by caring 
families and communities. 
 
And that’s premised on a couple of things, Mr. Speaker: that 
our children and our communities are the responsibility of the 
entire community; that we all need to work to help children to 
be the best that they can be — that they’ll develop to their full 
potential, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have a number of goals in this program, Mr. Speaker. We 
want to see that high-risk children are born healthy and remain 
healthy throughout their lives. That we, as a government, do 
what we can to help those children in high-risk situations, to get 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1005 

 

those services to their parents in the prenatal stages, Mr. 
Speaker, and through the early years of their life. 
 
(16:30) 
 
We want to make sure that high-risk children are supported and 
nurtured by healthy, well-functioning families. That for a young 
child to develop properly and to nurture within our community, 
you must have a well-functioning family, with a family unit 
that’s working towards the goal of having healthy children and 
keeping healthy children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We want to help high-risk children able in their ability to learn 
and cope and solve problems as they encounter them, Mr. 
Speaker. And we want to make sure that high-risk children are 
free from abuse, injury, disability, disease, and death. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are gauged by how we deal with our children. 
Children are the most important thing to all parents. They’re 
very important to our communities. And those of us who are 
parents, which many of us from both sides of this Assembly are, 
know how important our children are to us. And we want every 
child in our communities to have the same potentials as we 
want for our own children, Mr. Speaker, and that’s very 
important. We care about children. There isn’t a single member 
in this Assembly that doesn’t care about their children and the 
children in our communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want high-risk children to have access to 
comprehensive, integrated, and developmentally sequential 
systems of supports and services. We want them to have those 
services they need when they need them, Mr. Speaker, and with 
the access that they believe they should have, and our 
communities should deliver to them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For we are going to endeavour, Mr. Speaker, to work to put in 
progress a program that’s going to increase and enhance the 
lives of all children in the province, but in particular will 
identify those children at most risk, and provide special services 
to those communities, and to those parents and families that 
most need it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what our budget this year did. 
Our budget put forward a number of initiatives to help children 
and families in our communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And this 
government stands behind its strategy for children in early 
childhood intervention and development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This strategy brings together several departments of 
government — Health, Education, Social Services — and 
combines their efforts and resources and commitment and 
energy towards one objective, ensuring that all Saskatchewan 
children have a healthy start, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we all 
want our children to have a healthy start in life, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
We all know that early intervention improves the chances of 
success for our children; that those vital services that children 
get at their earliest possible point in their lives will determine 
their success in future years. And this is the fundamental 
principle behind the early childhood strategy that builds on our 
success in the Action Plan for Children. 
 

The early childhood development strategy focuses on special 
services for children with serious health, education, or 
developmental challenges, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in communities 
where they need the services . . . the need for those services, 
pardon me, are exceptionally high. Helping the children who 
most need the help is putting our values to work. That’s the 
Saskatchewan spirit and the way we do things within our 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The early childhood development program will ensure that all 
babies born in Saskatchewan hospitals, and their families, will 
be screened for risk factors that may affect the child’s 
development. It will provide intensive support services for 
high-risk children and the families in need, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Early childhood development will be employed across the 
province to aid Saskatchewan children in getting a healthy start 
to life. Mr. Deputy Speaker, progress in improving the quality 
of life for our children is what this province is all about. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk today about a number 
of programs that this government’s introduced to help children 
reach their maximum potential. 
 
And I’m going to start first about a kid . . . a program called 
Kids First. Saskatchewan’s child care programs will be 
expanded to meet the needs of vulnerable families in targeted 
communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as part of this program. 
Investments in early learning programs provide children an 
opportunity to learn skills and enhance their social 
development, school readiness, and their ability to learn — all 
things that all members of this Assembly will support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the early childhood development program is a 
combination of commitments between government, 
communities, and our stakeholders. These programs will be 
coordinated provincially but will be managed and delivered 
locally rather than by the provincial government. 
 
The members opposite want to debate this issue and I hope that 
they get the opportunity to get into the debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The provincial government will provide central leadership to 
the program by setting policy and program direction, including 
program priorities and standards. And it will include methods of 
accountability, reporting, and outcome measurements, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They will select targeted communities for 
these programs to be delivered in; they’ll allocate funding to 
those communities. 
 
They’ll be approving community plans for the initiative. They’ll 
establish the accountability framework within each community 
and there will be public reporting to the minister and to the 
Assembly, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, health districts, school divisions, and 
others will partner to deliver services through partnerships 
where existing service providers will deliver the services, 
including appropriate Aboriginal service delivery partners, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s important that we deliver those programs in a 
culturally sensitive way for those Aboriginal children and other 
children of other cultures to feel comfortable within our 



1006 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

programs. 
 
Individual communities will develop community-specific plans 
to be approved by the government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There 
will be local determination of service delivery and mechanisms 
— delivered by the people in those communities and designed 
by the people in those communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There 
will be local management determined by those communities 
and those agencies. They’ll build on existing community 
resources that already are there in those communities. And 
we’ll realign services where possible to get the maximum 
benefit for children on the delivery of our services. 
 
Within the first year, Mr. Speaker, of these programs we expect 
that we’ll be able to achieve some targeted results. First off, that 
96 per cent of all births in the province will be screened in 
hospital; and 22 per cent of these births are going to be targeted 
in high-needs communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 9 per cent of 
all births each year will receive in-depth assessments where 
there will be greater in-depth assessment of the family needs; 5 
per cent of all births will receive an intensive home visiting 
program as well as significant parent-community supports. 
 
So not only are we going to support the children, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we’re going to support their families within those 
communities. And over 50 existing early learning programs will 
be enhanced to better meet the needs of children in our 
communities, in our high-risk populations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On top of that, there will be 250 additional daycare spaces for 
the targeted high-risk population. That in itself talks about 
where this program is going in its first year, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But I want to talk a little bit about the need for this program, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think there are a few facts that many 
people may not understand or know. That 6 per cent of 
Saskatchewan women do not receive prenatal care. There are 
communities within Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where 
some of these services aren’t readily available. And then there 
are situations and circumstances, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where 
for various reasons people have difficulty obtaining these 
services. 
 
Each child with FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) costs 1.5 million 
in supports and lost productivity over a lifetime, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — each child with FAS costs 1.5 million in supports 
and lost productivity in their lifetime, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It is estimated that every dollar spent on prevention, or early 
intervention saves $7 in later costs to the government. Very 
important to understand the importance of early intervention 
and understand that saving . . . that putting money forward 
today will save in the future. 
 
It is increasingly clear to experts that the first three years of life 
have a tremendous impact on behaviour, health, and learning 
patterns of children, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that prenatal and 
early childhood periods are critical in the development of 
children and that children today are the healthy, productive 
citizens of tomorrow. 
 
So it’s more important than ever that we understand that early 

childhood development strategies are about our future, and not 
just about today. 
 
We need to ensure that all children have an opportunity to reach 
their full potential, and be meaningful contributors within our 
society. Making investments early through prenatal care, or 
spending dollars on early intervention can have a big payoff 
down the road, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we need to 
understand that, and we need to work towards that. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about child development theory and 
strategy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In terms of physical, intellectual, 
emotional, and social well-being, the period from conception to 
age six is the key to subsequent growth, development, and 
ultimate productivity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Children have different needs depending on where they are 
within the stages of that development from ages zero to six, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but those are the most important years of an 
individual’s life. 
 
Infants from birth to age one need a number of things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They need protection from physical danger; 
they need adequate nutrition; they need adequate health care; 
they need adults with whom to form attachments; they need 
adults who can understand and respond to their signals. They 
need things to look at, touch, hear, smell, and taste. They need 
opportunities to explore the world, and opportunities for 
appropriate language stimulation, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now toddlers age one to three, have different needs. They need 
the same things that the zero to one need, but they also have 
some new and enhanced needs. They need support in acquiring 
new motor, language, and thinking skills. They need a chance to 
develop some independence. They need help in learning how to 
control their own behaviours, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They need 
opportunities to begin to learn to care for themselves. And last 
but not least, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they need daily opportunities 
to play with a variety of objects. They need somebody to help 
them learn to play, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And children age three to six need other things on top of what 
we’ve already talked about, and those are as follows, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. They need opportunities to develop fine motor 
skills; they need encouragement of language through talking, 
reading, and singing; they need activities which will develop a 
positive sense of mastery; they need opportunities to learn 
co-operation, helping, and sharing; and they need the 
opportunity to experiment with pre-writing and pre-reading 
skills. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I’ve indicated through this theory of 
child development, a wide variety of inputs are required to 
support children’s growth and development. An early childhood 
strategy is designed to deliver those needs of children. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the factors 
that influence a child’s development. One is the parenting style 
of parents; the other is the availability of social supports within 
our communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
As well we need education . . . the education level of parents 
make a significant difference in the ability of our children to 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1007 

 

learn to grow. Single parents have a more difficult time. 
Employment status of the parents, their ability to earn money 
and to feed their families make a significant difference. And of 
course the income level of the parents has a variety of factors on 
the rest of the family as well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There are a number of potential risk factors for children. The 
presence of these factors does not guarantee a child will face 
developmental challenges. However, it increases the risk that 
they will encounter problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The age of parents also has an impact on young children. The 
younger the parents the greater the chance that a child’s 
development will be impeded, because those parents have not 
yet learned the skills they need to be adequate parents. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we have circumstances like that, 
we need to step in and have a strategy and a plan to help parents 
be parents; to help them teach and develop their children, 
monitor them; provide them with the necessary skills and 
support to be effective parents, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And of course, Mr. Deputy Speaker, multiple risk factors create 
an exceptional effect and the results are cumulative in families 
where there are high risks. 
 
To have the greatest long-term impact we need to intervene 
during the earlier stages of a child’s life, Mr. Deputy Speaker. If 
we wait too long to provide support and address the needs of 
high-risk children and families, it becomes too late to have a 
greater impact, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The cycle of poverty is extremely hard to break. Children 
currently in care receiving social assistance after age 18 are 76 
per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Young offenders receiving social 
assistance after age 18 today is 69 per cent. 
 
So those statistics indicate for us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
earlier we can intervene in a child’s life and the greater supports 
we can provide will enhance their ability to get out of the cycle 
that they have been put in and make a more meaningful 
contribution for their own well-being and for that of society as a 
whole. That’s why programs to deal with children at the very 
earliest ages are so very important to our society, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The way to break the cycle is concentrating on the important 
formative years of life, addressing the determinants of health at 
the outset, and being there for children in every way we can. 
And that’s what our strategy for early childhood development is 
all about, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
What’s our commitment to early childhood development? Well 
over the next five years there will be $73 million available to 
work towards enhancing the well-being of children, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It is very clear that we need to invest more of our 
energy and of our money towards this goal. And that’s what this 
government is doing through its early childhood development 
strategy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It is working towards the values that this government wants to 

put forward as the people’s agenda, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that 
we have heard from people across the province they want. They 
want to have our children have the greatest opportunities 
possible in life. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this commitment 
will allow us to expand the services we already provide for 
children and continue to build on those strengths that we have. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the vision of 
Kids First. It is that vulnerable children enjoy a good start in life 
and are nurtured and supported by caring families and 
communities. In high-needs communities, supports and services 
are provided through partnerships between families, 
communities, and service organizations and government. 
 
This is not a top-down approach, Mr. Deputy Speaker. This is 
about involving our communities, our stakeholders, and our 
families in developing the best possible potential for the 
children in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what are our goals? Mr. Deputy Speaker, our goals are that 
high-risk children are born and remain healthy; that high-risk 
children are supported and nurtured by healthy well-functioning 
families; that high-risk children are able to learn, hope, and 
solve problems, Mr. Deputy Speaker; high-risk children are free 
from abuse, injury, disability, disease, and death. And finally, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that high-risk children have access to a 
comprehensive, integrated, and developmentally sequential 
system of supports and services to help them reach a goal of a 
healthy future, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This goes beyond addressing the health needs or education 
needs. It encompasses the whole child and his or her family, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s about providing what’s best for not 
only the child but for the entire family. 
 
Who is trying to reach this goal? Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
people who we’re trying to help are those who are hard to 
reach. They don’t access programs and services today for a 
number of different reasons. Promotional materials are beyond 
their reading levels and people were apprehensive about using 
formal supports. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re trying to reach those who are most 
vulnerable in our society, those who most need our help, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
We want to reach those who receive little or no prenatal care. 
The first point of contact is at birthing time in the hospital, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We want to reach those mothers before birth 
and help those mothers learn the skills they need — nutrition 
and other elements in order to deliver a healthy baby — in the 
prenatal stages, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We want to begin . . . By having children in early teens 
continue to bear children frequently — we want to deal with 
those who are most vulnerable, having children when they are 
still children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we want those who 
have conflicts, socio-economic issues, substance abuse, 
violence in their home, poverty, and lack of education, we want 
to target those people, Mr. Speaker, to help them become . . . to 
help their children break the cycle in which they may be born 
into. 
 



1008 Saskatchewan Hansard May 8, 2001 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a targeted program to our 
province’s most vulnerable children and their families — what 
we call high-risk families. The programs will address the needs 
of children from before they are born until age five. This is the 
period when we can have the greatest impact on the future of 
our children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now where will we deliver those services, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? We’re going to target communities with a significant 
number of high-risk children, where a comprehensive range of 
community-based supports and services will be delivered. 
Selecting communities on a ranking process, based on factors 
associated with poor child development; those factors being 
poverty, incidents of low- and high-birth weight, infant 
hospitalization rates, lone parenting rates, the number of births 
in the community. 
 
Because dollars are limited, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to 
channel our efforts to where the need is greatest and the 
families in need are concentrated. And in short, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we want to focus on where we can have the greatest 
impact with the funding available. 
 
We will be targeting communities that have a significant 
number of vulnerable children and families who need a range of 
community supports — literacy, parenting support programs — 
as well as treatment services such as mental health, drug and 
alcohol counselling, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We’re going to target 
first where we can make the best and most profitable outcomes, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, but also where the need is the greatest, 
where we can help those who need it most. 
 
I just want to touch on some of the communities that have been 
identified for need: Regina in north central, Core and Al Ritchie 
areas, northeast; in Saskatoon, Pleasant Hill, Riversdale, 
Holiday Park, King George, Meadow Green, and 
Confederation; Prince Albert in the Westflat and East Hill, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker; in Meadow Lake; Moose Jaw; North 
Battleford; all of northern Saskatchewan; and Yorkton, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
How are we going to reach these high-needs children and 
families? We’re going to start with an aggressive prenatal 
outreach and screening program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And then 
we’re going to follow it up with a universal screening program 
at birth. 
 
The prenatal outreach and screening will address the issues of 
FAS and FAE (fetal alcohol effects) children, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, trying to reach women as early as possible in their 
pregnancies to ensure that they understand the impacts of their 
nutrition and health on their unborn babies, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. We are particularly interested in reaching out to the 6 
per cent of women who do not know or do not have access to 
prenatal care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the universal screening program, all 
babies born in Saskatchewan hospitals will be screened to help 
identify those facing challenges such as poverty, low education 
levels, single parenthood, or dependence on social assistance, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Those who are determined at high risk 
will be given priority for follow-up treatments, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 

What services will be offered? There’ll be intensive support 
home visiting programs for those families most in need, 
addictions and mental health services, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
enhanced early learning and child care options, and parent 
support programs to help parents become parents. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, intensive home support visiting in certain 
communities — this will be the follow-up that will take the 
form of home visits in communities where we have the highest 
risk children. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are going to do 
everything we can to help those parents effectively work 
towards the development of their children, help them obtain 
health services when they need it, social supports, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and parenting skills they may not have at this time. 
 
Our early learning and care programs through Kids First will be 
expanding daycare spaces in high-need communities to offer 
support to those families that need it the most. We will also 
enhance our early learning programs for four- and 
five-year-olds. These programs will help high-risk children 
develop social skills and prepare them for kindergarten. 
 
These programs will also support parents through literacy 
training, nutrition counselling, and parenting programs, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Research shows that home visiting programs improve parenting 
skills, improve mothers’ lives, increase parental participation in 
the workforce, increase parental participation in formal 
education, and reduce the need for health care for preventable 
illness, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Research also shows that early learning programs increase 
school readiness and achievement for high-risk children, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, increases chances of completing high school, 
improves parent/child interaction, and decreases criminal 
activity, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about the 
model for service delivery. It will be provided through central 
leadership but delivered through community participation in the 
local communities, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It will include local 
partnerships in health districts, school boards, Aboriginal 
stakeholders in our communities, and others in our communities 
that apparently are delivering programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And what are the implications for our partners, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? The implications are that we’ll have . . . our 
Department of Health will provide universal screening, 
assessment by public health nurses, mental health and addiction 
services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Department of Education 
will provide early learning and Social Services will provide 
child care services, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to talk for one minute about our guiding principles 
before I wrap up my talk on early childhood and development, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. Our guiding principles include five . . . or 
six fundamental foundations. That the inclusion of Aboriginal 
organizations are essential to any programs that we develop, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. That community involvement and input is 
absolutely essential to the development of our program. 
 
We need to build on existing services and strengths within our 



May 8, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1009 

 

communities, and we need to ensure that our services are 
culturally appropriate. Our programs need to all be voluntary; 
these are not forced programs. They desire to enhance the 
willingness of families and their children to be involved in our 
programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And they must be innovative 
and flexible. 
 
Now this is the foundation in which we have put forward an 
early childhood development program, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And that program and strategy is going to guide us over the 
next number of years to enhance the quality of life for our 
children. Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s a program that we believe in 
as a government. It’s a program that I am very, very proud to 
say that I stand behind. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, for those reasons I am very proud to stand 
and second the motion for the member from Saskatoon . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Sutherland, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Greystone, pardon me, Mr. Speaker. 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Nothing 
could be more important to any one of us than the health and 
safety and well-being of our children. Children are not only are 
the future of the community but also the future of the province. 
We know that if we can take care of the babies today it’ll have a 
deep and lasting impact on their growth and development and 
define them as adults. 
 
We’ve all heard that if we spend $1 on preventative programs 
now, it’ll save $7 in associated costs in the future in areas such 
as social services, remedial education, and crime. I wish this 
government believed this. Based on its own track record, I don’t 
believe so. 
 
Remember the child action plan is an NDP program that’s 
linked to brighter futures, a federal initiative also aimed at 
prevention. This means federal money is funnelled to this NDP 
government and they turn around and use it as they see fit and 
then take credit for the program. Sadly, we all know not too 
many of their programs have been successful so far, so there’s 
really not a lot to take credit for. 
 
In fact when it comes to early childhood development it’s 
interesting to note that this is not really anything new for this 
government. It’s basically the same old package tied up with a 
different coloured ribbon. 
 
Four years ago they trotted out something called early 
childhood intervention, which targeted pre-kindergarten 
children. Interesting to note that in this government’s budget 
address just a few weeks ago, they talked about the need to 
eliminate child hunger to give Saskatchewan children the best 
possible start in their lives. 
 
I think we all remember the former premier, Mr. Romanow, 
promised that he was going to eliminate child hunger in his first 
term of government. 
 
If this government is so committed to stopping child hunger, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, why is an increasing number of the 
province’s families regularly using the food bank. The Regina 
and District Food Bank feeds nearly 9,000 people a month, and 

half of those are children, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Eight years after the child action plan was announced, we still 
have numerous school programs in school . . . in place whose 
sole aim is to prevent child hunger. A child who is hungry is not 
able to concentrate and is therefore not able to learn. Teachers 
have known this for years. 
 
Eight years after the child action plan was announced, we also 
have an increasing number of community programs in place. 
Some of these programs collect sweaters for children, some 
provide sports equipment, and still others exist to provide a 
lifeline for children who need intervention and support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion put forward by the government 
members promises this government will renew their efforts in 
raising the level of care for our children. We read between the 
lines that this government again pledges to put children on our 
list of the province’s number one assets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the opportunity afforded by this motion to even 
try to make 10 government departments work together is 
breathtaking. Add to that the issue of children’s health and 
well-being benefiting from such a program, and we believe that 
the motion must be applauded by everyone in this Assembly, 
regardless of which side of the House. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I support the government’s motion on 
behalf of the official opposition. And although I will not be 
putting forward an amendment, I will put forward my 
commitment that I will be very vigilant watching the 
government to ensure they fulfill their commitment to 
implement the program on behalf of the children of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I would like to adjourn the debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 


