















































Hansard: May 16, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1155 
 May 16, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today I 
present a petition on behalf of the residents of the small 
community of Consul, in the extreme southwest of the province. 
It’s a community that enjoys the benefits of an ambulance 
service, but they’re concerned about the possible loss of that 
service if the recommendations of the EMS (emergency medical 
services) report are put in place. And so I read the prayer as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan regarding the 
Saskatchewan EMS Development Project, which calls for 
provincially run and centrally operated ambulance services. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from Elrose, 
Beechy, and Demaine. 
 
And I am pleased to present this petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition. 
The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners pray that your Hon. Assembly 
may be pleased to call on the provincial and federal 
governments to provide immediate financial assistance to 
the city of North Battleford in order to facilitate necessary 
improvements to the North Battleford water treatment 
plant. 

 
Your petitioners come from North Battleford and Cando. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and area who are concerned about the 
state of their hospital and so they’ve presented me with the 

petition. And the prayer of this petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by residents of 
the city of Swift Current, of Pennant, Saskatchewan, of Gull 
Lake, of Cadillac, Waldeck, Hazlet, and Neville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about their ambulance service. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Radville, 
Ceylon, Gladmar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition on behalf 
of citizens . . . to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the EMS service. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people in the Alida, 
Redvers, and Manor area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our district, 
southeast Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and 
beyond. 



1156 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Redvers, Manor, 
Alida, and Bellegarde areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about cellular 
coverage in their area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Rabbit Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, 
Borden, Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Perdue, Saskatoon, and Asquith. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
of citizens concerned about the rate SaskPower and SaskEnergy 
are charging: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Davidson, Kenaston, Compton, 
New York, and Birch Hills. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise too today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents concerned about the 
centralization of ambulance services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Wynyard, Yorkton, Raymore, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition 
regarding concerned citizens with the energy rate rebate 
program: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 

portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Leoville, Spiritwood, and Mildred. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition from 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the service at Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Willow 
Bunch. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from concerned citizens — in fact the 
concerns are getting more and more increased — with reference 
to the cuts at the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. And the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by good folks in 
Assiniboia. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the petitions have been reviewed 
and pursuant to rule 12(7) the following are read and received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly: 
 

To provide reliable cellular service in a variety of 10 
northern districts; and 
 
To ensure health care services in the Kamsack Hospital are 
maintained. 
 

And addendums to sessional papers for previous petitions. And 
these are sessional papers nos. 3, 4, 10, 58, 121, 149, and 151. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1157 

 

To the Minister of Economic Development: how many 
forestry jobs have been created in northern Saskatchewan 
since April 1, 2000; and what are the actual figures for the 
number of forestry jobs in northern Saskatchewan on that 
date and the actual number currently? 
 

And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM: how many forest firefighting 
positions have been created in northern Saskatchewan since 
April 1, 2000; and provide in actual figures for the date and 
current figures. 
 

And I give notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM: how much money has your 
department spent to date in 2001-2002 battling forest fires 
and grass fires? 
 

Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 43 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: since, and including 1996, how 
many SaskPower employees have been dismissed without 
cause; how much total severance has been paid to these 
dismissed employees; how many severance agreements 
were accompanied by a gag order? 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the minister responsible for Social Services: for the year 
1999, what was the total number of children’s deaths that 
occurred while they were receiving services from the 
Department of Social Services and were in the care of the 
Minister of Social Services when they died; of those deaths, 
how many deaths were the result of natural causes, suicide, 
drowning, homicide, accidents, SIDS, and undetermined 
injuries? 
 

I give notice that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Social Services: for the year 
1999, what was the total number of children’s death that 
occurred while they were receiving services from the 
Department of Social Services but they were not in the care 
of the Minister of Social Services when they died; of those 
deaths, how many deaths were the result of natural causes, 
suicide, drowning, homicide, accident, SIDS, and 
undetermined injuries? 
 

And I ask the same questions, Mr. Speaker, for the year 2000. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 43 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: regarding the discharge of raw 
sewage into a water body that occurred on February 27, 
2001, in which community did this take place; into which 
water body did this discharge occur; and how much 
discharge occurred; and what action was taken by 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, we 
have several guests with us today and I want to start by 
introducing an officer of the legislature to you. With us in the 
Speaker’s gallery on the west side is the Children’s Advocate, 
Dr. Deborah Parker-Loewen. And with her is her deputy 
children’s advocate, Glenda Cooney; and advocate, Roxane 
Schury; and also communications and public education 
coordinator, Sharon Chapman; and I believe also her son, Trent. 
 
I ask the Assembly to extend a warm welcome to our Children’s 
Advocate and her office. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I also, hon. members, would like to draw your 
attention, a number of special guests also seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery that are representatives of the l’Assemblée 
parlementaire de la Francophonie. The Assemblée 
parlementaire de la Francophonie is an international association 
of French-speaking parliamentarians. 
 
The aims of the APF (l’Assemblée parlementaire de la 
Francophonie) have broadened over the years to include 
promoting democracy and human rights within the 
French-speaking community, inter-parliamentary co-operation, 
and encouraging the use and development of French culture and 
language. 
 
Our guests are meeting with a number of our members today to 
explain the role of the Assemblée parlementaire de la 
Francophonie and how our Assembly might benefit from 
joining. They will also be meeting with representatives of the 
Saskatchewan francophone community. 
 
J’aimerais souhaiter la bienvenue à nos distingués invités et 
aussi une bonne réunion et un séjour agréeable en 
Saskatchewan. Bienvenue. 
 
(Translation: I would like to extend my welcome to our 
distinguished guests and wish them a prosperous meeting and a 
pleasant stay here in Saskatchewan. Welcome.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Or as I might say in my mother language, 
Schero vitayehmo vas. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Merci, M. le Président. I will also try to 
follow your sterling example, if I may. 
 
M. le Président, je suis heureuse de présenter les représentants 



1158 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

de l'Assemblée parlementaire de la Francophonie. 
 
(Translation: Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to present the 
representatives of l’Assemblée parlementaire de la 
Francophonie.) 
 
These MPs (Member of Parliament), MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly), and officials come from across Canada. 
They are here in force, so I would ask you to hold your 
applause until the end. 
 
De la Région Amérique; from the Americas Region: Monsieur 
Jean-François Simard, député de l'Assemblée nationale et 
chargé de mission, et Madame Marie Tanguay, secrétaire 
administrative régionale. 
 
De la section canadienne; from the Canada section: Monsieur 
Bernard Patry, député, président de la section, and a former 
colleague of the current Leader of the Opposition; Madame 
Guyanne Desforges, secrétaire administrative; et Monsieur 
Marc Toupin, secrétaire administratif. 
 
De l'Ile-du-Prince-Édouard; from Prince Edward Island: 
Monsieur Wilfred Arsenault, député, président de la section et 
Monsieur Donald DesRoches, secrétaire administratif. 
 
De la Nouvelle-Écosse; from Nova Scotia: Monsieur Michel 
Samson, député, membre de la section; and a former cabinet 
minister. 
 
Du Nouveau-Brunswick; from New Brunswick: Monsieur 
Louis-Philippe McGraw, député, président de la section; et 
Madame Phyllis LeBlanc, secrétaire administrative. 
 
Du la belle province Québec; from Québec: Madame Monique 
Gagnon-Tremblay, députée, vice-présidente de la section; et 
Madame Solange Charest, députée, membre de la section; et 
aussi, Madame Françoise Leu, conseillère en relations 
interparlementaires et internationales. 
 
De l'Ontario, et merci pour la plume: Monsieur Jean-Marc 
Lalonde, député, président de la section; et Monsieur Katch 
Koch, secrétaire administratif. 
 
Et finalement, de l'Alberta: Monsieur Denis Ducharme, député, 
président de la section. 
 
Veuillez vous joindre à moi en souhaitant la bienvenue à ces 
invité distingués. Please join with me in welcoming these 
distinguished guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Merci, M. le Président. Bienvenue, to the 
delegation from the Assemblée parlementaire de la 
Francophonie. Like Mr. Speaker, my français est très pauvre, 
but welcome to Saskatchewan anyways. 
 
We had the privilege of having lunch with the delegation a short 
time ago and we had a discourse on the work that the 
association does, and the provinces in Canada and countries 
around the world where the Assembly is active. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out — and they’re all very 
special people — but I would like to point out four people, for 
special reasons. 
 
First of all, Mr. Jean-François Simard, who is the chargé de 
mission, who we had the privilege of meeting. And I believe 
he’s sort of the leader of the delegation, although there are 
many leaders in the group. 
 
Also, Mr. Bernard Patry, a Member of Parliament for 
Pierrefond-Dollard. Mr. Patry and I had the privilege of serving 
in Parliament together and it’s good to see him in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Also, Mr. Marc Toupin. Mr. Toupin was the secretary of the 
Standing Committee on Agriculture when I had the privilege of 
being in Ottawa and he provided excellent service to our 
committee. And welcome to you, Marc, as well. 
 
And finally, to Mr. Donald DesRoches from Prince Edward 
Island section, administrative secretary. While the French 
presentations were being made, Donald whispered in my ear so 
I knew what was going on and that was particularly appreciated. 
 
Welcome to Saskatchewan. Enjoy your time here. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I 
also have another delegation that I’m pleased to introduce to the 
Legislative Assembly. In the east gallery there is a group of 
grade 8 students from Rosetown Central High School. We’re 
glad to see them make the long journey from Rosetown to the 
capital city of Regina and hoping that they enjoy the many 
activities that they will undertake. 
 
Teachers who have accompanied the group are Richard 
Berezowski, Craig Oman, Jana Clark, Nicole Summach, and 
Terry Gowan. And chaperones — only one needed, Mr. 
Speaker — Ross Gregory. 
 
I know all members of the Legislative Assembly will welcome 
this fine group of students from the community of Rosetown, 
Saskatchewan. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you and through you 
to the members of the Assembly a group of students and their 
teacher who are visiting us. This is a group of grade 12 students 
from the tutorial program at Balfour Collegiate. They’re 
accompanied here today by their teacher Karen Scherle. 
 
I must say that Ms. Scherle makes a special effort to make sure 
that her class attends here on an annual basis and that we 
appreciate that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I look forward to meeting with this group after. And I would 
ask all members to extend them a warm welcome. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1159 

 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence Awards 
 

Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
recognize the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce for another 
very successful SABEX (Saskatoon Achievement in Business 
Excellence) award presentation last evening in Saskatoon. I was 
pleased to be able to be in attendance. 
 
As we are aware, this is Saskatoon’s opportunity to celebrate 
the success of that city’s business community and to 
specifically recognize business excellence with these 
prestigious SABEX awards. 
 
Mr. Harry Day, a long-time business and community leader, 
was inducted into the SABEX Hall of Fame. As well, Shelly 
Brown was awarded the ATHENA award — a recognition of 
leadership and opportunity for women entrepreneurs. 
 
Business of the Year was presented to Kocsis Transportation 
Ltd. — a two-time winner in this year’s awards. 
 
Congratulations to all winners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in fitting with this government’s Saskatchewan 
dream awareness initiative of successful businesses in the 
province, I would have thought it would have been an ideal 
opportunity for this government to show support for 
award-winning businesses in Saskatoon. 
 
The question was asked why there was none of the 11 NDP 
(New Democratic Party) Saskatoon MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) in attendance to show their support and 
offer congratulations. And why wasn’t the Minister of 
Economic Development able to attend such a prestigious event 
in person, but chose rather to send official greetings from his 
department’s deputy minister? 
 
Congratulations to the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce for 
their recognition of business initiative and excellence. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Advanced Technology Association 
 
Ms. Jones: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan continues to move 
toward a knowledge-based economy as the province’s advanced 
technology sector matures and expands. Yes, Mr. Speaker, this 
means more good news for Saskatchewan. 
 
The Saskatchewan Advanced Technology Association is an 
organization dedicated to encouraging, promoting, and 
stimulating the development and growth of industry and 
employment in the province through the commercialization and 
application of advanced technologies. 
 
SATA (Saskatchewan Advanced Technology Association) held 
its kick-off meeting in June of 2000. This spring, SATA found 
itself a home in Innovation Place in Saskatoon. Larry Cooper, 
SATA’s president, said: 
 

Innovation Place was a natural choice for SATA’s new 
office. The research park has a strong core of 
technology-based companies, many of whom are SATA 
members. 

 
Mr. Speaker, SATA represents over 100 companies in the 
advanced technology sector. SATA provides everything from 
business development to training programs for its members, 
helping them stay in Saskatchewan and thrive. There are 
applications for advanced technology in every sector of the 
province’s economy — the resource sector, agriculture, health 
care sector just to name a few. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to thank SATA and all others who make it 
a priority to help improve the business environment in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Honey Bee Manufacturing Ltd. Expansion 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to share with my colleagues in this Assembly a success story in 
my home constituency of Cypress Hills. And with all apologies 
due to veteran broadcaster, Paul Harvey —The Rest of the 
Story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Honey Bee Manufacturing is a manufacturing 
business located in the town of Frontier. They’re in the process 
of expanding their operation, including 9,720 square feet for a 
heated warehouse, 1,000 square feet for a parts and shipping 
office, and close to 20,000 square feet of manufacturing space, 
a total cost of which will be over $1 million. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is encouraging, not only for the 
business itself and the community of Frontier, but for the 
province as a whole. But, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take a 
moment to add to this what Paul Harvey calls The Rest of the 
Story. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project is being financed with absolutely no 
provincial government assistance and — according to business 
ownership — in spite of provincial government policies, in 
spite of the bureaucracy and red tape ownership had to go 
through to even begin this expansion, and in spite of the state of 
the highways that serve that community. This considerable 
investment is taking place at a time when we have an NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government intent on abandoning rural 
Saskatchewan and private business. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you know now what the good news is but you 
also know the rest of the story. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prime Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to tell the Assembly of a remarkable story from a special place 
in one of the many communities in my constituency of Regina 
Wascana Plains. 
 
It has been said that Connie Buchanan’s classroom at White 



1160 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

City School is unique. Aside from the colourful posters, 
displays, and decorations that adorn the walls, there is also a 
roomful of smiling students. Mr. Speaker, these smiles are 
likely due to Ms. Buchanan’s different approach to teaching. 
 
Ms. Buchanan was recently recognized for her teaching style by 
receiving the Prime Minister’s Award for Teaching Excellence. 
Ms. Buchanan had the distinction of receiving the award from 
the Prime Minister himself in Ottawa last Thursday. 
 
Nominated by her principal and vice-principal, Ms. Buchanan 
was one of only 15 teachers from across the country to receive 
the prestigious award. Her award application showed how Ms. 
Buchanan likes to have fun with learning and uses theme-ing as 
a tool to educate her students. An example of theme-ing is 
dressing all of her pupils up in early costumes and re-enacting 
the lives of many of the passengers on the fated ship, the 
Titanic. Students wrote journals through the eyes of those 
characters, produced a newspaper of the tragedy at sea, and 
acted out the fateful night of the sinking. 
 
I’m sure you will agree Mr. Speaker that Ms. Buchanan and the 
White City School are well deserving of the prestigious award. 
 
Congratulations to Connie Buchanan on your tremendous 
achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Momentum in Canada 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there is 
a red tide rising. Last year it was the Yukon voters who swept 
out the NDP (New Democratic Party) in favour of the Liberals. 
Today it is British Columbia’s turn and if pundits are correct, 
when the Liberals finish with the NDP, BC (British Columbia) 
will be red from Fort Nelson to Victoria, with a surging red tide 
washing against the very gates of Fortress, Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberals are on the move. Can Saskatchewan 
be far behind? 
 
It may seem a bold prediction right now, Mr. Speaker, but with 
Liberal momentum building the way it is, when we get finished 
mauling the NDP in the next election here, I predict they will 
need dental records to identify the remains. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members opposite may laugh now, but as they 
watch the . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. 
Speaker, isn’t it bad enough I have to deal with cryptosporidium 
without having to deal with the member from Regina South as 
well? 
 
The Speaker: — I would just like to remind members that this 
is a time for member statements, not member debate. The 
member for North Battleford has got another 10 seconds. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, members opposite may laugh 
now, but as they watch the red tide rushing in tonight, they’ll be 
running for the lifeboats. 
 
Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Canora Credit Union Sod-Turning 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have more good news for the province and rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a sod-turning ceremony took place on May 7, 
marking the construction of the 2.5 million Canora Credit 
Union building. Excavation of the site actually began on May 2, 
Mr. Speaker, with the project expected to take 34 weeks to 
complete. 
 
The construction and site development will cost around $2.1 
million. Once architect’s fees and furnishings, which also 
include a new ATM (automated teller machine), are included 
the total project will approach the $2.5 million mark. 
 
This new facility will provide a positive atmosphere for 
members and employees, and allow for the development and 
expansion of financial services to Canora and surrounding 
communities. 
 
Since the present building was constructed in 1973, the credit 
union has simply outgrown it. Since 1973 assets have grown 
from less than 10 million to over 120 million. It was clear that a 
new facility would better meet the long-term needs of the credit 
union and its members. A Saskatoon architect, Henry Klypak, 
was retained and the building was designed. As well, Mr. 
Speaker, a Yorkton-based company, Logan Stevens, began 
construction on the project. 
 
This project, Mr. Speaker, represents the spirit of Saskatchewan 
— Saskatchewan people working for and with Saskatchewan 
people and enhance the well-being of the province. Our 
congratulations to the Canora Credit Union and its members. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Possible Pioneer Lodge Closure in Assiniboia 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a letter here that I’d like to share excerpts of it with the 
Assembly, and it’s over the continuing and deepening concern 
of the Pioneer Lodge. And this is a letter from an individual that 
is nearly 84 years old and he’s worried about what’s happening 
to it and what’s going to happen to himself. 
 
And I’d like to just quote. He’s worried about if it closes, where 
he has to go, or if there’s even be a place for him to go. And he 
says, quote: 
 

Stop and think about it. If I was sent to one of the places 
and my wife left in Assiniboia, what kind of ending is that 
for a couple who have spent most of their lives together? 
Can’t anyone see through that? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, he goes on in his letter and he talks about the 
numbers of elderly people in the community of Assiniboia 
alone, not the rest of southern Saskatchewan that this place 
would service. And he came up with a list of 143. He says that’s 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1161 

 

not all-inclusive, that’s just people that he knows. 
 
And now what is the Pioneer Lodge doing? Closing the doors 
and changing it from the current number of beds into 12 or 8 as 
the senior population increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in closing, the individual comments. He says: 
 

Maybe some of the people who are helping make these 
decisions can’t quite see things the way we older people do. 
If they are lucky and get old themselves someday, they may 
be glad there’s a place like Pioneer Lodge to spend the last 
days of their lives. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to table this letter. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Deaths of Children in the Care of Social Services 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Social Services. The minister has 
just received an extremely disturbing report from the Child 
Advocate. 
 
She identifies a dramatic increase in the number of 
Saskatchewan children who are dying while under the care of 
the Department of Social Services. This number increased from 
4 deaths in the last half of 1996 to 25 deaths in 1997 to 33 
deaths in 1998. That’s 62 children in two and one-half years 
who died while in the care of Social Services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is this number increasing so 
dramatically and why are so many children dying while in the 
care of Social Services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, at the outset I want 
to thank the member for her question and for focusing attention 
on the issues that beset children in our society. I appreciate the 
concern that the member expresses about what she says are 
increasing numbers of children that are receiving services or in 
the care of the Minister of Social Services and die, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But in fact she points out partial statistics for one year. I should 
point out that this review commenced in August of 1996 so that 
the number of deaths during the course of that year would not 
be representative of a full year; and therefore, Mr. Speaker, I 
question as to whether she’s presenting the facts in a fair way. 
 
I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Department of Social 
Services has led the rest of Canada in asking an independent 
agency to review the deaths of children. We do that because we 
want to be open and transparent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in all 
fairness I do think that I have my facts right because from four 
deaths in the last half of 1996 — which is what I stated — 25 

deaths in 1997 and up, up to 33 in 1998. So 33 is up from 25. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this report divides these tragic deaths into two 
categories, children who are receiving services from Social 
Services and in the care of the minister. These are the children 
like Karen Quill who are taken out of their home and placed in 
the legal care of the minister. The number of deaths in this 
category increased even more dramatically from zero in 1996, 
to three in 1997, up to ten in 1998. Mr. Speaker, these children 
were taken from their homes and placed in the care of the 
minister for their own protection. 
 
Why are so many children dying while in the care of the 
Minister of Social Services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Again I appreciate the question. 
May I just make one correction and point out to the House that 
in fact the Department of Social Services has changed the 
reporting of the deaths that would be referred to the Children’s 
Advocate, which may account for some of the increases that the 
member talks about but did not disclose to the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should point out to the House that most of the 
children who die while in the care of the Department of Social 
Services are children who are medically fragile, have multiple 
medical problems, are not expected to live, Mr. Speaker. And in 
fact, the Children’s Advocate commends the department and the 
caregivers, foster parents in Saskatchewan, for doing an 
excellent job to extend the lives of these children, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, of the 13 children that were in the 
care of the minister, 7 were medically fragile — that leaves 6 
that weren’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this report reveals an extremely disturbing trend. 
From 1996 to 1998 the number of children who died while in 
the care of Social Services increased dramatically. The number 
of children who died while under the care of the minister 
increased even more dramatically. However we don’t know if 
the government is now doing a better job of protecting children 
or whether this trend is continuing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister release figures for 1999 and 2000 
regarding the number of children who died while under the care 
of Social Services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I’d like to thank the member for 
her question, Mr. Speaker. I note that earlier she asked specific 
questions about what has occurred during the years 1999 and 
2000, and we will undertake to provide the answers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I might point out, Mr. Speaker, that the Children’s Advocate 
report refers to a period of history ending in December of 1998. 
The Department of Social Services has made a number of 
improvements, both in our practices and our training for our 
staff, and I might say that we’ve also added significant 



1162 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

resources, Mr. Speaker, in the way of additional staff included 
in this year’s budget. And, Mr. Speaker, I find it so sad that that 
opposition party would vote against that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I anxiously await 
those figures to see if it does have a positive effect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this report contains many extremely disturbing 
findings, but it is impossible to understand why anyone would 
want to hurt a child. But from 1996 to 1998, seven children in 
the care of Social Services died as a direct result of assault, 
mainly by family members. These include a 26-month-old boy 
and a 5-year-old girl. Another 11 of the children who died have 
suffered from family violence during their short lives. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report talks about the numerous agencies and 
government departments who deal with these children. Yet 
somehow many still fall through the cracks. The report says, 
and I quote: 
 

It is clear that a collaborative approach with all the 
child-serving agencies is needed. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what is the government doing to ensure better 
communication between departments to better protect these 
children? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, again I thank the 
member for her question. Mr. Speaker, again I would point out 
to the Assembly that the period of time we’re talking about was 
up until December of 1998. Since that time there have been a 
number of efforts, I know by the Department of Health for 
example, to find additional services for health districts to help 
deal with young people who are harming themselves. And in 
terms of suicide prevention, the Children’s Advocate has made 
a recommendation that there be a better coordination of services 
between my department and health districts and we agree. And 
we will work to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a number of areas we have worked with 
departments, and I think significantly too. In the area of 
prevention programming we’ve made an announcement some 
weeks ago to provide better intervention services, better 
prevention services for children so as to reduce the incidents of 
violence and death that we see, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Child Advocate also found that in over half of these tragic 
deaths, case management concerns were raised with the 
Department of Social Services. The Child Advocate says and I 
quote: 
 

In these 32 files that standards and policies that were in 
place to provide services to children were not adhered to 
consistently. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this may be the most disturbing finding of this 
whole report. In 32 deaths the government’s own policies, 
policies designed to protect children, were not followed. 

Mr. Speaker, how does the minister explain this? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I thank the member for her 
question, but point out that the advocate did not conclude that 
any of the so-called non-compliance resulted in any deaths. 
Let’s make that very clear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Speaker, again we’re referring to a period 
of events leading up until 1998. Since that time we have made 
great strides in terms of training, improving our practices, 
ensuring that there is compliance at all times. We have added 
significant resources in child protection area, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve done additional investments in prevention so that we are 
able to respond better when issues are raised with us, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Again, my question is: why is it that one day when we say we 
need the additional staff in areas such as child protection to help 
protect the needs of children in society, they say no we won’t 
support that. But now they say it’s a concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP must take responsibility 
for its own policies and procedures. They have been in 
government for 10 years and this is getting worse, not better. 
 
The report says that from August 1996 to December 1998, 62 
children died while under the care of Social Services. In 33 of 
these cases, including Karen Quill, the government’s own 
standard and policies were not adhered to consistently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has been in power for 
several years at the time of these deaths. Why were they not 
following their own standards and procedures and why were 
they not doing a better job of protecting these children? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, again I thank the 
member for her question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, may I point out to the Assembly that prior to 
1992, there was no Children’s Advocate to independently 
investigate and review these issues in Saskatchewan. That prior 
to 1992, there was no independent review of deaths and there 
was no policy by the Department of Social Services to review 
these matters, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all recognize as a society, as communities, that 
we have these challenges. The question remains, Mr. Speaker, 
is the government committed to using its resources, the public’s 
resources, to make improvements in this area? I think the record 
speaks for itself — yes, we do, and they don’t, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Cogeneration Project 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskPower. 
 
Internal SaskPower documents obtained by the CBC (Canadian 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1163 

 

Broadcasting Corporation) have exposed yet another bad NDP 
business deal. SaskPower International and ATCO Power, a 
private Alberta company, have formed a partnership to build a 
$228 million cogeneration project. The 230 megawatt 
cogeneration project is located at the Cory Potash Mine near 
Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the potash mine will buy the steam and 
SaskPower is going to buy the electricity. The only problem is 
that the power purchase agreement SaskPower forced its own 
negotiating team to accept is so bad that the negotiating team 
filed a disclaimer stating the deal did not serve the best interests 
of SaskPower. 
 
To the minister, Mr. Speaker, why did SaskPower agree to sign 
on to a multimillion-dollar power purchase agreement that its 
own negotiating team said was bad for SaskPower and bad for 
the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all, I want to say emphatically that this is a good deal 
for the people of Saskatchewan. It’s a good deal, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It will help ensure, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have an adequate power supply — a safe, reliable power 
supply, Mr. Speaker, where there will not be power shortages 
and exorbitant power rates as exist in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in an economy that is growing, Mr. Speaker, 
where there is higher demand for electricity, Mr. Speaker, this 
is a very good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure everyone feels much 
better now because the minister thinks it’s a good deal. The 
man in the government that thought Clickabid was a good deal; 
that IQ&A was a good deal; that ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) has been a good deal — these 
are the people that are endorsing this project, Mr. Speaker. It 
doesn’t leave much room for hope, frankly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower’s negotiating team was so concerned 
about this multi-million-dollar power purchase agreement that 
they actually filed this disclaimer. Here’s what they said. Mr. 
Speaker, this is important: 
 

The SaskPower negotiating team has been the recipient of 
pressures to conclude negotiations and finalize the power 
purchase agreement within a time frame considered . . . to 
be restrictive. 
 

It goes on to say: 
 

Using its best efforts, the SaskPower negotiating team was 
unable to conclude the negotiations within these time 
frames without compromising its responsibility to conduct 
the negotiations in good faith and with due diligence (Mr. 
Speaker). 
 

Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this. Why did the 

minister push through a deal risking $220 million in taxpayers’ 
money when his negotiating team was telling him that the 
necessary due diligence had not been done? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, he says the minister thinks 
it’s a good deal. You bet the minister thinks it’s a good deal. 
And do you know who else thinks it’s a good deal, Mr. 
Speaker? Who else? On May 25, 2000, out of Hansard, the 
member from Rosthern says the following: 
 

I think the concept of cogen has become more popular. I 
think it is something that everyone should be looking at. 
It’s just highly unfortunate (in criticism of our government, 
he says) it’s highly unfortunate that it’s taken this 
government this long to come up with (these 
announcements, Mr. Speaker) . . . 

 
I go on. And he says: 
 

So the cogeneration concept is a great concept (Mr. 
Speaker). This government is to be commended that they 
finally decided to take a step (Mr. Speaker). 
 

Well they think it’s a good deal too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think we all agree with the 
member for Rosthern. The concept is great. But as those that 
negotiated the deal point out, the concept is great; your deal 
stinks. That’s the problem, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the negotiators were not the only 
ones, by the way, concerned about the financial viability of this 
NDP $228 million cogen project. According to documents 
released to the media this morning and posted to the Internet, 
SaskPower board members — SaskPower board members — 
and other senior SaskPower executives were all very worried 
about the restrictive timelines, the lack of good faith bargaining, 
and the inadequate due diligence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If almost everyone involved in this $228 million deal, from 
SaskPower’s negotiating team all the way up to the board of 
directors and senior staff were concerned, why did the NDP 
government approve the deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well yesterday, Mr. Speaker, that 
member criticized us for not working enough with the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker — not enough. Today we have a deal, Mr. 
Speaker, that partners with the private sector. What do they do? 
They’re critical of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me be clear, this is not about due diligence, Mr. 
Speaker. Due diligence was done on this, Mr. Speaker. The 
issue is about negotiating, Mr. Speaker, negotiating a fair price, 
Mr. Speaker. And in my estimation, Mr. Speaker, I trust my 
SaskPower officials. They have a good deal for the people of 



1164 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, that will provide safe, reliable 
electricity for the people in Saskatchewan for years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, on one hand he says he trusts his 
SaskPower officials, and on the other he says that due diligence 
has been done on this project. He can’t have it both ways, 
because here’s what his SaskPower officials said about the 
project. They said, and I quote: 
 

These time frames were too restrictive. They were there 
without compromising its responsibility to conduct 
negotiations in good faith and with due diligence. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what his own officials are telling him. It 
appears there was some other interest the NDP had in mind. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Member for Swift 
Current — 30 seconds. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it appears that the NDP agreed to 
this deal and risked millions of taxpayers’ dollars when almost 
everyone close to the deal, the ones that negotiated it, were 
concerned. And why was it a bad deal, Mr. Speaker? Well 
according to confidential SaskPower documents, the NDP 
imposed restrictive timelines and shared information that 
compromised its bargaining position and therefore made it 
impossible to do due diligence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP government push through a bad 
deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, the 
Saskatchewan people told us, Mr. Speaker, the Crown review 
told us, Mr. Speaker, and on some days those members tell us, 
Mr. Speaker, that ministers should not be involved and nor 
should the government be involved in negotiating deals, Mr. 
Speaker. They should be approving policy, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker. And today they say, get 
involved. It makes no sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
It will provide safe, reliable power and electricity at the lowest 
possible price. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not surprising we still 
aren’t getting any straight answers as it relates to this project. 
But luckily, the reasons, the real reasons, which is what we’ve 
been going after today, the real reasons for the NDP pushing 
through this latest bad business deal were also outlined in the 
internal SaskPower documents uncovered by CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation). 
 
They come in a memo from the acting CEO (chief executive 
officer) of SaskPower International, Mr. Mitchel. According to 
Mr. Mitchel, if the NDP, Mr. Speaker, if the NDP didn’t push 
through this deal against the recommendation of its own 
negotiating team, and I quote, “CIC and cabinet would be 

subject to extreme questioning and criticism.” That’s the real 
reason, Mr. Speaker. That’s the reason he didn’t listen to his 
officials. He didn’t want to suffer the criticism. 
 
Will the minister stand in his place today and admit that that is 
the real reason you shoved through this deal and risked 228 
million taxpayer dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I say this is a good 
deal for the people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The 
members opposite said, as I quoted from the member from 
Rosthern, hurry up and make the deal, Mr. Speaker. They said 
we should have done it years ago, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is an environmentally friendly cogeneration of electricity. 
This is the . . . (inaudible) . . . of jobs; this is working with the 
private sector, Mr. Speaker. This is everything that they asked 
for, Mr. Speaker, and rightfully so that they should ask for that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a good deal for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I would just point out again that the 
minister has not answered our question as to what the reasons 
are for this government ignoring the advice of those that knew 
this deal better than anyone else, why did the government 
ignore the advice. There is other hints in the internal documents 
uncovered by CBC, and I’ll share another one with you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We’ve already heard that SaskPower was worried that CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) and cabinet 
would, and I quote, “be subject to extreme questioning and 
criticism.” But he also went on to say that if this deal was 
canned in the interest of taxpayers, “no one would be immune 
from the project collapse fallout.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that those are the real 
reasons that this NDP government wouldn’t listen to its 
SaskPower officials? You were more worried about saving 
face; more worried about your own public perception than the 
interests of the taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, that member 
wants this minister and this government to be negotiating the 
prices of electricity, Mr. Speaker. That is absolutely ridiculous. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, and I say to the people of 
Saskatchewan, that member wants one thing, Mr. Speaker, and 
he wants, if he ever had the opportunity, to privatize our Crown 
corporations. That’s his involvement with SaskPower, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — For weeks, for weeks we’ve been raising example 
after example of the misadventures of this government as it 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1165 

 

relates to Crown corporation investments in questionable 
businesses. And every single time, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
stands up and talks about due diligence. That’s what he says. He 
talks about the due diligence of the government. 
 
Let me again quote from what his own officials told him about 
this project: 
 

SaskPower’s negotiating team was unable to conclude the 
negotiations within these time frames without 
compromising . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Once again I’d just ask 
members to allow the member who is putting the question, and 
putting the answers, to be heard. Just a little quieter, please. 
Order. order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, he’s been talking about due 
diligence for two weeks as it relates to Crown misadventures 
with taxpayers’ money. Here’s what his own officials said 
about this project: 
 

SaskPower’s negotiating team was unable to conclude the 
negotiations within these time frames without 
compromising its responsibility to conduct the negotiations 
in good faith and with due diligence. 
 

Why was that advice ignored? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I am amazed that 
that member questions the credibility of PCS (Potash 
Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) and ATCO, Mr. Speaker — 
two very reliable companies, Mr. Speaker. Absolutely 
incredible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition, I want to say to the people of 
Saskatchewan that while we . . . and as long as we are in 
government, Mr. Speaker, all the Crown corporations will see 
more than just the bottom line, Mr. Speaker. They will ensure 
that we have and provide environmentally friendly, Mr. 
Speaker, energy to the people of Saskatchewan. And that we 
will provide guaranteed sustainable energy for the people of 
Saskatchewan — not as occurs in Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If those members ever took charge of this government, Mr. 
Speaker, it would be only the bottom line and it would be 
selling SaskPower, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, one thing that 
we on this side of the House are completely confident about is 
that ATCO did do their due diligence. We’re convinced of that. 
We think PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.) Cory 
division did their due diligence. They’ll make out okay. But it 
looks like the big losers in this deal once again will be the 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. That’s who will 
lose on this deal. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ll give the minister one 
more chance to answer a very important question, a very 

important question. You got some solid advice and serious 
concerns raised with him by his officials. Why did he ignore 
that advice? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I am going to say 
emphatically that this is a good deal for the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. This is not about due diligence, 
Mr. Speaker. You can disagree with the price if you want but 
this is not about due diligence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those members opposite . . . and I will quote 
again, Mr. Speaker. They said we should hurry up and make 
this deal, Mr. Speaker. The member from Rosthern says again 
and I quote, he says: 
 

I think the people of Saskatchewan are going to be pleased 
to know that there is going to be a larger supply of locally 
produced electricity in our province, Mr. Speaker. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I agree with him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order please. Order please. 
 
(14:30) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 222 — The Legislative Assembly and Executive 
Council Amendment Act, 2001 (Set Election Dates) 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move first 
reading of Bill No. 222, The Legislative Assembly and 
Executive Council Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, order please. 
Order please. Members of the Assembly, for the record I just 
would like to record that earlier today I tabled two documents. 
 
One is the annual report . . . 2000 annual report from the 
Saskatchewan Children’s Advocate and the second one was the 
Summary of Child Death Reviews: August 1996 to December 
1998, also from the office of the Children’s Advocate. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand up on behalf of the government and table responses to 
questions 183 through 186 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 183 through to 186 are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 



1166 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

Standing Committee on Health Care 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, at the conclusion of my brief 
remarks, I will be making a motion seconded by the member 
from Saskatoon Northwest to establish a Standing Committee 
on Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think all members of this Assembly will agree 
that health care is one of the highest priorities of Saskatchewan 
citizens and one of the most important issues that we deal with 
as elected officials. It is a subject that affects every one of us 
personally no matter what we do, where we live, or how old we 
are. Saskatchewan people want to know what they can do to 
stay healthy and they want to know what the health care system 
will . . . that the health care system will be there when they or a 
loved one falls ill. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan I believe we have developed a unique 
interest in health care as a result of the leadership role we have 
assumed in developing and improving the medicare system in 
Canada. 
 
Over the years public opinion surveys have consistently found 
health care to be the most important public policy issue in the 
province and across the country. From time to time other 
important issues will eclipse health care in the arena of public 
opinion, but eventually, inevitably, health care will re-emerge 
as the public’s highest priority. 
 
As legislators we are called upon to make many important 
decisions concerning the health care system and the overall 
health of our citizens. Through the passage of legislation and 
the annual health budget, this legislature establishes the legal 
and financial parameters for our health care system. 
 
This year our government will spend over $2.2 billion on health 
care services, representing nearly 40 per cent of the 
government’s operating expenditures. The decisions we make 
can have a significant effect on the health care services 
provided to the public. 
 
But as legislators, while we are involved in the policy 
developments leading up to these important decisions, we 
seldom have the opportunity to engage in a focused discussion 
with those who are directly affected by health policy options. 
 
Over the years this legislature has established a number of 
standing committees where legislators can enter a more detailed 
discussion about specific areas of public policy. Currently there 
are 12 standing committees of this legislator. We have separate 
standing committees on agriculture, budgetary estimates, 
communication, constitutional affairs, Crown corporations, 
education, the environment, municipal law, non-controversial 
Bills, private members’ Bills, privileges and elections, and 
public accounts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are important subjects. These committees 
have served a vital role in examining legislation and 
government policies. However, I believe health care is every bit 
as important as these other issues and I believe the absence of a 
standing committee should be addressed. 
 
Through a standing committee on health, legislators will have 

an opportunity to examine critical issues in the health care field 
and to conduct hearings where members can hear from health 
providers, health groups, and the general public on matters of 
great importance. 
 
The release of the Fyke Commission report is one occasion 
where a standing committee on health could serve an important 
role in gathering feedback on the report from the public and the 
health care community. 
 
The Fyke Commission has proposed a significant shift in the 
way health care is organized and delivered in Saskatchewan. 
The recommendations would affect people and communities 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
As legislators, we must ensure that the views of the public, the 
views of health care providers, and the views of other interested 
groups are brought forward and taken into consideration before 
making decisions about the implementation of the suggestions 
in this report. A standing committee on health would allow 
elected members to perform this important function at a critical 
stage in the evolution of our medicare system. 
 
However, the formation of a standing committee on health is 
not simply a response to the Fyke Commission. In the years 
ahead, this committee will have an opportunity to examine 
different studies and different aspects of our health care system. 
 
In the fall of 2001, the national Commission on the Future of 
Health Care that is being chaired by our former premier, Mr. 
Roy Romanow, will issue a report that addresses challenges 
facing health care right across the country. He’ll be making 
reports throughout, with the final report in the fall of 2002. 
 
That commission has just begun its work and it is much too 
soon to speculate on the outcome. But these recommendations 
will no doubt be of great interest to the public, to health 
providers, and to this legislature. A standing committee on 
health could be convened to study the report and its 
implications for health care delivery in this province. 
 
The standing committee could delve into many other broad 
health policy topics. Just as a Special Committee on Tobacco 
Control has performed a valuable public service, I believe a 
standing committee could make a further contribution in the 
development of public health policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the health system has experienced continual 
change over the past 50 years and we are always looking for 
ways to improve the system. All across Canada, provinces are 
looking for ideas about how to improve the way primary health 
services are delivered to the public. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are looking at ways to improve early 
childhood development programs to ensure that children receive 
the support they need to lead healthy, productive lives. 
 
We are also looking at ways to ensure that we have a sufficient 
number of doctors, nurses, therapists, technicians, and other 
health care providers. 
 
And as health information technology develops, we will be 
looking for guidance from the public and the legislature on the 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1167 

 

potential uses for this technology. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will always be a role for elected members to 
play as new challenges arise and new solutions come forward. I 
believe a standing committee on health is needed today and will 
be needed in the future. Through the strength of its members, 
the committee has the potential to perform a valuable public 
service. 
 
I think all of us in this Assembly recognize the importance of 
health care to our constituents. I think we also recognize the 
important work that can be done by MLAs at the committee 
level. A standing committee on health will provide members 
with a permanent forum to debate and develop policy in an area 
of great public importance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the coalition government is proposing a 
motion to create a standing committee on health. This situation 
should be addressed by our Assembly today, Mr. Speaker. I 
encourage all members to support the motion before the 
Assembly to establish the standing committee on health. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Northeast or Northwest that: 
 

A Standing Committee on Health Care be appointed and 
empowered to examine and inquire into all such matters 
and things as may be referred to it by this Assembly, and to 
report from time to time their observations, thereon; with 
the power to send for persons, papers, and records, to 
examine witnesses under oath; and that Rule 94(1) of the 
Rules and Proceedings of the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan be amended by adding the said committee to 
the list of standing committees of this Assembly; and that 
the membership of the said committee be established by 
order of this Assembly and continue from session to 
session within a legislature, and that all subsequent changes 
to membership be made pursuant to Rule 94(3). 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
privilege to rise today to second the motion made by the Hon. 
Minister of Health to create a standing all-party committee on 
health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is hard to believe that Saskatchewan, the home 
of medicare and other major health care initiatives in Canadian 
history, has not had an all-party standing committee to 
deliberate and consider important matters of health that affect 
all of us until now. A move that both coalition partners feel is in 
the best interests of all Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only do I as a physician have a professional 
interest in the future of health care in this province, as Liberal 
leader I am proud our caucus has taken it as its duty to ensure 
that progressive views of Saskatchewan people have been heard 
in debates in this Assembly over the last few years. 
 
Having come through earlier incarnations of health care reform, 
we have learned that before decisions are made and plans 

started we need to provide the appropriate time to allow for the 
understanding of recommendations and feedback from those 
most affected. 
 
Many of those who presented views to the Fyke Commission 
did so from the vantage point of their respective groups and 
presented viewpoints without seeing the whole of the Fyke 
report. Now the report is released, it is only fair to allow those 
who spoke out earlier to talk about the whole of the report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this coalition government believes that issues 
surrounding health care in our province are so important to 
Saskatchewan people; we have no other choice but to raise the 
discussion above the purely partisan that often takes place with 
regards to issues on health care. 
 
The people of the province elected us all to look after health 
care. The future of health care must be the responsibility of all 
elected members. We are faced with issues that we must make 
informed decisions on, and we can only make those decisions 
based on knowledge and wisdom provided by the health care 
stakeholders, providers, and people of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this type of committee is not new to the Canadian 
experience. Other jurisdictions have this type of committee in 
place where members of all political parties representing all 
political views can make their contributions and make sure all 
voices are heard when it comes to the important issue of health 
care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this type of committee is profoundly democratic 
because everyone’s voice will be heard. The members opposite, 
in their own literature, call for more standing committees to 
allow MLAs a greater voice on the issues affecting this 
Assembly. For a party that claims to be profoundly interested in 
greater democracy for elected members and to give these 
members a greater say in the issues of the day, I cannot see why 
they would not . . . would even consider not allowing such a 
committee dealing with the biggest issue concerning people 
today not to be formed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this committee will give other voices a chance to 
be heard. Voices like Sinclair Harrison of SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), who says 
about the Fyke report and I quote: 
 

His recommendations are going to have to be given serious 
thought. However before any of his recommendations are 
acted on, they will have to receive the okay from 
Saskatchewan residents. 

 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, those voices will be heard by this committee. Mr. 
Speaker, there are other voices out there that need to be heard 
by this committee as well. The Saskatchewan Association of 
Health Organizations has issued a statement calling on the 
Premier to put a consultation process in place where 
stakeholders can discuss and determine guidelines and 
processes for any changes in the delivery of health care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 



1168 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

Organizations) has also called for a process for meaningful 
community involvement that is necessary to ensure the proper 
decisions are made for health care and for our communities. Mr. 
Speaker, SAHO is calling out for this process with the 
formation of this committee. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, Rosalee Longmore, president of the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses said of the Fyke report, to move 
forward there must be wide consultation with all sectors in the 
health care field, as well as the people of Saskatchewan to make 
sure the health care needs of communities are met under such a 
plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan nurses want this committee and 
they want this consultation. Saskatchewan nurses, front-line 
health care providers, have a right to be heard and woe-betide 
anyone who tries to keep their voices from being heard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the College of Physicians and Surgeons of 
Saskatchewan has said it will be prepared to work 
collaboratively with all agencies that have the capacity and 
inclination to implement the Fyke Commission 
recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Medical Association at its 
recent representative assembly has empowered its executive to 
formulate a response to the Fyke report. Our doctors are more 
than prepared to work with this committee to improve our 
health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would hope that no one is suggesting that we 
deny doctors or other front-line health care workers the right to 
be heard and the right to work with this committee, as they have 
already indicated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party claims to represent the 
interests of rural Saskatchewan. But what are the people of rural 
Saskatchewan actually saying. We see in the April 18 editorial 
of The Estevan Mercury advice given we hope that the 
Saskatchewan Party will take to heart. 
 
Among the recommendations put forward by The Mercury 
editorial is to have all politicians get involved in the assessment 
process that is open to all. The Mercury editorial also 
recommends the Saskatchewan Party become an active 
participant in the process. The Mercury says, and I quote: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party chooses not to participate, they 
will lose credibility, and the opportunity to show the public 
their own political will, courage, and leadership capabilities 
in a public forum. This is their golden opportunity to shine 
and show us what they have in the areas of ideas and vision 
for health care in this province. It would be far too easy for 
them to sit back in a cushioned position to hurl barbs and 
criticisms without having to put their own concepts on the 
line. 
 

The Mercury editorial goes on to say this, and I quote: 
 

A big opportunity for the Saskatchewan Party to give the 
public some fresh ideas outside of their nebulous 
statements regarding the need to audit health care, create a 
patient bill of rights, and appoint a health care auditor. 

The Mercury editorial states plainly, and I quote: 
 

The public needs to see this party contribute. 
 

The May 2 editorial, the Weyburn Review said, and I quote: 
 

If they, the Saskatchewan Party, don’t at least take part in 
the committee hearings, they can’t expect to have any voice 
in what follows. The issues at hand are too important for 
partisan politicking. 
 

The Weyburn Review editorial goes on to say: 
 

The opposition has always claimed there are enough health 
care dollars in the system already. They just need to be 
spent better, more wisely, with less emphasis on 
administration and more in front-line care. 
 

If they truly believe this, Mr. Speaker, they need to take part in 
the process, and find out the views of health professionals and 
the public at large, particularly from the rural areas they 
represent, and make sure those views are brought forward, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Lin Orosz, and his Melville Advance column of May 18, asked 
if politics can be set aside when it comes to the Fyke report. 
And he states: 
 

The greatest challenge for the Saskatchewan Party will be 
to rise above its petty political considerations. How 
refreshing it would be to see an opposition party actually do 
what’s best for the common good, instead of basing its 
action on a lust for power. 
 

Mr. Speaker, at the Saskatchewan Party’s 1998 convention, it 
passed several resolutions to enhance legislative reform. 
Among them was that members of the public will be invited to 
make their views known at the committee level. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is what this motion is intended to do, to create 
a fair and democratic forum for people to make their views 
known on the full Fyke report, and now that they have an 
opportunity to study it, and for all of us to see what their 
opinions are. This is something that the Saskatchewan Party has 
said it supports in the past. And unless they have changed their 
mind regarding public input, their was no reason that I can see 
for them refusing to deny that input now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, sitting across the floor are former members of the 
Liberal caucus who have in the past demonstrated their concern 
and their support for real changes to our health care system. 
Although our paths have diverged since then, Mr. Speaker, I 
hope their commitment to improve our health care system, and 
for public involvement in that improvement, still remains 
strong. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are counting on that commitment 
from all of us, all members of this Assembly, and are looking at 
these procedures with anticipation and perhaps a little 
trepidation at what path the House will take. 
 
The Liberal caucus has always taken the position that the public 
and health care providers and stakeholders must be fully 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1169 

 

consulted before changes are implemented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion sets these wheels in motion and that is 
why I am proud to second the motion made by the Minister of 
Health, our coalition partner. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
certainly pleased to join in the debate today on a very important 
motion put forward by the Minister of Health. 
 
And I want to speak about this in a number of ways. First of all, 
the idea of a standing committee on Health as a concept is an 
idea that’s sound. No one can argue of the relative importance 
of health and the Department of Health and the issues 
surrounding health care in this province are not significant 
enough to warrant a standing committee to deal with those 
kinds of issues over time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you’re aware, and the minister pointed out, 
there are a number of standing committees of this legislature. 
Some of them function on a regular basis. Committees like 
Public Accounts and Crown Corporations meet on a routine and 
a regular basis and have a very clear set of guidelines and a 
clear direction established over our parliamentary tradition. And 
they certainly have, by and large, proved useful to the members 
of this Assembly and the people of this province. 
 
Other committees, and I can think of Agriculture for example, 
had not met for years up until last fall when we used that as the 
vehicle to invite members from the Agriculture Committee to 
make presentations to this legislature. 
 
But prior to that, I believe it was maybe in the ’30s that this 
committee had actually functioned and met before that time. 
Standing Committee on Education, I am not aware of when 
they’ve last met. 
 
So that by the fact that we have a standing committee of this 
legislature, of and by itself, doesn’t mean a whole lot if you’re 
not going to use the opportunity of these committees in an 
appropriate way and a well thought out way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my understanding as well that there is a 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures that has been 
doing some significant amount of work in terms of looking at 
other parliamentary jurisdictions, both in this country and 
abroad in the British parliamentary system, who are looking at 
the whole issue of the role and function of our committees — 
the standing committees, special committees, legislative 
committees, what the role and mandate should be of these 
committees. 
 
And I understand as well, members on both sides of the House 
are participating in this investigation study to look at how does 
the committee assist and function and how could it best 
function in our provincial legislature. And I think that, as well, 
is a very important initiative that is ongoing by our legislature. 
 
And certainly, from my perspective, I think that there may be 
some real significant changes happen in the role and 
responsibilities of not only committees but individual members 

in opposition, in Executive Council, and backbenchers. 
 
All of these issues, I believe, are being considered under the 
terms of reference of this Special Committee on Rules and 
Procedures. And, Mr. Speaker, I certainly look forward to what 
that committee is going to recommend in terms of the long-term 
reorganization, I hope, of the structure of how we actually 
conduct our affairs in this legislature on behalf of the people of 
this province. And I think that that is also important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this process, I think it is important to highlight 
the fact that health care is a very significant issue in the 
provincial scene. Health care occupies almost 40 per cent of the 
provincial department budgets, and so a $2 billion expenditure 
each and every year is a very significant portion of our fiscal 
responsibility as a province and as a legislature. 
 
But more important, I think, even than that, is the whole issue 
of how important the health care system is to people. It’s not 
just a monetary issue that talks about 40 per cent of the 
provincial budget or so much per cent of the GDP (gross 
domestic product) and is this number sustainable or not. The 
question is, how does the system respond to the day-to-day 
needs and concerns of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Every day there are tens of thousands perhaps of people who 
are accessing, in one way or another, the health care system. If 
it is something that is very routine and predictable, something 
that is dealing with healthy lifestyles or outcomes or people 
who are involved in leadership and governance issues with the 
health care system or people that are actually experiencing a 
very significant event that might not be all that happy and might 
be a trauma or an accident or a sudden illness or a catastrophic 
problem, thousands of people across this province, on a daily 
basis, are accessing the health care system. 
 
And statistically, people tell me that the health care system is 
something that isn’t in your top-of-mind awareness until you 
need to access that system, and then it goes from zero interest to 
right to the top of the issue when something happens to yourself 
or one of your loved ones. 
 
And so it is much more than a fiscal issue, although the whole 
fiscal sustainability of the system is an important issue to deal 
with. But more importantly in my mind, Mr. Speaker, is health 
care is a people issue and it’s an issue that is something that is 
very near and dear to people over time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in this motion to set up a standing committee, in 
principle I think that there is nothing particularly of concern in 
doing that, and even more importantly, the concept of elevating 
the issue of health care to the level of a standing committee I 
think is important in the long term. But, Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to raise just some cautions. 
 
First of all, I am concerned in terms of how this is going to fit 
into the whole reorganization of the committee structure that is 
being undertaken. And I don’t have a problem about putting this 
committee on the floor at this stage in a similar fashion, and 
from my understanding of the proposed legislation, it would be 
very similar in structure and organization to what existing 
committees are. And so it is not sort of being set up in a special 
way in isolation from other committees. 



1170 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

And so I understand that following recommendations of the 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures, that the whole 
relationship of this committee may change, as well as other 
committees may change as well following those 
recommendations and on the deliberations of this Assembly in 
terms of what a new organizational structure may look like. 
 
So I understand that. But I do raise it as a concern because what 
I fear is happening is that this committee is being struck just to 
deal with the Fyke Commission report, and I have a concern 
about that of course. I want to make sure that people understand 
that the idea of a special committee on health, in principle, is a 
good idea, but I want to make sure it’s done in the bigger 
picture context and not just as a knee-jerk reaction to a report 
that has come before the Assembly. 
 
There have been all kinds of opportunities in the past when this 
government, expressing their so-called concern about 
consultation and all the rest of it, could have struck a special 
committee or a standing committee on health care, and they 
didn’t choose to do that. They’ve been government for the last 
decade, and this is a good idea. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And so why all of a sudden when the Fyke report is now on the 
table is the great need for having this happen all of a sudden, 
before the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures have 
given their deliberations in their report. So I’m concerned about 
the motivation. 
 
The second thing that I’m concerned about is that I don’t 
pretend to be the most experienced parliamentarian in this 
Assembly but I have been around a little while now, Mr. 
Speaker, and I certainly have been here as a member of other 
standing committees in the past. I’ve had the pleasure not only 
to serve on the Standing Committee on Public Accounts, I’ve 
had the pleasure and the opportunity to chair it in the past, and I 
understand something about the committee process. 
 
I’ve also had the opportunity to participate in the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations and I also understood how 
that worked. 
 
And part of the problem that I had is out of the past experiences 
that I’ve had on actual committees in this House . . . the 
member, the seconder of the motion, the member from 
Saskatoon Northwest can stand up and talk with all these great 
platitudes about how non-political it’s going to be. Everything 
he does is political. Unfortunately he does it wrong almost 
every time that he ever enters into anything. 
 
And so I get real nervous when that member thinks it’s a good 
idea because it almost surely might not given that member’s 
track record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the past I sat on both Public Accounts, as I 
mentioned, and Standing Committee on Crown Corporations, 
and I’d like to tell you a little bit of the experience. 
 
We tried very hard — and the member from Meadow Lake was 
the Deputy Chair when I was the Chair of Public Accounts — 
and we made a deliberate effort to not politicize that committee 

and to deal with the business before Public Accounts. And it 
worked as long as it was sort of non-political. As long as there 
was nothing involved and it was just very benign and you could 
just sort of neutralize things, well it wasn’t a problem. 
 
But as soon as there was anything at all that happened in the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts that had the least little 
bit of ramifications for the government, you could just see them 
lining up and saying, forget about this great utopian issue about 
how well this committee is going to work and how non-partisan 
it is. It became partisan instantly. 
 
And the NDP staffer that sat behind the members on that side of 
the committee room made sure that the members knew exactly 
what was involved. They were very well briefed about the 
political ramifications of the committee work and decisions 
were either yeahed or nayed on the basis of a political 
imperative every time it became political, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the actions of my experience in the Committee on Public 
Accounts simply was not borne out in reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second committee I participated on, as I said, 
was the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations, and the 
reason I was involved with that committee was because I was at 
the time the critic for the Crown Investments Corporation and 
the Channel Lake inquiry was referred to the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, again there was an NDP member that 
chaired the committee, the member from Saskatoon Southeast, I 
believe. And there were all kinds of lawyers and testimony and 
television cameras, and the whole thing went on. And it was, 
again, a great show. 
 
The Minister of Economic Development in charge of CIC at the 
time, Mr. Lingenfelter — I believe I can use the name of a past 
member — got up in this House and he said how concerned 
they were about what had happened in Channel Lake and how 
they wanted to have us all come and join in this great effort to 
get to the bottom of it and so that we could strike a non-partisan 
vein in this whole affair. And at the end of the day we would 
make meaningful recommendations that were going to be 
listened to because this was such an important issue. 
 
I’ve heard the good words before. They weren’t uttered from 
the member from Saskatoon Northwest; they were muttered by 
the Deputy Premier. And we again said, well let’s give it a 
chance. Let’s participate in the process. Let’s give it a chance. 
And we went through the whole exercise. 
 
We participated, we read the documents, we studied all the 
issues. We participated in the investigation, we asked questions, 
we tried to get to the bottom of the thing. And when we got near 
to the time when we finally were coming to a conclusion, you 
know what? Brian Topp from the Premier’s office wrote the 
recommendations, released them to the media, and we hadn’t 
even seen them. 
 
So thank you very much for the great involvement and the great 
sort of process about what was going on. Thank you very much 
for this non-partisan committee that was going to have 
meaningful input from us, that was going to have a meaningful 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1171 

 

process, when the NDP staffers wrote the final report and they 
didn’t even have the courtesy to show it to us who were 
supposedly important members of this whole process. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, please excuse me if I’m just a little bit cynical 
about all the kind words that come from the other side of the 
House about how this process is going to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t know that there’s many people in this 
province that would sit there and put up with the kind of abuse 
and process that we have by these members that we have 
entered into in good faith and then have been turned around and 
treated with absolute disgust and disdain. And there would be 
no people in this province that are going to sit there and come 
back to that table again. We just can’t trust these people to do 
anything that isn’t political. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly also think it is 
important for the people of this province to say what they feel 
about the Fyke report. I think that’s true; I think it’s important. 
And I will bet you long dollars that the Minister of Health is 
currently getting a lot more letters than I’m getting from people 
explaining what they think. I also know that I bet you that the 
Minister of Health is getting representation from all of the 
groups that presented to Fyke — from the nurses and the 
doctors and the psychiatrists and the health districts. And all of 
these people are expressing their focus on this whole issue of 
Fyke. Because they’re saying it to me, so I’m sure they’re 
saying it even more forcefully to the minister. 
 
So no one can say that the people of this province don’t have an 
opportunity. They can pick up the phone. They can write a 
letter. They can send a fax. They can send an e-mail. And they 
actually do get to visit with the opposition about these issues. 
All of these things are open, as they should be on every issue. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are not going to 
appreciate having another committee be manipulated by this 
non-political government as they have promised to do and their 
record says just simply will not happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that it is important that people 
have involvement in the future direction of health care in this 
province. It’s absolutely critical. But we have a government that 
has been at the reins of authority in this province for the last 10 
years, and where have they taken the health care system in this 
province? They’ve gotten themselves from one crisis to the next 
until finally they, in desperation, not knowing where to go 
because the mess was getting out of control, they end up with a 
Fyke Commission. 
 
Two million dollars later, how thoughtful is this report? Did the 
report study what was happening in other countries, or what has 
happened, according to a lot of people in the professional health 
care business are saying, this report is more about ideology than 
it is about pure, good research that would look at what’s 
happening in Denmark, in Sweden, in Germany, in New 
Zealand, or England, or the United States, or across the world. 
 
Where are things happening that are solid and good? We spent 
$2 million and they still don’t have any suggestions other than a 

continuation of closures and the wellness theory that has got us 
into the problem we are right now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, what we have to do is say to this government, 
we all have to live up to our responsibilities. As the official 
opposition, we asked ourselves that question very honestly early 
on in the Fyke Commission report. And we said, is it our 
responsibility to present to Mr. Fyke or not? As a member of 
the opposition, should we listen to Fyke and then make our 
presentation after the fact? 
 
And we said no, Mr. Speaker, it is time that we came forward 
before the Fyke report was released and said what we thought 
were the concerns and the issues of health care in 
Saskatchewan. And on February 15, I believe, we made that 
submission to Mr. Fyke, we released it to the public, and I took 
an hour in my speech on the Speech from the Throne reply to 
talk about all of those issues and they’re a matter of the record 
in Hansard and I passed out copies of our report to members 
opposite. 
 
We did that upfront and it’s now still posted on our Internet site 
and anybody in this province is not only open to view it and 
comment on it, it’s there for all to see. And we’re very proud of 
it. 
 
Now does that mean it’s a definitive paper? Absolutely not. But 
we believe it is a solid guideline of how we would approach the 
issues of health care and how we would deal with some issues 
that just simply are begging for decisions. 
 
While the Fyke Commission was being constituted, the minister 
of the day said, oh, we can’t make a possible decision of any 
kind because we’ve got to wait for Fyke. And so we’ve sat here 
now about 18 months with absolutely no decisions being made 
and all of the concerns and issues and problems piling up. And 
so it’s getting to a time that we’re very, very concerned about 
some very critical issues that need to be addressed and dealt 
with. 
 
And certainly one that is very topical and current is the situation 
of the health sciences at the University of Saskatchewan. The 
president of the University, Dr. MacKinnon has explained the 
concern that he has about the lack of commitment of this 
government to the educational system at the university in 
general, but in particular, but in particular of the health sciences 
college. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was headlines in the paper as of yesterday 
that are still . . . or this morning concerned about the College of 
Medicine and the fact that the dean of Medicine, the search for 
the dean has been postponed because quite frankly nobody 
wants to come to a college whose future has very much been 
placed in doubt by this government. 
 
And this government should know that. The Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education should know that and the Minister of 
Health should know that. 
 
And there has been some constant erosion of funding and 
commitment to the point there are people that are leaving the 
College of Medicine and going to other jurisdictions. There are 
people whose bags are packed and are currently negotiating 



1172 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

with other jurisdictions. And this government wants to study 
some more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the accreditation of this college is coming up for 
review in the very short future and if we don’t meet the 
minimum standards, we’ve got a big problem, Mr. Speaker. 
And in the meantime these guys sit here and say, oh, we’re not 
going to play politics this time, just trust us this one last time 
and it will somehow go better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s not only a responsibility for the official 
opposition to come up with a position on what we feel should 
be happening in this province, there is a greater responsibility of 
the government of the day to say what should be happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — They’re the people that are supposed to be 
knowing what’s going on, Mr. Speaker, and this government 
has not only created the mess, they now don’t know what to do 
about it and they are sitting here trying to stall as long as 
possible about any kind of direction at all and in the meantime, 
the health care system is at risk. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I certainly think that I . . . I certainly know 
that I have no problem philosophically with a standing 
committee on health. I have a big problem with the way this 
government will manipulate it and will manipulate the people 
into thinking that they’re going to be involved in something 
meaningful; in the meantime, a staffer in the backroom is 
already writing the decisions that they’re going to make, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like 
to say that certainly I do not object to the concept of a standing 
committee on a subject, which after all is overwhelmingly the 
largest single item on the province’s budget. However I do have 
some concern, as the member for Melfort-Tisdale has 
explained, that this might be nothing more than a stall tactic. 
 
Certainly to consult with the people of Saskatchewan is always 
of value, especially in a matter as crucial as health. 
 
Now specifically I want to talk about the response to the Fyke 
committee. Now more than a decade ago and under a different 
administration, we had the Murray Commission. And the 
Murray Commission said that the optimum number of major 
acute care regional hospitals for this province would be 12 to 
15. Now that was under the Conservatives over a decade ago. 
What happened with the Murray Commission? Nothing. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now we come back after many years of health reform, a lot of 
water under the bridge, many changes, and this present 
administration has the Fyke Commission. And what do they 
say? They say that 12 to 15 major acute care regional hospitals 
is the optimum number for this province . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, I do. The Liberals have campaigned on it 
in 1995 and 1999. 
 
But the interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, is we had the Murray 
Commission in the late ’80s; we have the Fyke Commission 

report in 2000-2001. All those years separate, we get exactly 
the same recommendation. And I fear that we’re going to do 
with the Fyke Commission what we did with the Murray 
Commission, and in another 10 years no doubt another 
commission will again recommend what Murray recommended 
and Fyke recommended. We have heard from the experts and 
they have told us the same thing now over a period of many 
years. 
 
We also heard Mr. Fyke in this Chamber talk about the cost of 
inaction. And he said that the cost of inaction is one of three or 
a combination of all three. If we do not act, we will see longer 
waiting lists and a further deterioration in services. Or, two, we 
will see de-insured services. We’ve already had a lot of 
de-insured services in our province, especially by virtue of the 
drug plan simply not keeping pace with new drugs coming on 
the market. And three, user fees. 
 
Those are all three very unattractive possibilities. And I think 
all members of this House would be unanimous in saying none 
of those possibilities are ones we want to see happen in this 
province. 
 
However what Fyke told us very clearly is the present system is 
not sustainable. We have double-digit increases in our health 
budget on an annual basis and we have increases in our health 
budget which are two, three, and four times the increase in our 
economy, the increase in the GDP. And that is what he means 
when he says this is not sustainable. And if we do not act, the 
decision not to act is a decision to have a continually faltering 
system. 
 
Well consultation with the stakeholders is important. But may I 
say, Mr. Speaker, that if the government would have the 
courage to issue at least a preliminary response to Fyke, that 
would allow the citizens of this province, and especially the 
special interest groups and stakeholders, to respond to the 
government’s position. It would give them something to react 
to. 
 
But in the absence of any response from the government, I 
would suggest to you that there is nothing for the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association or the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses or 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, there is 
nothing more for them to do than repeat what they have already 
said to Fyke. And as the member for Melfort-Tisdale just said, 
the Saskatchewan Party has already presented its paper to the 
Fyke Commission. 
 
Presumably if the Saskatchewan Party went before the review 
of the review, about all they could do is repeat the paper they’ve 
already presented. And I respectfully submit that SUN 
(Saskatchewan Union of Nurses), SAHO, and the SMA 
(Saskatchewan Medical Association) will also have nothing 
more they can do than repeat the positions they have already put 
forward. 
 
Whereas if the government would have the courage to tell us in 
what direction their thinking is moving, and how they would 
like to respond to Fyke, then that would allow the stakeholder 
groups and the citizens of this province generally to respond to 
that and say how they think Fyke should be implemented, as 
opposed to, as I say, merely repeating positions and papers 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1173 

 

which are already given and already there. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we know that we have a rapidly increasing 
health budget which does not appear to be dealing with the 
underlying problems. I as an MLA, and I’m sure all of my 
colleagues on both sides of this House, a major part of my work 
now is listening to people who have been on waiting lists for 
months and months and months, and phoning to the client 
representative of the various health districts to see what could 
be done to get people through. That’s now a major part of an 
MLA’s job. 
 
And may I say, I find it unfortunate that even doctors are now 
recommending to their patients who can’t get service, that they 
should talk to their MLA. Now there’s something just faintly 
bizarre about the fact that we have created in this province a 
system where if you have a health problem, you talk to your 
MLA. But that is in point of fact now a major part of my work. 
I assume it’s a major part of every other member’s work in this 
House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to give another example of where I do 
not think we need further review for the government to act. And 
that is in the example of standard ambulance charges. The Fyke 
Commission said very clearly that ambulance charges based on 
mileage discriminate against rural residents. In point of fact, it’s 
two-tier medicine, the sort of two-tier medicine the NDP tell us 
they are opposed to. That is a very strong example of two-tier 
medicine. 
 
And if we look . . . and Fyke did a good job of this. The 
Saskatchewan Health Review Commission that they had before 
that did the same thing. And it pointed out, it pointed out, Mr. 
Speaker, that the costs of ambulance services in this province 
depend on what health district you live in, depend on the 
number of kilometres you have to travel, and even of course the 
issue of inter-facility transfer. In some health districts there is 
no charge for that; in other districts there is. 
 
Well frankly, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to be non-partisan — 
and I sense that maybe my friends opposite are slipping away 
from their non-partisan role right now — if we’re going to be 
non-partisan, then we should be united in saying the rights to 
ambulance service should not vary according to what 
community one lives in. We should all have the same rights to 
ambulance service, and we simply don’t. I happen to live in a 
community where our basic ambulance charges are among the 
highest. 
 
And so if we believe in one-tier health care, then the Fyke 
Commission’s recommendation of standard ambulance charges 
that are not distance-based is something all of the experts agree 
on; I think all of the members here could agree on. I don’t sense 
that anyone here would say that’s a bad policy. I don’t think any 
member here is going to rise in his or her place and say, I think 
distance-based charges for ambulance services are fair. I think 
people who live in a small community or on the farms should 
have to pay more than someone who lives in Saskatoon or 
Regina. I don’t sense any member’s going to do that. 
 
And we’ve had a commission from Sask Health that reported 
the same thing. We’ve had the Fyke Commission that reported 
the same thing. We had the SEMSA (Saskatchewan Emergency 

Medical Services Association) response that reported the same 
thing. So all of the experts agree that we should have standard 
ambulance charges. We should not have distance-based 
charges. 
 
So I say to my NDP colleagues, if we’re going to be 
non-partisan, here’s a part of the Fyke report that can clearly be 
implemented right now. There’s no disagreement from 
anybody. So if we’re really involved in a non-partisan process, 
here’s something that can be moved on immediately and we do 
not have to wait. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said there’s certainly nothing the matter 
with having a standing committee on health. I’ve also said 
there’s obviously nothing the matter with consulting with the 
people of Saskatchewan as to how to design health care for a 
new century. 
 
But I do have concern that the consultation might be an excuse 
for inaction. I am concerned that this is a government which has 
lost its nerve, lost its courage. I hope I’m wrong. 
 
But may I close with this: governing is about making the tough 
decisions. And I sense that this is a government which has lost 
its courage to make the tough decisions, and for that reason 
appointing a committee to consult is an excuse for inaction. 
 
If this committee is going to consult and then bring back 
recommendations which the government will implement, then I 
think it will be a valuable process and I support it. If this 
committee is simply a smokescreen by which the government 
can hide its inaction, then I think it is unfortunate. And as Fyke 
correctly and strongly pointed out to us, there is a very heavy 
price to be paid for inaction. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, this is indeed an interesting debate today. This is only 
the second time since I have been elected that this type of 
debate has taken place — the establishment of a standing 
committee. 
 
Unfortunately though, this particular case, Mr. Speaker, is just 
another cynical government move by a government that has run 
cynical politics in this province since 1991. And fact is, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a government opposite that has done everything 
it can to avoid any responsibility. They continually blame 
somebody else for everything that happens. They refuse to 
make a decision, and when a decision is forced on them they 
blame somebody else for it. This is simply another attempt, Mr. 
Speaker, to do this. 
 
The other time a standing committee was appointed by this 
legislature since I’ve been elected, Mr. Speaker, happened in 
1992. That was the Standing Committee on the Environment — 
another very worthwhile sector that needs to be looked at, Mr. 
Speaker, another very worthwhile committee. 
 
There was a reference made to that committee because standing 
committees, Mr. Speaker, can only receive references from this 



1174 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

legislature. It’s only what the majority in the House decides that 
a committee will look at, that they are allowed to do a review 
on. 
 
Well the Standing Committee on the Environment had a Bill 
referred to it, Mr. Speaker. And the committee did its due 
diligence, went out around the province — there are a number 
of members still here that were on that committee, Mr. Speaker 
— and the committee came back and made its report. 
 
And what happened after that, Mr. Speaker, with the Standing 
Committee on the Environment? It did the job the government 
wanted to do in 1992, and has never sat again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Oh it was a very important committee when the minister for the 
Environment stood up and moved a new Standing Committee 
on the Environment. It was the best thing since sliced bread. 
And was never heard of again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The move, Mr. Speaker, by the Minister of Health, to establish 
a new standing committee on health, on the surface, Mr. 
Speaker, is a very good idea. Unfortunately it’s simply being 
used for cynical politics. 
 
And the letters we have received, Mr. Speaker, from the 
Premier, states that the committee will be struck to review the 
Commission on Health, the Fyke report, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t 
talk about all of the aspects of health care, Mr. Speaker, that 
might need to be reviewed in this province. It doesn’t talk about 
specific doctors or nurses or any of those other issues that need 
to be dealt with. Ambulances. No, Mr. Speaker, the letter says 
the committee will deal with the Fyke report. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we’ve already stated our opinion on holding 
more committee hearings on the Fyke report. We believe, Mr. 
Speaker, that what needs to be done is some action taken now, 
not a year later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of the members opposite are saying take a 
look at the outline of the motion, on what it refers to. Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s pretty ambiguous. So was the outline for the 
Environment Committee, Mr. Speaker, but it still never sits. 
 
Just like the Standing Committee on Education. I’ve been here 
since October of 1991, Mr. Speaker, and the Standing 
Committee on Education has not met even once. Not even once. 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, they have not even met to appoint a 
chairman. 
 
The Standing Committee on Agriculture met last year for the 
very first time since 1953. That’s how much these members 
opposite believe in standing committees, Mr. Speaker. They 
don’t. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The standing committee on municipal government, Mr. 
Speaker, held one set of hearings in the last 10 years. These 
people do not use standing committees, Mr. Speaker, to carry 
on the normal business of the House. They use them for strictly 
political purposes. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, I heard the other day the Government 

House Leader make a comment on some results coming out of a 
Crown Corporation Committee meeting, where he stood in the 
House here and insinuated that the government had somehow 
paid the legal bills of a member of the committee. 
 
Well when he was questioned outside though, Mr. Speaker, oh, 
no, no, we didn’t spend government money on the member’s 
legal bills, but rather on a legal bill related to the case. Again, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s simply politics on behalf of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am part of a special committee that has been 
struck, the Committee on Rules and Procedures. The purpose of 
this committee, Mr. Speaker, is to look at how committees are 
used in this legislature. Because obviously, Mr. Speaker, if the 
committees never meet, they’re not being used — Agriculture, 
Education, Municipal Law, Constitution, Environment, Mr. 
Speaker. And now this government wants to strike another one. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I would have thought, since there’s a 
committee, an all-party committee in place looking at how to 
use committees, that the government would wait — would wait 
and see what kind of a report came from the Special Committee 
on Rules and Procedures, Mr. Speaker, before they struck any 
new committees. 
 
To take a look at what recommendations might come from that 
committee’s deliberations and the structures they have looked at 
across Canada, Mr. Speaker, and in other jurisdictions to 
determine what would be of value to Saskatchewan, what 
would work in Saskatchewan, rather than simply using the 
establishment of another standing committee for cynical 
political purposes, Mr. Speaker, which is what this exercise is 
all about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the health community, communities 
themselves, had the opportunity, even individuals, Mr. Speaker, 
had opportunities to make presentations to the Fyke 
Commission. The only ones who did not do so were the NDP 
government, Mr. Speaker. Everybody else had a chance to have 
input. 
 
Now they may not agree with what Mr. Fyke is reporting, and I 
certainly don’t agree with what Mr. Fyke is reporting, but 
people had that opportunity to have input. And I can certainly 
understand them wanting to have a say further to air their 
grievances. 
 
The Minister of Health, the member from Saskatoon Northwest 
read a number of quotes from The Estevan Mercury and the 
Weyburn Review but he failed to read the quotes from the 
Redvers New Optimist, Mr. Speaker, that held a . . . In that 
community there was a public meeting after the Fyke 
Commission reported, when people had an opportunity to see 
what was in that document, Mr. Speaker. Over 500 people 
turned out, and none of them liked the Fyke report, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And in fact, the message that I received — because I was at that 
meeting, Mr. Speaker — was to not support this Fyke report 
and not to be a part of their sham committee, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Minister of Health was not there; nor were any other 
government members, either NDP or Liberal, Mr. Speaker. 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1175 

 

They were noticeable in their absence but they had been invited, 
Mr. Speaker. And fact is the chairman of the meeting read out a 
nice reply from the Premier saying: sorry, I can’t be there nor 
can anybody else from this government. 
 
So it wasn’t that they hadn’t been notified, Mr. Speaker. They 
certainly had been. They just chose not to hear. They had an 
opportunity there, Mr. Speaker, to hear the concerns of 500 
people, and yet they turned it down. Now they want to strike a 
committee to let people have a say. 
 
Well, from the information we have received, Mr. Speaker, 
from the members opposite, the initial thoughts on holding 
committee hearings would be held in Regina only, Mr. Speaker, 
would be held with invited groups, not individuals, Mr. 
Speaker. So there was going to be the small select group that 
were invited to come to the Legislative Building in Regina to 
tell a committee what they thought. 
 
It wasn’t going to be open to the general public. It wasn’t going 
to be open to communities or groups or individuals that were 
not on the government’s invitation list, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My colleague from Melfort talked about the hijacking of other 
committees, Mr. Speaker. And Crown Corporations is the prime 
example, Mr. Speaker, where the committee was hijacked on 
the Channel Lake report where the government . . . Executive 
Council staffer wrote the report and presented it as the final 
report to the media, Mr. Speaker, even though the individual 
members on the committee had not even seen it. 
 
Since that date, Mr. Speaker, Crown Corporations Committee 
seems to be most reluctant to meet, even though, Mr. Speaker, 
in the past, it has been one of the more active committees. 
There seems to be a great deal of reticence on calling that 
meeting to order since the Channel Lake report, Mr. Speaker, 
and you have to wonder why that is when the government 
claims to be so open and accountable and desirous to hear what 
people have to say. 
 
We had an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, we had an opportunity to 
actually ask questions of Mr. Fyke on the floor of the Assembly 
here, Mr. Speaker, and we took advantage of that because we 
felt it was important, Mr. Speaker, to listen to what Fyke had to 
say and that he have an opportunity to answer our questions. 
 
Unfortunately though, Mr. Speaker, once the questions started 
to get a little more difficult and Mr. Fyke didn’t want to answer 
them, what happened? Well the Committee of the Whole 
hearings, hearing Mr. Fyke, was immediately shut down by the 
government, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t really want to hear what 
people had to say. It was just another show trial, Mr. Speaker, 
to bamboozle the public and to really not answer any of the 
questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is value in standing committees. There is 
value in all-party committees, Mr. Speaker, but not the way this 
government has run them. If they’re used for their proper 
purposes, Mr. Speaker, they can do good work. They do good 
work in other jurisdictions. They have done good work in this 
province in the past. 
 
But not with the cynical way that this government has tried to 

manipulate the committee structure, Mr. Speaker. They do not 
do good work for the people of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Speaker, 
while the idea of a standing committee is certainly worthwhile 
and valid, the purposes to which this government puts standing 
committees or any committee is a sham. 
 
We have a select committee, Mr. Speaker, out there right now 
studying the child sex trade. It was established over a year ago 
and has yet to report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have been holding up the 
meetings. They wouldn’t meet in December and they wouldn’t 
meet in January because it was their own leadership campaigns 
— Mr. Speaker, we couldn’t possibly be involved in 
government business at that time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the committee, any standing committee, is a 
good idea, but it should wait though, Mr. Speaker, until the 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures reports and makes 
recommendations to this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
The Chair: — I call on the Minister of Finance to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated to my left is 
Dr. Paul Boothe, the deputy minister of Finance. And to his left 
is Mr. Terry Paton, the Provincial Comptroller. To my right is 
Mr. Len Rog, who is the assistant deputy minister of the 
revenue division of the Department of Finance. Behind Mr. Rog 
is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who is the assistant deputy minister of 
taxation and intergovernmental affairs. 
 
Behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle, the assistant deputy minister of 
the treasury board branch. Behind Dr. Boothe is Mr. Bill Van 
Sickle, the executive director of the corporate services division. 
And behind Mr. Paton is Ms. Joanne Brockman, the executive 
director of the economic and fiscal policy branch of the 
Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. 
Minister, welcome, and welcome to your officials for the period 
of time we have this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was reviewing the information that you provided 
the last time we were in Committee of Finance with your 
department. And we had I think an open discussion on pensions 
and where we’re headed with liabilities and that entire aspect. 
 



1176 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

Mr. Minister, one of the concerns that has been raised by the 
Saskatchewan Government Superannuates Association, the 
people that have worked for various departments, one of their 
concerns is all around a declining pension and a declining value 
and the loss of health benefits. 
 
And I know, Mr. Minister, that in our debate last week when we 
were talking about pensions and we were talking about the 
kinds of ramifications that pensions do have on individuals, I 
had the opportunity to raise some of their concerns. 
 
And I know, Mr. Minister, that you’ve met with them and 
you’ve had the opportunity to discuss loss of health benefits, 
because that occurs each and every time someone retires; that 
the benefits that they have when they are employed by a various 
agency or a Crown entity, those benefits usually end. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Minister, I wonder if you would share your explanation. I 
found it interesting in listening to the chairperson of the SGSA 
(Saskatchewan Government Superannuates Association) when 
he talked about the various pension plans that are contained 
within, I believe, vote (FI09) when we talked about pensions 
and benefits. Would you explain how many different pension 
plans are involved in that section, and how each one may be 
similar or different? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, under (FI09) there are five 
pension plans listed there, as well as the Canada Pension Plan. 
But in terms of the provincial plans, there are five. 
 
The first four listed — the Public Service Superannuation Plan, 
the MLA (Members of Legislative Assembly) Superannuation 
Plan, the Judges’ Superannuation Plan, the Municipal 
Employees’ Pension Plan — these are defined benefit plans. 
The Public Employees’ Pension Plan is a defined contribution 
plan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for that explanation, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, under the old plans that I believe existed prior to 
1977, if I have that date right, the plans that were in place, 
many of the superannuates that belonged to those pension plans 
indicate that the benefits being provided by people who belong 
to those plans are different. Is that true, and if so, how does 
your department deal with negotiations with each of those 
departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I should say, Mr. Chair, in addition to what 
I said in my last answer, the MLA superannuation plan, I said 
was a defined benefit plan. Of course, for anyone elected after, I 
believe, it’s 1978, it is a defined contribution plan. So that the 
member from the opposition and myself, for example, are in a 
defined contribution plan. 
 
These plans are statutory. I’m not sure what the member means 
when he refers to negotiations with departments. These are 
statutory plans. The old plans have a defined benefit set out by 
statute; the new plan is a defined contribution plan. And I’m not 
quite sure what the member means when he talks about 
negotiations concerning that. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
maybe I wasn’t clear enough. What I’m asking is that the old 
plans that existed . . . Each and every year inflation takes a role, 
or plays a role in the amount of money that’s being . . . that 
people are receiving. Do all of the old plans have an indexing 
involved, or is that the role that the government plays in 
changing the amount of indexing that is granted to each of the 
plans? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In answer to that question, Mr. Chair, with 
respect to the defined benefit plans, they are defined benefit 
plans. So by definition, the benefit that the member is entitled to 
once the member retires, that is the member of the Public 
Service once he or she retires, is as defined in the plan by 
statute. 
 
There is no guaranteed indexing whatsoever. The member is 
entitled to get what is defined as the benefit. 
 
Having said that, in most years the Government of 
Saskatchewan has provided an ad hoc increase to supplement 
the defined benefit. And I can tell the member that ad hoc 
increases were provided in 1986-87, ’88-89, ’89-90, ’90-91, 
’93-94, ’95-96, ’97-98, ’98-99, ’99-2000, and 2000-2001. 
 
So in most years an increase has been provided. It’s not set out 
in the statute. It’s not part of the defined benefit. It is simply a 
decision made year after year by the government according to 
the finances of the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, through 
the minister, the membership of the SGSA, the Saskatchewan 
Government Superannuates Association, contains many people 
that have worked for various departments, various agencies, 
Crown corporations. The one agency that jumps to mind, Mr. 
Speaker, is the Saskatchewan Power Corporation. 
 
I’m wondering if the people who have previously worked for 
the, you know, Saskatchewan government in various other 
departments, when you’ve explained how the indexing has 
taken place at different years, is that a statute within the Power 
Corporation plan or is the same procedure followed that you 
just explained? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. It is the same procedure with respect 
to the old SaskPower superannuates plan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I recognize that you have had 
presentation to you from members of the Superannuates group 
regarding their concern about health benefits. And I’m 
wondering, have your officials in the pension benefits area, 
have they done an actuarial study to see what the costs might be 
for providing a single coverage for health benefits, a dental 
coverage? Has any study been done on the number of people? 
 
And while I’m asking that question regarding whether or not 
there is a study, could you indicate how many people are 
involved in the pension . . . Saskatchewan Government 
Superannuates Association? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We do not know, Mr. Chair, how many 
members the Saskatchewan Government Superannuates 
Association has. In terms of the number that could be members, 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1177 

 

there are 7,000 superannuates. So we know that. How many are 
involved in the association would be another question. 
 
In terms of the question respecting is there an actuarial study 
with respect to the cost of health benefits for retired public 
servants, the answer is no, there is no actuarial study. 
 
We do know from talking to the industry and the superannuates 
themselves that it’s a very expensive proposition because, as 
you can appreciate, if you’re putting together a group plan for 
retired people the cost tends to be quite high because the health 
care costs for retired people are higher than the general 
population. And that’s a problem that the superannuates 
association has found in trying to contract for health benefits. 
And I think they’re finding that really all of the carriers of this 
kind of insurance want to charge them more than people are 
generally prepared to pay. 
 
So it seems like if there is a solution to continued health care 
benefits for superannuates, it probably would be to try to 
include them as part of a larger group as opposed to having a 
group of the superannuates themselves. Because they have been 
trying that and the experience thus far is not all that good 
because the price that the insurance companies want is very, 
very high and, unfortunately, going up more and more. 
 
So we sympathize very much with the desire of the 
superannuates to have health coverage. It’s a very expensive 
proposition, and so the solution to the problem does not seem 
all that easy. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And while we 
recognize, and I think the retired public servants recognize, that 
there indeed will be a cost, I believe that they will continue to 
lobby to deal with that because most people, as they retire, 
experience the majority of their health costs in their latter years. 
And this has been a tremendous burden on a lot of individuals 
as they’ve looked at the health costs, as they’ve looked at the 
drug plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, your government has introduced a deductible — 
$850 semi-annually, so we’re looking at a $1,700 deductible. 
Many of these people are finding that as soon as they retire 
they’ve lost the benefit, that health benefit. If it was a drug plan, 
they’ve lost that. 
 
And now they move into the retired public servants area and 
there are no health benefits, there are no dental benefits. There’s 
a tremendous burden now on the salaries. And as you’ve 
indicated — you didn’t indicate the percentage of increase — 
but you indicated that there was some indexing that has taken 
place sporadically throughout the last 10 years. They have 
found that their net money has continued to be eroded and, as a 
result, they’re finding themselves in severe financial difficulty. 
 
So while I understand what you’re saying, I think we have to 
explore possibilities, whether they be cost shared, whether they 
be looked at as joint kind of things. I know that the Group 
Medical Services made a proposal to the superannuates. And as 
you’ve indicated, I think there are around 7,000 retired public 
servants and individual . . . I think the premium that was 
suggested to them was going to be somewhere in the area of 
$600 per individual — single. 

So that, Mr. Minister, if you take that on mathematical terms, 
7,000 times 600 is about $4.2 million. I think that’s the cost that 
was looked at for that particular study. Now whether or not 
you’re even exploring that, I think until we do the analysis, until 
we look at those proposals, there’s all kinds of suggestions that 
are being made. And I’m wondering if your department has any 
interest in pursuing a study and looking at what might be a plan 
to alleviate some of the financial burden on the retired people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s fine for the member 
opposite to get up and do what opposition politicians do, which 
is to try to be all things to all people. But let’s be very clear 
about what the member opposite is saying. 
 
We have a general population of retired persons in 
Saskatchewan, which would be tens of thousands of people, and 
we very much appreciate the role that the public servants have 
played. But what the member opposite is saying is that if you’re 
a public servant, as distinct from somebody who wasn’t a public 
servant and may not even have a pension, that the government 
should take $600 or some other figure per year to buy extended 
health coverage for that individual. 
 
And my view is, Mr. Chair, that we have to be fair to all of the 
people of the province. And it’s fine for the member opposite to 
get up and say that, you know, he’s the friend of everyone, and 
if you’re a retired public servant, you’re going to have extended 
health coverage over and above medicare. But it’s very costly. 
 
And what we’re trying to do, Mr. Chair, is to say this: that 
medicare will be a system that will cover everybody in the 
province. And the member refers to the Saskatchewan drug 
plan. There is, Mr. Chair, a program of special support available 
for people who are low income and who have high drug costs. 
 
And what I would suggest to the member and I would suggest 
to the House is that we in government — and the members 
opposite should join us — should have a program like that to 
support anyone in the province who is low income with high 
drug costs, we should help them with their drug costs. We 
should not have one system for retired public servants who have 
pensions under the pension plans, and another less generous 
system for everybody else. 
 
Some people who perhaps worked at minimum wage all their 
lives do not have a public sector pension and do not have 
extended health coverage. Everyone is covered by the medicare 
system; everyone is covered by the drug plan. There are costs 
that sometimes are onerous for seniors. 
 
(16:00) 
 
That member can get up on behalf of the retired public servants 
and say that, in addition to their public sector pensions, they 
should have superadded coverage that other people don’t have. 
In my view what we should do is when it comes to drugs is try 
to have special support under the drug plan for everyone. 
 
And as I tried to say to the member in the first answer to the 
question on this, if we’re going to help people, we should try to 
include them in a larger group to keep the cost down. If the 
member’s position is that retired public servants should have 
superadded protection that the rest of the general public doesn’t 



1178 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

have, it’s not necessarily the view of the government. 
 
Our view is we should try to spend our money in a way that is 
fair to all the taxpayers, and indeed, if there are retired public 
servants who need assistance with their drug purchases, let’s 
help them. But let’s help everybody, not just the public 
superannuates. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
I think that for, not for the first time, but I can definitely agree 
with you that we are suggesting that there be fairness and there 
be equality. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Minister, my final question in this area 
would be are there taxpayer dollars that are currently expended 
for any health benefits or any pension plan benefits for any of 
the plans in the Crown sector, or in specific government 
agencies, where right now the government is actually using 
taxpayers’ dollars to provide the benefits that I’ve just talked 
about? Are there any such expenditures currently being made? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There are some plans that allow employees 
who retire before normal retirement age to continue their 
benefits until normal retirement age. I am advised that there are 
no plans that, generally speaking, would continue health care 
coverage for superannuates once they are at the normal 
retirement age and, in fact, superannuated. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, on page 66, the vote that we’ve 
just been talking about, the (FI09), could you indicate . . . You 
commented about the statutory requirements for the four 
different pension plans, could you indicate why we see a $4 
million decrease in the very first one, the Public Service 
Superannuation Plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, it has to do with mortality rates. 
There are more people who are passing away in the upcoming 
year than are retiring. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as I 
indicated last time, I received the document that you sent over, 
or your officials sent over, regarding the components of the 
various taxes. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, under the revenue you indicate that the 
components of other taxes are about $65 million. I note that 
that’s up very little . . . very slightly. And I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, when you talk about the $65 million, why you see an 
increase on the premium of . . . the insurance premium side as 
far as the source of revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. The increase with respect 
to insurance premium tax is simply due to the fact that we 
expect more insurance policies to be written in the province this 
year. In other words, an increase in business. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, one of my colleagues, I think, submitted a written 
question to your department regarding contributions that are 
made directly to fire . . . fire safety and firefighting in the 
province. And as I understand it, this money that is obtained 
from the various percentages on insurance premiums is used to 
offset that. 

Your budget contains a $65 million revenue. What will be the 
expenditures that you anticipate being sent specifically to the 
firefighting sector? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, it is the policy of the 
government that no government revenues are earmarked 
specifically for specific government programs. That is 
consistent with the rules set out by the Gass Commission, which 
studied the finances of the province in the early ’90s. 
 
And the policy we follow is that all revenues are paid to the 
General Revenue Fund and then the allocation of the revenue is 
according to the estimates as approved by the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
looking at another component of revenue for the budget, I note 
that your estimate contains a number for the Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority, a net income of $312.7 million, 
and you project . . . your officials project that that number is 
going to be down significantly — $6 million down. 
 
Could you indicate why your officials indicate that we will 
actually have less revenue from Liquor and Gaming? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. It has to do with the timing 
of expenses as opposed to different levels of use or activity of 
the products. Some expenses are being undertaken in this fiscal 
year with respect to the activities in that area. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
Report of the Provincial Auditor; Understanding the Finances 
of Government contains a graph that shows the income from the 
Liquor and Gaming over the last seven years, I guess, is the 
chart. Shows a substantial increase each and every year. 
 
And I note that in your projections last year, in your mid-term 
report, your budget document of March 31, 2000 or year end of 
March 31, 2000 was changed in your mid-year report by 
showing that it was increasing. 
 
And while we’ve heard some expenditures that you have 
indicated will be a one-time expenditure for this fiscal year, I’m 
wondering why you see such a dramatic change in the income 
levels from Liquor and Gaming. 
 
We’ve seen over the last years at least 10, 12, $15 million 
increases each and every year. Now if that same increase takes 
place this year, are you forecasting a large amount of additional 
expenditure, one-time expenditure for this year? 
 
We’ve seen the report on television and in the newspapers, I 
believe, that the VLT (video lottery terminal) machines are 
going to be replaced over a period of time, and there is a 
substantial cost there, if I recall the media release. But the 
numbers don’t seem to indicate that we’re going to see that 
much of a drop. And I’m wondering why you’re forecasting 
that kind of a drop? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well as the member has identified there is 
replacement of VLTs going on this year and that’s a $6.1 
million expenditure for replacement. And the revenue is 
dropping according to this by some 5.4, I believe, million 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1179 

 

dollars. So most of it has to do with VLT replacement. 
 
And we don’t anticipate that the amount of liquor consumption 
in the province or the amount of VLT usage is going to be 
going up. We think it’s going to be levelling off and our 
projections are based upon those assumptions. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
significant amount of revenue is received from non-renewable 
resources, specifically natural gas and oil. And your budget 
documents indicate that you see a drop of about $400 million in 
revenue from the forecasted amount for last year versus your 
estimated revenue source. And I recall in the legislature you 
commented on the price per . . . for measurement, and I forgot 
what that measurement was of natural gas, but you made 
reference to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I was reviewing the Crown Corporations 
Committee minutes that took place, and it’s interesting that a 
question was raised to SaskEnergy President Ron Clark, and his 
belief is that the projections are very, very low. In fact he was 
. . . he almost, I think, he made a comment that he’d love to be 
purchasing gas at the rate that your officials were using in the 
projections of revenue. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, when the president of SaskEnergy seems to 
think that your projections are low, when we see people in the 
oil and gas sector, the response by a few of them is that if we 
lose $400 million worth of revenue that we had last year, 
basically the whole sector will have gone into the tank. 
 
I note that you had made a comment about your projections. 
And I’m wondering if you can review again how you arrived at 
the numbers, and if you did any consultation with people in 
SaskEnergy to actually arrive at those numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I would point out that our 
projections for the price of oil and gas are actually higher than 
what the province of Alberta has projected. For example, I can’t 
speak for the president of SaskEnergy, other than to say that 
they tend to want to lock themselves in at a certain price so that 
there’s some stability. 
 
But in answer to the question where do we get these numbers 
from, our department, the Department of Finance, consults with 
the Department of Energy and Mines and they tell us what they 
project the prices to be. They in turn consult with all of the 
private sector — the oil companies, the gas companies, the 
investment bankers, and so on, the Government of Alberta — 
and try to come up with a reasonable projection. So that’s how 
we arrive at the numbers. 
 
Our numbers, I would point out to the member, Mr. Chair, are 
consistent with what other governments would be projecting. 
They’re consistent with what the private sector would project. 
On the oil and gas side, these are always estimates. We don’t 
claim to be clairvoyant, and it’s quite possible that we will be 
incorrect in some way. But our estimates are not out of line with 
estimates from players in the industry or the Government of 
Alberta, for example. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I guess we will 
know when your officials have had a chance to reassess this 

come November, when you do your mid-term . . . mid-year 
report, I should say. And I hope that indeed the revenue will be 
much greater, because at that time we will maybe be able to 
have a windfall again as we did back in November of 2000. 
 
Mr. Minister, would you explain and clarify — I’ve looked for 
information on this and I’d like to get an explanation — about 
the revenue sources from the Government of Canada. And your 
information that you’ve shared with the House on the Canada 
Health and Social Transfer and the equalization payments was 
excellent, and it explained those two numbers very well. 
 
Mr. Minister, the other section, the third section indicates that 
there’s about 136 million coming in the section of other. Could 
you have your officials explain, or yourself explain, what is 
contained or what numbers make up 136 million and what are 
the different areas that the money comes from. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, this relates to other federal/provincial 
programs where we have agreements with the federal 
government to co-operate in terms of delivering programs. 
 
For example, the Medical Equipment trust, that is a revenue 
gain of $33.3 million. Programs administered under the 
Canada/Saskatchewan Agri-Infrastructure Program, CAIP, and 
other cost-sharing programs in the Department of Highways 
and Transportation where we work together — I think the grain 
roads, for example. 
 
Athabasca/Fort Qu’Appelle health facilities where the federal 
government is assisting with capital costs because those are 
located on First Nations land. Forest fire activity compensated 
by Indian and Northern Affairs Canada under the Forest Fire 
Suppression and Primrose Air Weapons agreements. An 
increase in the allocation for special opportunity grants in the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training. 
And a variety of other programs. 
 
And I would be pleased, Mr. Chair, if the member wishes — 
and in fact, I’ll just offer to do it anyway — to provide a 
detailed list of how the $136 million figure is arrived at. And I 
can send that over to the member tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and I 
thank you for sharing that information. Mr. Minister, one of the 
other questions I think — I’m not sure whether it’s contained in 
the category of other — is the money that is received for 
agricultural programs. 
 
I note that the auditor has indicated in his report that various 
funding is provided by the federal government, and of course 
the Government of Saskatchewan collects premiums from 
producers. And I’m wondering if in the revenue section, if your 
document contains the money that the federal government 
transfers to Saskatchewan for agricultural programs, and/or 
does the revenue received from producers, is it contained in the 
revenue section? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With respect to the crop insurance 
premiums, Mr. Chair, that money is not included in our 
statement of revenue. That goes into a separate account for the 
purpose of crop insurance. 
 



1180 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

And for the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program) and CSAP 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program) which are two 
programs where money comes from the federal government, 
that money does not come into our revenue; that money goes 
directly to the producers. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So then, Mr. 
Minister, if I can now move that explanation into the 
expenditure side, and if I see on page 13 of your document that 
for Agriculture and Food you’re estimating $337 million worth 
of expenditure, that the revenue needed to meet that cost of 
$337 million expenditure would not . . . there would be no 
federal money, or there would be no producer money that 
would be needed to offset that expenditure of 337 million for 
the agriculture programs in your budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — In general terms, Mr. Chair, the $337 
million we would expend would not include crop insurance 
premiums from producers. We’ve established that. It would not 
include money for crop insurance from the federal government, 
except perhaps in some small degree. There may be some small 
amount that they compensate us for administration of the 
program which we may get from them, but no premium money, 
if I can put it that way. And then it does not include the CFIP 
and CSAP money. 
 
So that generally speaking, the monies that we receive as 
premiums, or from the federal government, do not go into our 
expenditure of $337 million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for clarifying that, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, a couple of questions directly connected with vote 
18 in the Finance department. 
 
Mr. Minister, I note that two of the subvotes have significant 
increases in terms of the amount of cost, one of them being the 
Provincial Comptroller’s office. I note that the amount of 
estimated expenditure has doubled. 
 
Could you indicate how you . . . or what you see happening in 
that department as to why you have such a significant increase 
from 5 million to 10.8 million? And what kinds of things will 
we see happening differently this year in that department than 
we saw last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The reason is a one-time expenditure to 
install a new payroll system for the Government of 
Saskatchewan, that is the information technology to issue the 
cheques. 
 
And it’s believed that the establishment of that system, which 
I’m told is long overdue, will in fact save money across 
government by preventing individual departments and agencies 
from having to invest in information technology for their own 
systems. In other words, the expenses are being borne by the 
Department of Finance to put in the new information 
technology for a new payroll system. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, and I 
recognize that that department must do literally thousands and 
thousands of cheques. Have you had . . . has anyone done a 
study as to the actual cost of producing a cheque? That is 
through this system, under the old system, and now as you’ve 

indicated, we will have a new information technology system, 
do you expect that the cost of producing that cheque, the actual 
cost, will decrease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It’s difficult to analyze savings in terms of 
per cheque basis because part of the reason for the change is to 
move more and more into electronic transfer of funds and 
electronic deposit. And it’s very difficult to compare any old 
system with a new system in the sense that instead of issuing 
cheques, to a much greater degree monies are being deposited 
directly into people’s accounts. 
 
But I am told by department officials that because the 
Department of Finance will install a system that can be used by 
the entire government, the savings across government as 
opposed to having each department put in their own system are 
expected to be in the range of $28 million one-time costs for 
payroll systems; that the implementation of the system in the 
Department of Finance this year, and I think there will be some 
more expense next year, will mean that overall we will save $28 
million that otherwise would have been spent. 
 
But we don’t anticipate that we can point to any savings on a 
per cheque basis in the sense that we’re trying to substantially 
reduce the number of cheques that are going out, and instead, to 
electronically transfer monies to people that are entitled to 
them. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, one of the other votes, (05), 
revenue, the revenue expenditure or estimate for the revenue 
section of your budget is up almost $3 million, and I note that 
the explanation there talks about tax and refund programs. Do 
you see significantly more work in this area for this year to 
necessitate a $3 million increase in the budget? What will occur 
in that department that caused you to increase their budget by 
$3 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is greater expense because of the 
implementation of the new tax-on-income system. Formerly, as 
the member knows, Mr. Chair, we had a tax-on-tax system 
which meant that Ottawa would not only collect our income 
taxes, as they will continue to do, but they also would make the 
rules with respect to our taxation. 
 
And you can see that the income tax administration is the major 
part of the increase, and that is because we’re implementing the 
new tax-on-income system. 
 
We also are increasing the number of auditors that are 
employed by the Department of Finance. But I should point out 
that every time we hire another auditor, the amount of money 
collected by those auditors exceeds by several times the amount 
of money that it costs to hire an auditor. 
 
And those are the reasons. We’re moving to a new income tax 
system that’s being developed, and we’re increasing the number 
of auditors that we employ in the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and Mr. 
Minister. And welcome to your officials too. 
 
If I could, I’d like to follow up on the question that my 
colleague was just referring to there. And the new taxation 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1181 

 

system, the flat rate but accelerating over the . . . in three stages 
— it’s going to be considerably easier, I understand, for 
personal income tax reasons, to understand, probably fill out. 
 
I would hope that it’ll be similarly easier for the department to 
do the calculations, do the summaries, the audits, and so on. 
 
What you’re telling me is that it’s going to cost even a greater 
amount with an increased role for auditors in this newer 
system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I should be clear about this. The auditors 
don’t have much to do with the income tax. They have to do 
with the sales tax, Mr. Chair. 
 
We have auditors to make sure that out-of-province contractors 
are paying the PST (provincial sales tax) for example, when 
they come into Saskatchewan — that kind of thing. They don’t 
do any auditing with respect to income tax. That’s the role of 
the Canada Customs and Revenue Agency, commonly referred 
to as Revenue Canada. 
 
In my earlier answer I think I said that there was more money 
with respect to income tax administration. I should say that 
most of that money will be spent as a payment to Ottawa, not as 
a payment to ourselves in Regina. 
 
And the reason for that is that under the old system, Ottawa 
could do whatever it wanted with respect to income tax in 
Saskatchewan. Under the new system we are saying that we 
want Ottawa to apply not just the personal tax exemption or 
deduction that they have, we want every individual to have an 
$8,000 personal credit. So they have $8,000 before they pay any 
income tax. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And if they have dependent children, we’re saying we want 
every individual to have this year a $1,500 tax credit over and 
above the 8,000, which will go up to $2,500 by 2003. We want 
senior citizens this year to have a $500 tax credit which will 
grow to a thousand dollars by 2003. 
 
We want the tax credits and deductions and brackets eventually 
to be indexed so that the taxpayers are protected from inflation. 
We want to reduce the capital gains that would be paid for by 
farmers or small-business people when they sold . . . when they 
sell their businesses or farms. And, for example, we want lower 
income people to have a credit against the PST. That in addition 
to their GST (goods and services tax) credit they would get a 
PST credit. 
 
So in other words what we’re doing is saying to Ottawa, we 
want to quite significantly lower the income taxes that 
Saskatchewan people pay by implementing the credits for 
everyone, the $8,000 basic credit, the extra credits for people 
with dependent children, extra credits for seniors, the capital 
gains tax reduction for farmers and small-business people, and 
the sales tax credit for low-income people. 
 
But the difference is when we take on the responsibility to do 
those things, to lower the income taxes for people, as I think we 
must do, and we take on the responsibility for the rules, we 

have to also pay for the administration of those special rules 
that we come up with. 
 
So in one sense we’re paying Ottawa $2 million more than we 
did before to implement this system. But the result by the year 
2003 will be $430 million less income tax paid for by the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan. But if we want to reduce the 
income taxes by $430 million by 2003, as we’re presently doing 
— and some of that is being implemented this year because we 
abolished the flat tax, the high income surtax, and the debt 
reduction surtax — we’re bringing in our own system of lower 
taxation but we have to pay for the administration of that 
system. 
 
The alternative is we don’t pay them the $2 million to 
administer it but everybody pays more income taxes in 
Saskatchewan. And it’s the policy of this government, through 
the budget last year continuing this year, to bring in lower 
income taxes. And we’re prepared to say to Ottawa we’ll pay 
for the administration of some of that. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Is that a similar 
format that other provinces are going to the flat tax, or the 
non-tax-on-tax format that you’ve described? Is that a similar 
reaction from other provinces? Are they in fact . . . are they 
paying an administrative fee to the federal government for 
doing those exceptional kinds of deductions and calculations 
needed for their changes as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is yes. It wouldn’t necessarily 
be the same amount but each province going through a tax and 
income system would have to pay the Canada Customs and 
Revenue Agency an amount of money to develop that system. 
 
Our amount we estimate this year is about $2 million. But part 
of that will be one-time costs not ongoing year after year. Each 
province would have to pay Ottawa to implement the special 
features of their system. We have a lot of special features 
because we’re making a lot of changes to the income tax 
system. If we’re going to do that to lower the income taxes for 
people, we have to pay for the development of that system and 
the answer is, yes, so would every other province have to pay 
for that as well. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The negotiation 
with the federal Revenue Agency that is doing this, that has 
already been . . . you’re officials have already accomplished 
that because the new tax system was initiated on January 1. At 
least I believe it was. 
 
Now if that’s the case, the tax year being finished at the end of 
March, can you see any problems that have evolved with that 
new system as has been worked out with the federal agency? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We feel that the initial launch of the new 
tax system has been fairly successful. In terms of our 
relationship with the federal government, we are still in 
negotiations with the federal government to arrive at a new tax 
collection agreement. And we have not succeeded in signing a 
new tax collection agreement with the federal government. 
 
I should tell the member, Mr. Chair, and the House that in this 
regard we are in the same position as every other jurisdiction in 



1182 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

Canada with the exception of Quebec, because the nine 
provinces who have the federal government collect their income 
taxes, none of them have reached an agreement with the federal 
government for the ongoing collection of their taxes. And we’re 
working on that. 
 
And in fact that’s one reason we’re having Professor Jack Vicq 
join us in the Department of Finance to assist us and, hopefully, 
other provinces in arriving at suitable arrangements with the 
federal government. 
 
But having said that, in terms of the administration of the 
system and the collection of the taxes, we feel that it’s going 
relatively smoothly. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — That’s good news. I’m very pleased to hear 
that, because the more confidence that everybody has in the 
system and all the details are ironed out and determined, then I 
think everybody feels more comfortable in going down this new 
road. 
 
Anything new, of course, requires some level of confidence and 
I hope you’ll be able to achieve that. And I think with the 
personal income tax, the changes, I hope that confidence is 
going to continue as well. 
 
I want to get back to a response you gave earlier to my 
colleague about the auditor, the cost of additional auditors. And 
I think you mentioned that those were people that were needed 
to do additional work in terms of PST for things in the province 
. . . coming into the province and so on. Why would there be an 
increase this particular year for those kinds of auditors? 
 
And under that general revenue, there is a three . . . under the 
revenue section, there’s about a $3 million increase and I think 
that was part of the discussion in your response. Can you tell 
me why there was a need for these auditors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I should point out to the member, Mr. 
Chair, the increased costs for auditing services we expect to be 
in the neighbourhood of $693 million a year. And I’m advised 
by the officials that they would consider a reasonable level of 
audit to be in the range of 4 per cent. That is 4 per cent of 
accounts, I guess, in order to have the affect that an audit is to 
have. And we are presently at about 2.6 per cent. They want to 
move that up, which I’m told would be consistent with what is 
done in other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, would that be part of the 
reason then that the overall spending for the Department of 
Finance, vote 18, is increased . . . my calculation, about five and 
a half per cent overall? 
 
I noticed one of the factors on vote 18 was administration, 
which has significantly gone up to over 10 per cent. Is that a 
reason . . . your earlier response, is that part of the reasoning for 
those rather significant increases in the department budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I would say no, Mr. Chair. To put it in 
perspective, with respect to the increase in audit function, we’re 
talking about approximately $700,000. But with respect to the 
new payroll system, we’re talking about, I believe, in the range 
of $6 million. 

So obviously, most of the reason for increase in the Department 
of Finance is not administration or auditing, it is an investment 
in information technology, which as I said in an earlier answer, 
we believe will save the government approximately $28 million 
across government. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — But, Mr. Minister, the administration itself 
. . . the administration line item has increased very significantly. 
And the reason that I’m dwelling on that is that when I look at 
all the departments, all the government departments, and looked 
at that line item of administration, every department but maybe 
one has increased their administration budget for this year. And 
it just seems strange to me that in a time when your revenues 
are down, that expenditure is going up, particularly on 
administration within department. 
 
Would you care to comment on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, well, to put it in perspective, Mr. 
Chair, I would say this, that the expenses of the Department of 
Finance are going up approximately $7 million, I believe, this 
year. The administrative costs are going up $356,000 which, as 
the member can tell, is about one-twentieth of the amount of the 
increased costs. We’re spending about $6 million on 
information technology so that the province has a good payroll 
system that will save us money. And, as the member says and I 
acknowledge, there’s an increase of $356,000 in administration. 
 
But it’s quite apparent that the largest increases in the 
Department of Finance are not for administration; therefore, 
investments in information technology to save money across 
government. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The idea of 
saving money has a real appeal to me. In a corporate world that 
is the answer to a situation where your revenues are actually 
decreasing, you don’t want your expenses to increase. And 
things like administration, I agree, are maybe not a major part 
of the overall expenditure. But the fact is that there is an 
increase and those signals are very important. Maybe they’re 
perception, but the signals are very critical in terms of how 
people look at the provincial budget and your budget in 
particular. 
 
I guess with that in mind, I would like to maybe just ask a 
question or two, Mr. Minister, about some of the things that 
have troubled me, and you and I have maybe discussed these at 
earlier times. 
 
Correct me if I’m wrong, but the signal that is generated from 
the budget is a very important factor in the economic activity 
within the province. And I think when you look at the budget 
numbers — the actual revenue numbers — generated revenue is 
down. And the expenditure, when you total up all the 
departments, is up. 
 
That is a signal that doesn’t bode well in the business 
community. I know there’s other factors in there but could you 
give me a statement that would allow me to go back and talk to 
business people saying that there is a sustainability to your 
budget even though those numbers in a corporate world would 
dictate other? 
 



May 16, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1183 

 

(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well certainly, Mr. Chair, I’d be happy to. 
 
The member suggests that we’re spending more money than 
we’re taking in. And as I myself said in the budget speech — 
when I delivered the budget speech on March 29 —that’s quite 
correct because our revenues are going down. 
 
The member need not by alarmed about that because as I also 
pointed out on budget day we are not funding expenditures by 
borrowing money or going into debt. We are funding our 
expenditures by drawing down the savings of the province. And 
let us be very clear about that. There’s a big difference. We’re 
not going into debt; we’re not going out borrowing money to 
finance day-to-day operations; we’re drawing down our 
savings. 
 
And I want to say to the member who asks how he’s going to 
explain this to his public; I’d put it this way. Day after day and 
month after month I have listened and the people of the 
province have listened to the opposition say you’re sitting on 
too much money. At the beginning of this fiscal year we had 
savings of $775 million. And I don’t know about the member 
from Lloydminster, but some of the other members have said 
that we ought not to be sitting on so much money. 
 
This year in the budget we are spending $260 million of our 
savings because we want to fix the roads, we want to put more 
money into education, and we want to take high speed Internet 
throughout rural Saskatchewan, among other things. So we’re 
going to rebuild the roads, we’re going to put more into schools, 
and we’re going to put more information infrastructure into 
rural Saskatchewan. That’s what the budget says. To do that 
we’re going to spend some of our savings. 
 
The members voted against those measures so they may not be 
in favour of spending some of our savings. But that seems very 
odd, Mr. Chair, because day after day the rest of that member’s 
colleagues say we’re sitting on too much money. This year 
we’re spending some of it on highways, education, and 
information technology in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The member I think finished off his question by saying, what 
would the business community think about it. Well I met 
yesterday with the Investment Dealers Association of Canada, 
which represents at least one part of the business community, 
and this is what they had to say. Longest string of budget 
surpluses extended. Then they say, the province (meaning 
Saskatchewan) is to be commended for prudent management of 
its finances. By keeping spending growth under control and 
racking up budget surpluses in the past seven years, 
Saskatchewan not only has reduced public debt but has been 
able to introduce tax reform that is leading to cuts in taxes. 
 
They then go on to point out that our marginal income tax rate 
is the second lowest in the country. They then go on to say — 
this is the Investment Dealers Association of Canada — and the 
member is asking about business reaction. They say: 
 

Higher budget spending notwithstanding, Saskatchewan’s 
finances are in good shape. Taxes support a debt of 8.2 
billion and a debt to GDP ratio of about 25 per cent are the 

fourth lowest among the provinces. 
 
And I want to pause here to say, Mr. Chair, that in the 
beginning of the 1990s, 10 years ago, Saskatchewan was the 
worst province in the country in terms of our debt level. The 
Investment Dealers say we are now the fourth lowest. In other 
words, we’re better than six other provinces. 
 
And then they go on to say this; I think this is very interesting: 
 

Saskatchewan’s debt ratio should continue to move closer 
to the 20 per cent mark by mid-decade and represent one of 
the lowest ratios among the provinces. 

 
In other words, the lowest debt . . . one of the lowest debts is 
going to be Saskatchewan according to the Investment Dealers. 
 
So when the member says in his question that somehow by 
investing in education and information technology in rural 
Saskatchewan and fixing the roads, that we’re doing something 
wrong and that we shouldn’t be spending this money because 
somehow our finances aren’t in good shape because we’re using 
some of our savings, all I can say, Mr. Chair, is the Investment 
Dealers Association does not agree with him. 
 
I’ve also read analyses from the Royal Bank, from Nesbitt 
Burns, and from some other private sector agencies. They think 
that the Government of Saskatchewan and the people of 
Saskatchewan are doing a good job moving forward. 
 
We know that the opposition always says oh, you’re doing a 
bad job. One day they say you’re spending too much — this is 
what the member is saying today — the next day they say 
you’re sitting on too much money. That’s what the rest of them 
usually say. 
 
But if we have to choose between what the business community 
says through their organizations and what the opposition says, I, 
Mr. Chair, will put my money on what the objective, private 
sector analysts are saying. 
 
I could add, by the way, that we started out 10 years ago with 
the worst credit rating in the country. We now have a straight A 
credit rating. 
 
And so, the member can ask what can he go back and tell the 
people of his community. I would tell them that we once again 
have an A credit rating. I would tell them that we’re paying 
down our debt. And I would tell them that yes, we’re going to 
use some of our savings to invest in education, invest in 
highways, and take information technology to 366 communities 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. I appreciate that the opposition 
is opposed to those measures, but that is what is in the budget, 
that is where this government stands, and we’re going to 
continue on with those measures. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, I’m not sure that you’ve got 
the right impression of our criticism of your budget based on 
your perception of us opposing investment in highways, 
education, and so on. 
 
I think what we have to look at is when there is a . . . when 
there is a windfall revenue, that maybe should be handled 



1184 Saskatchewan Hansard May 16, 2001 

 

maybe in a different way than you have. Maybe we have a 
different opinion about that. 
 
But let me get back to what you have been talking about in 
terms of the . . . and quoting from investment dealers and so on. 
Basically, the difference between the revenue and the 
expenditures, the difference there, is made up of . . . two or 
three ways. Transfers from the federal government, and I 
noticed the transfers have been increased in various ways. 
Fortunately there’s some provinces doing very well in Canada 
and the transfers seem to be increased. 
 
There’s the Canada Health and Social Transfer that has 
increased, all part of the federal transfer from the Government 
of Canada. But there’s also one that the Crown Investment 
Corporation dividend of $200 million comes into play so that 
the General Revenue Fund does, in fact, have a balanced 
budget. 
 
But when you . . . we have to look at the bigger picture — 
maybe for a different day — but when you have to look at the 
bigger picture, I would have to have a difference of opinion as 
to whether we are decreasing our debt, particularly in this 
budget. Is that . . . am I accurate there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, the member is certainly accurate, Mr. 
Chair, when he says we have a difference of opinion. We on 
this side do have a difference of opinion from the opposition. 
 
We believe in balanced budgets. We have delivered the eighth 
balanced budget in a row. The opposition has consistently 
advocated through their spending initiatives that we go into 
deficit and debt. So we have a difference of opinion there. 
 
We don’t believe in saddling the next generation with deficit 
and debt. So, yes, we have a difference of opinion. 
 
We believe that the debt of the province should be reduced. We 
have been paying down the debt of the province. The opposition 
would, if they had the opportunity, increase the debt of the 
province. So we certainly do have differences of opinion. 
 
But the reality is, Mr. Chair, that through the balanced budgets 
and the payment down of the debt, we’ve improved our credit 
rating. We have some money in the bank, of which we’re 
spending some of it this year. 
 
And I think that we need to continue going on the kind of fiscal 
path that we’re on, which has attracted credit rating upgrades 
and the approval of the investment community from 
coast-to-coast. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Excuse me, I was just going to thank the 
minister and his officials for the questions and answers this 
afternoon. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask for 
leave to, with respecting a motion regarding the sitting hours of 
the Assembly. 
 
Leave granted. 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That not withstanding rule 3(4) of the Rules and 
Procedures of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, 
that when this Assembly adjourns on Friday, May 18, 2001, 
it do stand adjourned until Wednesday, May 23 at 1:30 
p.m. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 
 
 


