















































Hansard: June 12, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1741 
 June 12, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have 
a petition to present on behalf of people in Saskatchewan 
concerned about emergency medical services. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the 
community of Rose Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
petition to the Legislative Assembly also regards the provincial 
government’s report, the Saskatchewan EMS (emergency 
medical services) development project, which calls for 
provincially run and centrally operated ambulance services. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from Fosston, 
Rose Valley, and Archerwill. And I’m pleased to present the 
petition on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today regarding the Fyke report: 
 

Wherefore your petitions humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure the Wadena health centre be 
maintained at its current level of service at minimum, with 
24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services for users from our district and 
beyond. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions are all from 
Wadena. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 

citizens concerned about recommendations in the EMS report 
and the Fyke Commission report. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government not to 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are all 
from the community of Rose Valley, and I’m proud to present 
on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
this morning of citizens from the southwest concerned about the 
condition of Highway 43, and the prayer of relief reads as 
follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
Saskatchewan government to repair Highway 43 from 
Vanguard to its junction with Highway 4 in order that area 
residents may have access to necessary services without 
endangering lives and property. 

 
Your petitioners come from the communities of Aneroid, 
Mankota, Hazenmore, and Ponteix. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals all from the 
community of Briercrest. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Saskatchewan that are very concerned about the high cost of 
energy. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by the good folks from Assiniboia and 
Mossbank. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 



1742 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It may be hard to 
believe but I have still more petitions from the Swift Current 
and area on the subject of the hospital. And the prayer of the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Swift 
Current, Mankota, Herbert, Waldeck, Webb, Val Marie, and 
Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who believe that we need an in-patient treatment centre 
in the city of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
support this in-patient treatment centre in the city of 
Weyburn and provide funding for the same. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and Colgate. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today regarding Highway 35 that runs through Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency. The prayer reads as follows, it 
says: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury or 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by many people in that area 
— Fort San, Fort Qu’Appelle, Lipton — with their concerns 
about the highway. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today dealing with health care. The petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the people of Redvers, 
Alida, Antler, Storthoaks. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition from citizens calling for immediate 
implementation of province-wide 911 emergency service. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to fulfill its 
promise to the people of rural Saskatchewan by 
immediately implementing the 911 emergency telephone 
system province-wide. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Marcelin and Leask, 
Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present to do with the lack of funding to 
non-profit personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The good people of Atwater and Bangor have signed this 
petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
of citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and 
doctoral services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to the 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Davidson and Bladworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
with citizens concerned about the EMS development project 
report that recommends the ambulance services of Wynyard, 
Wadena, and Foam Lake be all relocated to Elfros and 
downsized to two full-time ambulances and one part-time 
ambulance. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1743 

 

implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
And the people who signed this petition are from the good 
community of Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It sounds 
as though that I’m the only one over here with a light on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to maintain community 
ambulance services in the communities of Wynyard, Wadena, 
and Foam Lake. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good 
people of Wynyard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition, on behalf of constituents, dealing with centralization of 
ambulance services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Wynyard and Bankend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by the good 
citizens of Saskatchewan in regards to energy rates. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from Shell 
Lake, Chitek Lake, Spiritwood, North Battleford, and Luseland. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks from the province concerned about the high 
energy costs. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to the Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Battleford and 
North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens who are very 
concerned about the ambulance coverage in rural 
Saskatchewan. And the pray reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Aneroid. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions from citizens of the province on 11 different 
matters that are addendums to previously tabled petitions. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 60 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister of Crown Investments Corporation: how 
much has the government budgeted for the current 
advertising campaign SaskEnergy is running regarding the 
recent rate changes; including design, production, and 
advertising and purchase costs? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
once again we are joined by our colleagues from the Midwest 
Legislative Conference, sitting behind the government side 
today. Representative Pam Gulleson from North Dakota; 
Representative Willard Jenkins— and his wife Mrs. Jenkins is 
in the gallery along with Mrs. Skarphol — Representative Bob 
Skarphol; Representative Bob Tomlinson from Kansas. And 



1744 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

also in the gallery is Miss Ilene Grossman, who most of us will 
know as assistant director of the Midwestern Legislative 
Conference. 
 
And I’d just ask all members to join in welcoming them to our 
legislature again today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it gives 
me great pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the 
Assembly, a group of grade five and six students from 
Mankota. 
 
There’s 16 in all, and Mankota is very close to where I live. 
And the teacher with the students is Gail Gagnon, and the 
chaperones and drivers is Pam Zerr, Daniel Chabot, and Joanne 
Kress. 
 
I’ve had an opportunity to meet briefly with the group. They’re 
on a very tight schedule and I just hope they get a chance to 
stay for a few minutes of question period. 
 
So would everyone please join me in welcoming the group from 
Mankota. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the Assembly a group of 
22 grade 12 students from Robert Southey School in Southey. 
They’re sitting in your east gallery, Mr. Speaker. They’re 
accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. Diana Ritter, and Mrs. 
Theresa Schaeffer is the chaperone. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them later this afternoon. I’ll be interested 
in discussing their future plans seeing as these students are 
grade 12 students. And I look forward to meeting with them 
later this afternoon. And I’d ask all members in welcoming 
them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

New Exhibits Planned for Duck Lake Centre 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Duck Lake 
Regional Interpretive Centre has unveiled plans for new 
exhibits in their 64 metre viewing tower. A Milestone artist by 
the name of Jack Pickering designed the three exhibits in 
conjunction with the Royal Museum of Saskatchewan. 
 
The first exhibit will feature the lives of the First Nations 
people, their method of hunting and processing bison as well as 
their use of plants and vegetation for food and medicinal 
purposes. 
 
The second will focus on the Métis culture, their distinct 
method for hunting bison for the pemmican trade and the social 
aspects of their lives. 

The third, Mr. Speaker, will feature local pioneers and their 
struggles in the new land. 
 
These new exhibits were made possible through $335,000 in 
funding for the capital upgrades from the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Western Economic Partnership Agreement. 
 
The Duck Lake Museum is a tourist attraction that we may all 
take pride in, Mr. Speaker. Opening nearly 10 years ago, the 
museum houses a collection of more than 4,000 artefacts from 
the NorthWest Rebellion, the Hudson Bay Company, the North 
West Mounted Police as well as First Nation clothing and 
beadwork and pioneer tools and equipment. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to have all members join 
me in commending the Duck Lake community for building on 
the areas rich historical and cultural resources. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Maryfield Guest House and Studio Official Opening 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this last 
Saturday I had the privilege of attending the official opening of 
Atelier Manor in Maryfield. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Atelier Manor is the refurbished hospital in 
Maryfield which owners, Jayne Raven, and her partner, Richard 
Childs, have transformed into an art gallery and guest house. 
Atelier meaning the artist’s studio. 
 
Jayne and Richard have also recently purchased the CN 
(Canadian National) rail station and plan on moving the 
building onto the property and turning it into an artist’s studio 
and office space as well. 
 
Their plans also include the development of a walkabout garden 
on the property. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Jayne and Richard moved to Maryfield from BC 
(British Columbia) to establish this business endeavour. 
Richard, a stonemason, plans on including a lot of stonework to 
the buildings enhancing the appearance of the property and the 
community. 
 
Since the opening of the property to the public last July, Atelier 
has had 90 guests stay at the manor including guests from 
England, BC, and Ontario. 
 
By the number of guests for the official opening, it is obvious 
the community is very supportive of this business venture. 
 
I might add one of the greatest supporters is a long-time nurse 
who spent many happy years in the facility and is pleased to see 
that the facility is being utilized rather than demolished. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only negative aspect of the opening was the 
comment about the atrocious state of Highway No. 48 in the 
area. Residents and the owners of the facility certainly trust the 
Department of Highways will give speedy approval for this 
rebuilding of Highway 48, which will encourage tourism to the 
community and to our province. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1745 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Survey Indicates Post-Secondary Graduates 
Stay in Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Higgins: — Members of the opposition would have us all 
believe that no capable, intelligent, and educated young person 
would choose to stay in Saskatchewan. They would also have 
us believe that there are no meaningful opportunities for young 
people in this province. 
 
Well the opposition would be way off track on this, Mr. 
Speaker, because young people do stay here, then they do find 
employment right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Many of the young people finding work in Saskatchewan are 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) graduates. According to SIAST’s most recent 
survey of its graduates, 93 per cent of employed graduates who 
responded to the survey are working in Saskatchewan. And for 
the fifth consecutive year, the average monthly income for 
graduates working full time has increased. 
 
This survey is a clear indication that SIAST is providing 
excellent training that leads to jobs, giving Saskatchewan’s 
post-secondary institution graduates the chance to remain in 
their home province and to contribute to the future of it. 
 
I want to take this opportunity to recognize the exceptional job 
that SIAST does of providing quality programs and training. 
And SIAST students recognize this as well. 
 
In their surveys, the graduates overwhelmingly agreed that they 
received quality education. More than 95 per cent of the 
respondents rated program quality as good to excellent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have educated and skilled graduates of 
post-secondary institutions staying in Saskatchewan. All 
members of this Assembly should recognize this as a positive 
thing, and these young people will help to build the future of the 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cops for Cancer Fundraiser 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Nipawin RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
detachment recently participated in the 2001 Cops for Cancer 
fundraiser in support of the Canadian Cancer Society. 
 
The total amount raised by the event was about $5,300. They 
had a great deal of help in reaching their financial target. 
Students at Wagner Elementary raised $500, and four students 
also joined in to get their heads shaved. 
 
There were also individuals who raised money on their own and 
allowed their heads to be shaved. Mitchell Stewart, a student 
from L.P. Miller, raised $123; Garry McKay, $150; and Bert 
Dalziel, whom the Legion raised $500 for if he would take part. 
 
There were also people who participated that just wanted to 
show their support or wished to shave their heads in memory of 

family members who were victims of cancer. 
 
On hand for the event were Canadian Cancer Society 
representatives for northeast Saskatchewan, directors Kate 
McCorriston, Wally Derkach. For McCorriston the event held 
personal significance, as she has been a cancer survivor for 
seven years. 
 
RCMP members who took part were Cst. Wayne Love, Cst. 
Jason Willmets, Cst. Clifton Dunn, Cst. Donna Zawislak, Cst. 
Percy Lenz, St. Sgt. Max Mayan, and originally from the great 
town of Porcupine Plain, Cpl. Randy Serhan. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating members 
of the Nipawin RCMP detachment for their fundraising efforts 
on behalf of the Canadian Cancer Society. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Dieppe Community Association Celebration 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was my pleasure to attend a very important event in my 
constituency this past Saturday afternoon. It was sponsored by 
the Dieppe Community Association and it was this 
association’s celebration of The International Year of the 
Volunteer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we all know that Saskatchewan is the volunteer capital of 
Canada, and certainly the members of Dieppe Community 
Association and that neighbourhood in my constituency were 
great examples of this effort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they had day-long activities for the families and 
students and children that were in attendance. I’d like to 
personally thank the members of the Dieppe Community 
Association, their president, Jody Tetlock and the members of 
their executive: Patti Cossette, Becki Ollinger, Tony and Louise 
Yaremchuk, Bonnie Kreklewich, Carrie Siebenich, Carol 
Bieberdorf, and Gail Harleman. 
 
Also great thanks to the staff and students of Dieppe School 
who provided some entertainment. 
 
And last but not least, a special recognition to Mr. Norm 
Chadwick, a long-time Dieppe resident who received an 
honorary lifetime membership to the Dieppe Community 
Association. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was a fun day. The official activities started at 3 
o’clock in the afternoon, and were attended by myself, the 
mayor, and the local federal Member of Parliament. And it was 
noted that the wind got a little heavy at that time, and we hope it 
wasn’t just because of the presentation of the dignitaries. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Macdowall District Volunteers Recognized 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to rise this afternoon to bring recognition to three very 
special people from the community of Macdowall. 



1746 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, in this year of the volunteer, it is vitally important 
that we continually honour those that have put others ahead of 
themselves. There are three women from the Macdowall district 
who have done just that, Mr. Speaker: Margaret Shillington, 
Tena Wilkinson, and Kathleen Smith have spent decades 
ensuring that their community is and will continue to be the 
kind of place we all should be proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday evening of June 11, Margaret, Tena, and 
Kathleen were invited to a specially arranged meeting so that 
they could be honoured for 15 years of dedicated service to the 
Macdowall Housing Authority. The success and longevity of 
the authority can be attributed in large part to the efforts of 
these three ladies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to join me in congratulating 
Margaret Shillington, Tena Wilkinson, and Kathleen Smith. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Training for Excellence Awards Luncheon 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, earlier 
today, Saskatoon and the Bessborough Hotel played host to the 
Saskatchewan Labour Force Development Board 2001 Training 
for Excellence Awards luncheon. 
 
These awards recognize organizations that are investing in 
Saskatchewan’s workforce. Over 50 organizations and 
partnerships have been honoured since 1995, with more than 
450 organizations participating in the awards. This year, Mr. 
Speaker, there were 28 applications received from 21 
organizations. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to congratulate the winners 
in each category. And they are: basic skill development — 
Leadership Saskatchewan, Garvin and Associates Consulting. 
In career laddering — Career Pathways, Saskatchewan Joint 
Career Transition Committee. 
 
Educational partnerships was won by two — Saskferco 
Products Inc. and A.E. Peacock Collegiate; and the second one 
was Social Housing Management Training Program, 
Saskatchewan Housing Corporation. Promotion of Aboriginal 
participation from SaskTel. Promotion of equity participation 
— Weyburn and Area Support Employment Services. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate all the 
participants in this year’s Training for Excellence Awards and 
wish them the best of luck into the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan High School Rodeo Association Finals 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am proud to rise in 
the House today and talk about accomplishments of a young 
man in my constituency; also my hometown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Vincent Northrop of Bladworth competed in the 

bull riding event of the Saskatchewan High School Rodeo 
Association finals that were held on June 1, 2, and 3 in 
Shaunavon. Vincent finished in first place for the season. He 
also placed first overall for the finals. 
 
This qualifies him to compete in the nationals for the high 
school rodeo that will be held in Springfield, Illinois the week 
of July 23 to 29. Last year, Vincent placed ninth at the 
nationals, and I have every reason to believe that he will do 
equally well this year if not better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Vincent has a busy summer ahead of him as this also qualifies 
him to compete in the Canadian finals in Regina on August 3 to 
5. This will be Vincent’s last year to be in High School Rodeo 
Association as he has recently completed his grade 12 in 
Davidson. 
 
He is already well-known on the Canadian Cowboy Association 
circuit as he was recently named CCA Rookie of the Year. 
Vincent started competed in the CCA bull riding events when 
was 15 years old and will continue at the level for as long as he 
can. 
 
I ask the members to join me in wish Vincent much luck in the 
upcoming national event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Government’s Responses to Ongoing Concerns 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. 
 
Every day Saskatchewan people wake up to another story about 
NDP (New Democratic Party) government failure and 
mismanagement: an RCMP investigation into fraudulent 
activities at SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) 
and the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority; 34 
million taxpayers’ dollars missing and unaccounted for in the 
First Nations Fund; the worst job losses in Saskatchewan since 
the Great Depression. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The StarPhoenix columnist, Les MacPherson, said 
that the loss of 20,000 jobs is, and I quote: “nothing short of a 
disaster. The province is bleeding to death.” And the Saskatoon 
Chamber of Commerce is calling the NDP’s job creation plan a 
menu for mediocrity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t matter who you talk to, everyone agrees 
that the NDP is failing the people of Saskatchewan. What new 
steps will the Premier take to address this crisis of public 
non-confidence in his own NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite talks 
about the economy of Saskatchewan and its ability to produce 
jobs. As the Minister of Economic Development pointed out in 
this House yesterday, Mr. Speaker, we are facing an agricultural 
challenge in this province. I would have expected the Leader of 
the Opposition to know that. And that has had and will have 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1747 

 

some very dramatic impact on jobs. 
 
In spite of, Mr. Speaker, in spite of the crisis in agriculture, this 
economy continues to perform well and to perform strong. We 
understand the challenge that’s before us, Mr. Speaker. We 
understand the challenge of creating a solid economy, a 
prosperous economy for our young people and for our people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what they do, they get up in the morning and try 
and figure out ways to attack the government. We get up in the 
morning and try and figure out ways to attack the problems 
faced by Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what we’ve been waking up to every morning is listening to the 
NDP cast blame for their own incompetence. One day and again 
today we heard it from the Premier — he’s blaming farm 
families for his government’s lousy job creation record. The 
next day he’s blaming the nurses for the NDP’s failing health 
reforms. They blame the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker; 
they blame the media. They blame anybody but the NDP. 
 
Meanwhile Saskatchewan is in the midst of a full-blown health 
care crisis. Saskatchewan’s drinking water is making people 
sick. And now the NDP is gouging Saskatchewan families by 
driving SaskEnergy rates up, even as natural gas prices are 
plummeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is there anything other than blaming nurses, 
blaming farmers, blaming hard-working people in 
Saskatchewan that this government can do? 
 
The Premier right now needs to address the complete loss of 
confidence by Saskatchewan people and his failing NDP 
government. What’s he going to do? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite and 
members of the general public know exactly what we’re doing. 
We’ve partnered with Saskatchewan business people, with 
Saskatchewan leaders across this province, and have laid out 
what is described as the Partnership for Prosperity, Mr. 
Speaker, with targets, with action plan, with a taking on of the 
future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re doing this why? Because we believe in this province 
and we believe in its people and we believe in its future, unlike 
apparently the folks across the way. 
 
The interesting question is, Mr. Speaker, they stand up and ask 
questions, but have they got a proposal? Have we heard one 
suggestion, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well here it is, here it is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well here it is, Mr. Speaker, right here, 

in their platform from the last election on how to make this 
economy prosper, well here it is, here’s how they’d do it. well 
they’d grow the economy all right through a combination of tax 
cuts and highway spending initiative. 
 
What have we done? Tax cuts and highway spending initiative. 
 
They’d try and make business more competitive by eliminating 
bureaucratic red tape. What have we done? Reduced regulations 
by 25 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party plan 
would have grown Saskatchewan, would have created jobs, 
would have restored confidence, Mr. Speaker, in the . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — This government has lost jobs, is driving 
people from Saskatchewan, and is creating an economic death 
spiral in the province. Mr. Speaker, it’s time to get rid of this 
incompetent, arrogant, out of touch, wimpy NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Later today, Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party will be moving a vote of non-confidence in 
the NDP government’s ability to manage the affairs of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the Premier: will he admit that his 
leadership has failed the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
His NDP government has plunged our province into an 
economic death spiral with no plan for pulling out, and the 
incompetence of the NDP is smashing the confidence of 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure if the Leader 
of the Opposition is aware of the chamber of commerce’s 
slogan for this year. He ought to take some counsel from that 
slogan. You know what their slogan is, Mr. Speaker? Up Your 
Attitude — Up Your Attitude. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he comes into this House, he comes into this 
House, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, he comes into this House 
talking about . . . can you believe it? The Leader of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition comes into this House talking 
about a province in a death spiral. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday, I repeat again today, the 
only group of men and women in this province in a death spiral 
are members of the Saskatchewan Party, and everybody knows 
it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1748 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

Job Losses in 2000-01 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
marvel at the calmness with which this government reacted to 
the devastating news that in the month of May Saskatchewan 
lost 5,400 jobs, and in last year lost a total of 21,000 jobs. 
 
What was the reaction of the Minister of Economic 
Development? Well he said that what we have now is a bit of a 
valley. If the minister describes the loss of 21,000 jobs as a bit 
of a valley, I hope this province never sees anything he would 
consider serious. 
 
My question for the Premier. Your minister of economic 
disaster considers the loss of 21,000 jobs as a trifling matter. 
And he says it’s everybody’s fault. He says it’s StatsCanada’s 
fault for talking this province down. What is your response? Do 
you . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Just before the minister responds, I’d remind 
the member to direct his questions through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, very much. Mr. 
Speaker, as I said yesterday, the loss of 16,800 jobs in 
agriculture is not trifling. It’s a very serious matter, Mr. 
Speaker, and we’ve known that this has been a problem in our 
province for a considerable period of time. 
 
But what members opposite — well if the members want to 
listen — but what members opposite fail to recognize are some 
of the positive signs with respect to the growth of our economy. 
Retail sales have increased; the value of new building permits is 
up 33 per cent; new motor vehicle sales — there is consumer 
confidence, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to members opposite, what they need to do is 
take some advice from the Chamber of Commerce of 
Saskatchewan and up their attitude. This province is a good 
place to work; it is a good place to do business. And we will 
come through this agriculture difficulty. We will continue to 
diversify this economy. And we’ll continue to grow jobs in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, placing the priority 
on overseas’ investments by our Crowns has been a total 
failure. 
 
When our civil servants go to England to market the new 
on-line land system, I’m sure the first question of the Brits has 
to be: and how’s it working for you blokes in Canada? And the 
answer has to be that: it isn’t because we haven’t got the bugs 
out of it yet. 
 
Most recently a memo was sent to Land Titles’ users in Moose 
Jaw informing them that implementation has been delayed 
again. The memo gives no new date when the system will be 
operational nor is there yet a fee schedule. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are we spending money flying civil servants 

around the world to market a system we can’t get up and 
running? Is this the government’s idea of economic 
development? Is ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan ) the NDP’s GigaText? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, as we know the land corporation, now the Information 
Services Corporation of Saskatchewan, has been received with, 
with great expectation and opportunity by lawyers, by real 
estate agents, by surveyors, by the business community, Mr. 
Speaker. All are looking forward to this new venture which will 
make the transfer of land quicker, cheaper, and more efficient in 
this province, and therefore be good for business, Mr. Speaker, 
which this member should be supporting, not criticizing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporations are on 
their own agenda and have made it clear they do not want 
interference from the government that owns it. 
 
Alone in the western world, the NDP government sees 
government purchase of companies as an engine for economic 
growth. The results speak for themselves. 
 
When the former minister had the gall to question ISC’s 
business plan, she got a tongue-lashing from a civil servant she 
had dared to question. The Premier appears to have sided with 
the official. Such behaviour on the part of the Premier seriously 
weakens not just one minister but the entire cabinet. Cabinet 
government cannot function if ministers know that in trying to 
give directions to their departments, the Premier will leave the 
minister to hang out to dry. 
 
My question for the Premier: has the official who wrote the 
memo criticizing the minister who dared to question his travel 
been disciplined? What measure has been taken since that 
memo to demonstrate that the Crown officials are under cabinet 
direction? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not quite sure I fully 
understand the member’s question, but if he gives me the 
information more fully I’ll look into it and get back to him 
tomorrow. 
 
But let me say this, Mr. Speaker. The land corporation will be 
cheaper, will be more efficient, will be quicker, will be good for 
business in this province, and, Mr. Speaker, it is something that 
will generate economic activity, jobs in the high-tech sector, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’ll be in place in two weeks in Moose Jaw and it’ll be in place 
across this province within the planned period of time, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s a good project and the member should be supporting it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1749 

 

Strike by Health Care Workers 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. Now that there has been a mediator 
appointed in the health care contract dispute between CUPE 
(Canadian Union of Public Employees ) and SAHO 
(Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations), there is 
some hope that a settlement in this dispute may be reached. 
 
But while it is encouraging that both sides will be going back to 
the bargaining table, it is discouraging that the union has not 
prepared to return to their jobs. Many health care facilities are 
having trouble providing basic patient or resident care, and 
many families are unable to cope with the level of care an aging 
or medically fragile family member requires. 
 
The Regina Health District appealed to the union for some 
relief and essential service workers, but CUPE refused. Surely 
now that both sides are negotiating again, there should be some 
movement to get people back on the job. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister contacted the union and asked 
them to return to their jobs so that essential services are 
provided while mediation takes place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we all are concerned about 
the patients and the residents, especially of the long-term care 
homes, and all of the people who are working to provide care 
for these people. 
 
We know that the issue of essential services is being discussed 
between SAHO and CUPE, and that CUPE has provided 
essential services in many areas. There are some areas that they 
haven’t acceded to the request directly, of SAHO, but I 
understand that today some of the CUPE officials are working 
together with some of the district management people to 
address exactly the question that the member asks. 
 
What we know is that we need to have these people get back to 
the bargaining table and get these issues that are between them 
resolved so that the people who are in the system can get the 
care that they need. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
are hearing from families of patients who are affected by the 
strike. Mr. Craig Smith writes that the situation in some of the 
long-term care homes, and especially where his mother resides, 
is very difficult. He is afraid for her well-being and is left 
wondering how they will manage to care for her. He states, and 
I quote: 
 

It is incumbent that the government ensure that these 
people are not left in this situation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mae Uhrich of Camrose, Alberta was notified by 
the Prairie West Health District last Friday that she had to come 
to care for her mother who has been completely bedridden in 
the Kindersley health facility for some time. It was extremely 
short notice for the family and she says that they are not trained 

to provide the kind of care her mother needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many health care facilities feel that they are at the 
breaking point with the level of service and care that is needed. 
 
Will the minister undertake to ask the CUPE members directly 
to return to their jobs while mediation takes place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said for the last 
couple of days, the situation is being monitored hourly by the 
department. 
 
And what happens is that the mediator will be coming later 
today. Obviously the first item on his agenda is to talk with the 
parties to get the people back to work. We are encouraging the 
workers to go back to work. We’re encouraging that 
management get back to the table. They’re all going back to the 
table. 
 
We know that this is a dispute that has to be resolved at the 
bargaining table and the parties on Sunday agreed to go with a 
mediator. That man is now coming and we look forward to him 
working on both the issues of the immediate care of patients, 
but also the longer-term solutions. And that’s what we’re going 
to do. We’re going to work together with the people that are 
involved here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Issues at the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming. 
 
It has been revealed that several officials with Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority had concerns that SIGA’s CEO 
(chief executive officer), Dutch Lerat was allegedly using drugs 
or was allegedly involved in the sale of drugs as early as 1999, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when did the minister first become aware that 
SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) officials 
were concerned about either alleged criminal activity or alleged 
drug use by Mr. Lerat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I thank the member opposite for the 
question, Mr. Speaker. As the court documents were filed and 
Mr. Glendinning’s statements were put before the courts would 
be the time that that information came to my attention. This 
matter is before a court process, Mr. Speaker, so to comment 
further would be entirely inappropriate, and I would refuse to 
then comment any further on the member’s question, as I would 
be held in contempt of court, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that would be my answer to the question he’s posed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The question 
referred to meetings that the minister was at, and I think she 
could answer that because she’s not in court here and she’s not 



1750 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

a witness there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again my question for the minister of Liquor and 
Gaming. It has been revealed that Mr. Lerat received a salary 
advance from SIGA in 1999 in the amount, Mr. Speaker, of 
$80,000. Mr. Speaker, when did the minister first become aware 
that Mr. Lerat had been granted a salary advance in that 
amount? Did the minister approve that salary advance, and if 
she didn’t, why not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, that information would 
have been provided through the auditing processes to the 
internal auditors and to the Provincial Auditor. The 
circumstances around that would have been discussed between 
those people, and if there was something that would be needed 
to be brought to my attention, that would be identified by the 
external auditor for SIGA by our Provincial Auditor to me, Mr. 
Speaker. That was not commented upon either in the Provincial 
Auditor’s reporting or the external auditor’s report because it 
had been dealt with as an internal matter. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would not be responsible to grant salaries to 
members of the SIGA organization. As an independent 
organization they have an independent board responsible for 
that kind of a salary advance. Mr. Speaker, it would not come to 
my attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Rates 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today it’s been reported that ATCO gas has 
applied to the regulator in Alberta for approval to reduce 
residential natural gas rates to $5.41 per gigajoule in Calgary 
and $4.95 per gigajoule in Edmonton — that’s the price to the 
consumer. 
 
Meanwhile the NDP has just increased SaskEnergy rates to 
$6.30 a gigajoule for Saskatchewan families — that’s to the 
consumer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party asked the NDP to 
reconsider its massive SaskEnergy rate increase last week. We 
said the NDP didn’t need the increase in light of the 
plummeting price for natural gas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why were the Premier and the 
minister in such a hurry to raise rates in Saskatchewan last week 
to $6.30 a gigajoule when other gas companies were preparing 
to drop their gas prices to as low as $4.95? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well here we 
ago again — the $20 million man, Mr. Speaker. The $20 
million expert over there. Mr. Speaker, at least in the 1980s, 
Grant Devine only cost us $2 million a day, not 20 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to point out to the member and to the 
public of Saskatchewan. First of all, Mr. Speaker, ATCO has 
about 25 per cent of the customers in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, so it 
doesn’t represent all of the consumers of energy in Alberta, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
As well, the member neglects to tell us, Mr. Speaker, that 
included in that application is not the insurance or the collar as I 
would describe it. Saskatchewan . . . SaskEnergy pays about 50 
cents a gigajoule for that insurance, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in addition to that, transportation costs are not 
included, Mr. Speaker. There are a list of costs that are not 
included, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And — pay attention to this — when does the contract expire? 
January 31, 2002. Guess what the prices might be in January, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP can’t have it both ways. 
They can’t on one hand take credit for SaskEnergy’s gas 
purchasing policies over the winter months and then not take 
responsibility for those purchases today, Mr. Speaker. They 
can’t have it both ways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, last week Saskatchewan people 
were slapped with a 24 per cent rate increase, and this week 
we’re being forced to listen to NDP radio ads paid for by the 
taxpayers that tell us to be grateful for having to pay 24 per cent 
more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s how the NDP’s latest radio ad goes. It starts 
with a question. The ad asks: what’s SaskEnergy doing about 
high natural gas prices? Well, Mr. Speaker, apparently the 
answer is: they’re marking them up even further and passing 
them on directly to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday ATCO applied to reduce 
residential gas prices to 5.41 in Calgary and 4.95 in Edmonton. 
Why? Well it’s because gas prices are going down. 
 
The question to the minister is this: how long will he force 
SaskEnergy gas consumers to pay rates significantly higher 
than the current cost for gas before he directs the Crown to 
reapply to the panel for a decrease? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, you know, I . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I’ve patiently, day after day after day, listened to that 
member talk about credibility in terms of due diligence, the 
credibility of the senior people in the Saskatchewan Energy 
Corporation and whether or not they’ve been able to do their 
job, whether they’ve done it credibly. But he knows more, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you how much that hall of famer 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1751 

 

knows. This is the same guy who in the end of the 1980s 
worked for the associate minister of Economic Development 
and Tourism, Mr. Gerich . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I know they don’t 
want to hear it, but he was responsible for putting together the 
due diligence that resulted in a $150,000 grant to bring to Swift 
Current, Saskatchewan, a music hall of fame. He then left the 
employment of that same minister, went to work over there, and 
it was bankrupt two years later. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this credibility cost . . . would have cost the 
people of Saskatchewan $20 million the other day. I think 
there’s a lack of credibility here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well it’s official, Mr. Speaker. The minister or 
the Government House Leader has officially lost his mind 
because he got up to answer a question on gas prices. We’ll, if 
he wants to answer it, we’ll give him one more chance, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Here’s the question. In Alberta today, consumers, consumers 
are going to benefit from the fact that rates are going down by 
over 40 per cent to $4.95 a gigajoule. The question is simple. 
Why is SaskEnergy charging Saskatchewan families $6.31 a 
gigajoule when the private Alberta gas companies are in the 
process of cutting their rates to $4.95? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the member might 
have it wrong. But I’ll tell you, you know what the question’s 
about? It’s about integrity — that’s what it’s about. And it’s 
about trust, Mr. Speaker — that’s what it’s about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I listened with some interest to a 
CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) news report today at 
noon that speaks to integrity and that speaks to trust. And I want 
to tell you, sir, we will match this side of the House with respect 
to integrity, trust; with respect to honesty; and with respect to 
competence any day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order, order. 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Rehabilitation of Avonlea Dam 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members of the Legislative Assembly, it is my pleasure to 
announce to you today of our government’s plans to rehabilitate 
the water management infrastructure for the people in the 
southern community of Avonlea. 
 
Avonlea dam was constructed in the early 1960s and is owned 
and operated by Sask Water. Located on Avonlea Creek 
approximately 60 kilometres southeast of Moose Jaw, this 14.6 
metre high earth-filled dam is in need of repair. Sask Water 
estimates a one in four chance of this dam failing over the next 

50 years. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is a public safety concern. A failure could 
also cause significant damage to a downstream regional park, 
golf course, and highway, as well as two farm sites and 
agricultural land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to inform you today that Sask Water 
has developed a plan to address the public safety concerns, and 
will be proceeding with project rehabilitation this fall. The work 
will reduce the chance of failure to one in 200 over a 50-year 
period. 
 
As mentioned in our last two annual reports, Mr. Speaker, a 
critical strategic issue facing Sask Water is the deterioration of 
the province’s water management infrastructure. While our 
primary concern is for public safety, it’s important to note how 
vital water is to sustain and enhance economic growth for a 
community, and in this case, Mr. Speaker, a rural community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over the next year Sask Water will work with 
local governments and residents in the Avonlea area to assess 
the feasibility of increasing the reservoir capacity to satisfy 
current and future water allocation needs. The project 
rehabilitation will proceed concurrently with these discussions, 
and this work will not impair the prospects of increasing the 
reservoir capacity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we want to ensure water from the reservoir 
continues to adequately address the water supply needs for the 
town of Avonlea, the Avonlea irrigation district, a rural 
pipeline, Dunnet Regional Park, Long Creek Golf &Country 
Club, and potential future users. 
 
Mr. Speaker, water is our most precious resource. As 
Saskatchewan’s water manager, Sask Water’s mandate is to 
manage, protect, and develop the province’s water and related 
land resources for the benefit of people throughout 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This project at Avonlea is just one example of how Sask Water 
works with water users to sustain the quantity and quality of 
water in our province. Mr. Speaker, we truly look forward to 
working with the people in the Avonlea area on this very 
important project. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you to the House, I’d like to introduce a group of elementary 
school students from the community of Consul, from the 
Consul Public School. 
 
During the last year, the previous Speaker and I — not the old 
Speaker, but the previous Speaker and I — had the opportunity 
of visiting the community of Consul and made a presentation to 
many of these very students. They greeted us enthusiastically 



1752 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

with a lot of questions. We took a lot of pictures. It was a very 
memorable occasion. 
 
They have chosen to join us here today to find out about the real 
work that we do. Unfortunately they may have been 
disappointed in some of the work they saw. But if they stick 
around for a little longer, they may see something of real 
benefit and substance. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce you to the 19 students of 
grade 5 and 6 at the Consul School. Accompanied by the 
teacher, Trudy Bethel, and by chaperones, Dave Manley, Tony 
Fieger, and Jackie Zilkie, and their bus driver, Peggy Brown. 
Please join me in welcoming the students and their adult 
accompaniments today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Rehabilitation of Avonlea Dam 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to respond to 
the minister’s statement. I’d like to thank him for sending a 
copy over to me in advance. 
 
Looking at this, I’m quite sure the people of Avonlea will be 
happy with this statement. I know last year I raised concerns 
about the Avonlea dam and the safety of it in Estimates. And 
I’m glad that the minister — I’m not sure whether it was the 
previous minister that was there last year or you as the minister 
— took concerns of this, took notice of this and addressed the 
concerns and safety of that area because I had many calls over 
that dam. 
 
And also not only the safety issues, the water supply, which will 
supply the town in the future; the irrigation district, which is 
important; rural pipeline. I’m also helping out the golf and 
country club and also potential future users. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And I hope, Mr. Speaker, that this minister will make it a new 
policy direction that Sask Water will be upgrading the many 
dams throughout this province because there are many dams 
throughout this province . . . and I’ve had some calls that they 
are concerned about safety issues. Plus also upgrading them to 
expand irrigation which is very important, which he had 
mentioned in here. The safety water concerns which are 
growing out there for people; rural pipelines so towns can get 
safe, clean drinking water. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day, I would like to comment on two items. First with 
respect to a point of order raised yesterday and secondly, with 
respect to rule 36. 
 

Yesterday the Opposition House Leader, the member of 
Cannington, raised a point of order requesting tabling of a 
document by the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs. I have 
reviewed the transcript of page 1694 of Hansard. The Minister 
of Aboriginal Affairs in her comments referred to a letter but 
she did not quote from the letter. Therefore the point is not well 
taken and the minister is not required to table the letter. 
 

Money Recommendation for a Private Member’s Bill 
 
The Speaker: — A second item. It is the practice of this 
Assembly . . . Order, order. It is the practice of this Assembly 
for the Speaker to review all Bills after they have been 
introduced and read the first time, for their procedural 
acceptability in regards to rule 36. Rule 36 stipulates that no 
Bill that necessitates an appropriation of any part of the public 
revenue should be considered by the Assembly without having 
first been recommended by the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Speakers have consistently upheld the constitutional principle 
of Crown initiative in financial matters. Members of the 
Executive Council are held strictly accountable for all public 
expenditures and accordingly, only they may initiate legislation 
involving the imposition of new or additional charges upon the 
public revenue or for the raising of any tax. 
 
Over the past few days I’ve had the opportunity to review a 
number of Bills and I wish to draw your attention to Bill No. 
204, The Justice System Review Act introduced by the member 
from Rosthern and presently standing on the order paper for 
second reading under the heading, private members’ public bills 
and orders. The question that I must address is whether Bill 204 
contravenes the parliamentary principle of the Crown initiative 
in financial matters. 
 
Clause 2(1) of Bill 204 seeks to establish a commission of 
inquiry to review the Saskatchewan justice system. Clause 2(2) 
provides for the appointment of one or more commissioners by 
the Lieutenant Governor in Council. I’ll refer members to the 
ruling of May 6, 1998 where it was ruled that the creation of a 
commission and the appointment of a commission . . . of 
commission employees clearly constitutes an expenditure of 
public funds requiring a royal recommendation. Similarly, a 
ruling on April 7, 1997 found that the creation of a health 
Ombudsman as an officer of the Assembly and the associated 
office entailed the expenditure of additional funds, which in 
turn infringed upon the Crown initiative. 
 
Likewise, I find that Bill No. 204 requires such a 
recommendation. The member for Rosthern is not a member of 
the Executive Council and is not entitled to obtain such a 
recommendation. Accordingly, I must rule this Bill out of order 
and advise the Assembly that it will be removed from the order 
paper. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government, a very open and 
accountable government, Mr. Speaker, and table a response to 
question no. 224. 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1753 

 

The Speaker: — The response to 224 is tabled. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 9 — Job Creation Record 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
legislature this afternoon. I want to discuss an item that is very 
serious in my opinion and I think in the opinion of all of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The situation is so serious that, at the end of my discussion, I 
would like to move a motion really referring to the confidence 
the people have in the government in Saskatchewan as of today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this particular motion that I’m going to be talking 
about is based particularly on a very dismal job creation record 
that was just put forward by Statistics Canada very recently. But 
it’s bigger than that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s a number of issues that have caused real concern in the 
confidence in this government and of Saskatchewan at this 
time. And I want to just refer to one or two of the bigger issues 
and the bigger items that will lead to making this motion that I 
want to bring up later. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, not only is the job loss very serious 
and critical. There’s other items. 
 
The current situation in health care is a real problem for 
Saskatchewan. It’s only a symptom of what is going on, the 
symptom of something that is bigger. And that of course is the 
way the health care has been managed over the last number of 
years. This is showing the problem with the confidence of 
people in this government. 
 
As we’ve talked about at length in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker, 
the tainted water and the water scandal problems in 
Saskatchewan have caused a lot of concern and a lot of danger. 
And the way that was handled and tried to be covered up with 
no problems, that attitude is not leading to confidence in this 
province. 
 
There’s also the ongoing scandal presently with the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority, and also the 
competence has been questioned in the Saskatchewan Indian 
and Gaming Authority as well. 
 
Now just very recently, Mr. Speaker, the government released a 
document called the Partnership for Prosperity. That’s the third 
document that’s been released talking about the economic 
development strategies in this province. 
 
The first one that was brought forward several years ago was 
called Partnership for Renewal. It promised job creation. It 
promised that this province would be moving forward. There is 
no evidence that that is the case. 
 
Another one came out very shortly after that — Partnership for 
Growth. Again targeted a large number of jobs to be created. It 
targeted economic development. And what happened to that 
one, Mr. Speaker? Nothing happened that we can see. And 
again the confidence of the people started to question whether 

this government has the ability to actually put together a 
strategy. 
 
Well just recently, another one — Partnership for Prosperity. 
People looked at it again and said here we go again: 
Partnership for Prosperity. 
 
They’re talking about creating 3,000 . . . 30,000 new jobs. They 
talked about how the economy should be driven by private 
sector but they immediately then said it should be in partnership 
with Crown corporations. That does not send the right signals, 
Mr. Speaker. That is not the way to build confidence in our 
economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we were talking about support or 
non-support for this last program called Partnership for 
Prosperity, and the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce was 
quoted as being supportive of this particular project. 
 
I’d like to draw your attention to an article. It’s a headline in 
fact, in Friday, June 8, The StarPhoenix in Saskatoon where 
they talk about this. And I will quote from the paper, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

The provincial government’s new economic strategy is not 
nearly ambitious enough to address Saskatchewan’s 
economic issues . . . (and does not) provide policies to 
support those goals. 

 
Now it goes on to say, and this is a quote from the paper again: 
 

“For the life of me, I can’t see why they’re so timid,”. . . 
 
This is a quote from Kent Smith-Windsor, the executive 
director of the Saskatoon and District Chamber of Commerce. 
There’s a real example of when an initiative for economic 
development was put forward it is questioned by the business 
community of Saskatchewan. 
 
At the same time the target for 30,000 new jobs was being put 
forward, which coincidentally was the same target put forward 
in the 1999 NDP election strategy campaign, and apparently 
that was just referred to as, oh it was just a target; we didn’t 
intend on it. 
 
So here we have in fact at this exact time 21,000 jobs being lost 
in this province — 21,000 jobs lost, not gained. That’s the 
largest decrease since 1976, and we’re not sure about that 
because ’76 was when the statistics were first being kept. Some 
actually speculate that this might be the worst job loss record 
since the 1930s, during the Great Depression. That is certainly 
not a way to inspire confidence in this province. 
 
That number of jobs, Mr. Speaker, is actually 4.3 per cent in the 
drop . . . percentage of the all the people working in this 
province. That is a very, very serious situation. That in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, is roughly equal to the entire working population of 
Prince Albert or the working population of Moose Jaw. That 
would be devastating in those communities and it is equally 
devastating in this province. 
 
At the same time that this kind of job loss was being 
experienced here in Saskatchewan, what we were finding that in 



1754 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

Manitoba, similar economy with similar population, they’re 
creating jobs. They are not losing jobs; they’re creating — 
they’ve created a thousand jobs. 
 
When we look at Alberta, of course you know that that’s going 
to be a creation . . . and that was creating 45,000 jobs. We’ve 
lost 21,000; you can see where most of our jobs have gone in 
this province. 
 
I’ve talked about this before in this legislation, Mr. Speaker, 
where even though Alberta might not have all the answers, it’s 
certainly an indication of where people are wanting to move and 
where they are in fact moving. I see that in a very, very direct 
way in the constituency in which I live. 
 
The problem that I think, Mr. Speaker, is that the attitude of the 
government is not in fact trying to put forward an economic 
development strategy that is positive, in fact it’s turning the 
other way around because the signals being sent from their 
strategy is actually anti-business. It’s competitive against the 
Crown corporations. It’s anti-growth — the bigger government, 
the better. The taxes continue to keep going up. There are 
indications that in parts of the economy the taxes might be 
doing the right thing. I’d like to see that encouraged and 
expanded so that where the high taxes would be starting to 
make a difference in this problem. 
 
But all of those things are causing the problem of economic 
downturn in this province, and again I believe that that’s at a 
record level and it is so serious that it brings me to conclude 
that the confidence of this province is just not in place. 
 
What is happening when you put all these things together, the 
bigger picture shows that it is a whole series of downturns in 
the economy. One thing affects another and the whole thing 
becomes related to each other. It becomes really a catalyst with 
one of the items affecting another. 
 
For instance when we don’t have 21,000 people working, those 
people are not prepared to buy housing. We just heard from the 
member in the government today that building permits were 
actually on the increase. Statistics Canada and Saskatchewan 
. . . the monitoring agency looking at housing starts actually 
shows that housing starts in Saskatchewan has dropped over 40 
per cent in the recent months. That is not confidence and it’s a 
basis of what the problems are in terms of jobs. 
 
And jobs again are just a symptom of the bigger problem. The 
bigger problem is again the confidence that is needed for 
business to invest in this province. If there’s no confidence to 
invest, there’s no businesses. If businesses are not staying in the 
province you’re not going to get the jobs, and one thing leads to 
another. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Another indication, Mr. Speaker, is the 
Canada West Foundation reported very recently 40 per cent of 
all young people in Saskatchewan plan to leave the province 
and search for work elsewhere. Again a very devastating 
statistic that was published very recently. When we read those 

kinds of things, we really wonder if in fact those people will 
ever have an opportunity to come back to this province. 
 
We don’t want to try to belittle the fact that this province hasn’t 
got a lot of advantages. What we’re trying to say, Mr. Speaker, 
is that the advantages of this province are not being promoted to 
the point where there is confidence for people to return, for 
businesses to come, and for investments to create these kind of 
jobs. 
 
When we look at other aspects of our economy, we see the 
same signals happening. We see in the gas prices, for instance, 
we just were referring to the price of natural gas recently in 
Saskatchewan being charged at a rate that is exceptional to 
other provinces. Alberta again is always an indicator of where 
the market trends are going to go. Certainly Alberta was blamed 
for the problems in the natural gas industry earlier on. Alberta is 
now showing that the natural gas prices on the stock market and 
the prices that they’re prepared to charge is actually on a 
decline, which is exactly opposite to what is happening here in 
this province. Again it’s a signal and that signal does not instill 
confidence. 
 
Those kinds of things are not the kind of story that we want to 
have in this province. And what this government is doing is 
putting forward those signals and saying: don’t worry about it, 
everything is just fine. If we talk about how well the province is 
doing, maybe somehow magically it will turn around and 
people will start feeling better about themselves and economic 
development will occur. 
 
I don’t disagree that we have to feel proud of the people that are 
still here and the businesses that are prospering in spite of what 
is happening in this province. And when we put together a 
program such as Saskatchewan Grows, well what we have to 
make sure is that not just talking about the advantages of 
Saskatchewan, not talking about how well some of the 
businesses are doing, we have to make sure that there’s policies 
and we have to make sure that there’s vision in place to back up 
those kinds of statements. Without the policies and programs in 
place, again it is empty words, and empty words leads to, again, 
this non-confidence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government has talked about the decline in the 
jobs here in Saskatchewan as primarily a problem of the 
farming community. Granted there is serious problems on the 
farm and a lot of the farm jobs are not there. Again, it’s a 
symptom of something bigger. The symptom is that the 
agricultural sector is not being supported the way it should be, 
and the confidence of people to invest and work and stay in the 
agricultural sector is not there. 
 
And even if we take the government jobs out of the equation . . . 
the agricultural jobs out of that equation, there is still a decline 
in job creation in this province, unlike any other province in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When we can’t put that . . . when we haven’t got that kind of 
confidence to increase the number of jobs in this province, how 
on earth are we ever going to make the great strides needed to 
make sure the Aboriginal employment will start to show in this 
province. That is a very large . . . very large problem and I think 
a very large opportunity. 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1755 

 

Again we need the confidence of investment in this province 
and we need to make sure that when people want to stay there is 
opportunities, and nothing that I’ve seen lately would indicate 
that those opportunities are there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — One of the positive things that I have to 
admit occurred was the reduction in the small business tax. That 
is a direction . . . the tax cut is a direction that is the right thing 
to do, and I think an example should be made of that. 
 
The problem though is, again, it’s not exactly the signal that we 
want issued. Even though the tax is going in the right direction, 
Saskatchewan has not taken the opportunity to lead in this tax 
cut. Saskatchewan is following in this tax cut. 
 
Other provinces are now having a lower rate of small-business 
tax, and I believe that we could be a real leader and send the 
right signals and not just be a follower, following along. 
 
We also see that the property tax is increasing and continuing to 
increase and that is a direct result of downloading onto the 
municipal governments by this particular province, not giving 
them any support for being able to assist in their predicaments 
in terms of infrastructure and in terms of servicing and 
supplying the services that are needed. And therefore, even 
though the government’s budget might look better, the people’s 
personal budgets are very, very stressed because of those 
downloading onto the municipal governments and through them 
to the taxpayers. 
 
The Crown corporation is another problem that creates the 
wrong signal in this province. If Crown corporations continue 
to keep competing in businesses with private enterprise, what 
business is going to have the confidence to come to this 
province and in fact try to invest, and having to spend its own 
tax money to compete against itself. 
 
Those signals will just not allow the economy to move ahead 
with outside interest or even allow the people in Saskatchewan 
to remain with confidence. Again, it’s the signals that are the 
problem and those signals are just not putting the confidence in 
this government that is needed in this province to make sure it 
moves ahead. 
 
You can talk a good game, but you really have to put your 
programs and policies in place for that to happen. 
 
And as the utility rates keep climbing, that is not an economic 
advantage when the utility rates go up, even though there is a 
campaign in the papers and on the media now saying that really 
the Crown corporations and SaskEnergy really are the good 
people because they could have been a lot worse than they are 
now. That is not a positive statement at all; that is not a 
confidence builder in this province. 
 
This government has followed that particular program over the 
last 10 years. It has been doing the same kind of things. In fact, 
I think those kinds of signals, the negative signals to economic 
development are actually increasing in the wrong direction. And 
I think this government from what we see, what the people in 
the province see . . . in Saskatchewan see, they’re just lurching 

from one crisis till the next crisis to the next crisis and hoping 
they can get through that. Again, not the right signals. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, because of all that and what I’ve just talked 
about, I believe this government has lost the confidence of the 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — And I would at this time, Mr. Speaker, 
move a motion, seconded by the member from North 
Battleford: 
 

That this Assembly expresses its non-confidence in the 
provincial government due to the policies that have led to 
Saskatchewan having the worst job creation record in the 
country, including the loss of 21,000 jobs in the last 12 
months and the loss of 24,300 jobs since the NDP last 
promised to create 30,000 jobs during the 1999 election 
campaign. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, I take no pleasure in rising today 
to speak in support of this motion because of the policies that 
have led Saskatchewan to its worst job creation record in the 
country — the loss of 21,000 jobs in the last 12 months. 
 
We are told that this is the worst record since Statistics Canada 
began collecting statistics in 1976. It is believed the worst 
record since the Great Depression of the 1930s. And behind 
those statistics are of course the personal stories, the tragedies 
of the people who have had to leave this province to find their 
future elsewhere. 
 
I don’t always find myself agreeing with the policies or 
positions of the Saskatchewan Party, but for reasons that I will 
elaborate on today, I feel compelled to support this motion. 
 
It has often been pointed out that left-wing parties are stronger 
on issues of wealth distribution, but very weak on issues of 
wealth creation. I accept that as . . . that it is the role of 
government to make sure that the prosperity of the society is 
shared by all members of that society. As John F. Kennedy once 
put it: “A rising tide lifts all boats.” 
 
But we know, without some work of government and of public 
policy, that may not be the case. And it is the role, a legitimate 
role of government to make sure that all members of the society 
participate in the wealth of that society. 
 
But unfortunately on the issue of wealth creation — and I say 
more in sorrow than in shame — that this government has failed 
miserably and it now continues to invest in the same policies 
which have held us back. In the new Partnership for Prosperity 
announced this week, again there is still the emphasis on using 
public companies, Crown corporations, as the vehicle for 
economic growth. 
 
This is a strategy which has basically been jettisoned by all 
other countries and provinces and states in the western world, 



1756 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

but it is a strategy to which this government continues to hold 
on to. 
 
Well the 21,000 who are no longer employed in this province 
. . . we’ve suffered a net loss of 40,000 people to other 
provinces between July 1, ’99 to July 1, 2000, and a population 
increase by 2,084. In all likelihood we will lose that many again 
from July to July this year. Between 1992 and 2001, pardon me, 
we lost 40,000; in the last year we’ve lost 2,084 to the year July 
1, 2000. 
 
The alarming fact is that the people we are losing are our young 
people and with them they are taking Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
Canada West Foundation issued a report this spring called State 
of the West, which describes some extremely disturbing 
demographic trends. It revealed that 40 per cent of our 
population between the ages of 18 and 24 anticipate leaving the 
province within five years. The expectation of leaving 
Saskatchewan is even higher among young people who list 
themselves as students. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, 42,000 of our youth. We add to that figure the 
40,000 who have left this province since 1992, this 
government’s first full year of managing our economy. We 
have lost 80,000 future Saskatchewan taxpayers. 
 
In effect, Mr. Speaker, we are paying to educate our best and 
brightest youth only to export them elsewhere so that their skills 
and their training can be used to fuel the economic growth and 
prosperity and to pay the taxes to other jurisdictions. With this 
strategic and staggering loss of our young and productive 
people, our future is jeopardized. That is why I feel compelled 
to speak in support of this motion. This province is a province 
in crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Manitoba has the same population as we do. 
Manitoba also has a strong agricultural base. But with the same 
population as Saskatchewan, Manitoba has 61,000 more tax 
filers, and 2 billion more in assessed taxable income. Manitoba 
is keeping their young and productive taxpayers, but we are 
losing 80,000 of ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find myself in agreement with the NDP on the 
need for strong public services and strong social programs. 
However, however, we will only have good public services and 
strong social programs if we have a tax base. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The Premier said when he was running for the 
NDP leadership, that you can have social policy without fiscal 
policy. That is wrong; you cannot. You can only have as much 
social policy as you have a tax base with which to sustain it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The offer, the offer to partner with business has 
fallen on deaf ears. They are not interested in partnering with 
this government. This is a government which alone in the 
western world still thinks that Crown corporations is the way to 

build the economy as opposed to saying that it is the job of 
government to provide the necessary infrastructure out of which 
an economy can grow. 
 
One change in the Partnership for Prosperity announced last 
week, as opposed to the one announced a year ago, was that 
there was a proposal for a 10 per cent increase in research and 
development spending announced last year by the government. 
 
Now there’s two interesting things about that. In the first place, 
spending on research and development is an appropriate role for 
government. That’s one of the building blocks, one of the 
foundational materials out of which you can build an economy. 
 
Furthermore, a 10 per cent increase in R&D (research and 
development) expenditure is a promise from government which 
means something, because government has a direct involvement 
and a direct control over it. If it promises 10 per cent increase in 
R&D, it can deliver it. 
 
Whereas what we see in Partnership for Prosperity announced 
last week is it is little more than an expression of hope. Figures 
are thrown out as to the jobs we would like to see materialize 
and the economic activity we would like to see happen. And 
yes, we would like that. I don’t think there’d be any argument 
from any resident of this province, certainly not in this House. 
But the whole thing is little more than an expression of hope. 
 
The target which meant something was the commitment given 
last year and quietly forgotten this year to increase research and 
development expenditures by the government. 
 
Well we know that the Crowns are on their own agenda. They 
do not want to be reined in by the government. And we know 
that the last minister who questioned the business plan of ISC 
got a tongue-lashing from the civil servant who was marketing 
an automated land project system we can’t get operating here in 
Saskatchewan. This minister got a tongue-lashing from a civil 
servant. And in the ensuing showdown, guess who won and 
guess who lost? 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the automated land project, my questions for 
the government are, is there a provision for expenditures and 
ongoing budget to upgrade it? 
 
We know that software has a notoriously short lifespan. If we’re 
going to market it around the world, we know it will have to be 
upgraded within a maximum of 2 to 3 years. That’s all the 
lifespan that software has. What provision has been made by 
ISC for upgrading the land system? That will be a significant 
budget item. 
 
Also I ask what provision have we made for insurance if we sell 
the system to other countries that, as I say, we don’t have 
operating here yet? We sell the system to other countries and 
what if it doesn’t work? Do we have insurance to cover that 
eventuality? 
 
But finally, and most important of all, how does this build an 
economy in Saskatchewan when we use the Crown corporations 
(a) to buy up foreign businesses, and (b) to complete with 
private businesses within this province? 
 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1757 

 

If you use home-monitoring systems to, to chase out of the 
province private business involved in that sector, even if it is a 
success, even if it doesn’t lose money, where is the net gain in 
employment? Where is the net increase in wealth? 
 
This goes back to the issue of there’s no concept in this 
government of wealth creation. If you transfer, if you transfer a 
segment of our economy, SAHO monitoring systems, you take 
it away from the private sector, you put it into the public sector. 
Even if it’s a success, it stills fails in the sense that you haven’t 
created employment. You haven’t created wealth. You have 
merely transferred from the private into the public. 
 
Well since the start of this session, we’ve had the following 
news. We’ve, we’ve . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No trips, no 
trips. I haven’t gone anywhere with them. I don’t have any 
plans to either. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the beginning of this session we’ve had the 
following news: 1.2 million on Crown travel; 2 million for the 
purchase of a home security company in Vancouver; 3 million 
for Business Watch International to keep a watch over pawn 
shops; $11 million in losses for ISC for a system we don’t have 
operating yet; 4 million for losses in Clickabid. We have 
SaskPower signing a cogeneration agreement where the 
negotiators were so concerned they issued a disclaimer on the 
soundness of the deal. 
 
Now we have 8.2 million to buy an insurance company in 
Toronto in order to protect 30 jobs in Toronto for an insurance 
company that was having difficulties there. So we’re going to, 
we’re going to create 30 million . . . 30 jobs . . . we’re going to 
save 30 jobs in Toronto and, however, we are going to 
apparently create 10 jobs in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now at 10 jobs at $8.2 million that works out to — listen to 
this, Mr. Speaker — that works out to $820,000 per job created. 
Now the NDP says they want to create 30,000 jobs. Well here’s 
the math, Mr. Speaker. If it takes $820,000 for them to create 
just one job, it will take $25 billion for them to reach this 
30,000 job target. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Well, the math doesn’t work out, Mr. Speaker. 
We need wealth creation. We need job creation. And it is the 
job of the government to have research and development and 
the proper investment climate, so that out of this, government 
and employment and business can grow and develop. 
 
The direct investment of buying an insurance company in 
Toronto is not a vehicle for building this province — it never 
has been, it never will be. 
 
Well we know we have other challenges. We know that the 
farm economy of Alberta and Manitoba, in spite of the present 
stress and the low commodity prices, the farm economy in our 
sister provinces is in fact showing modest gains. Ours is doing 
the worst. 
 
So we know that we need to do even more in diversification and 
value added than what we have to date. Our . . . (inaudible) . . . 
and farm income in Alberta is increasing. 

Certainly I’m not saying there aren’t stresses from one side of 
this country to the other, but statistically — statistically — the 
farm industry has, sadly, held up better in our sister provinces 
than here. We know our farmers have done a tremendous job in 
diversification. We know we are laying the foundation for value 
added, but we know that far more needs to be done in that area; 
far more needs to be done if this province is to have a secure 
future. 
 
And that is where the government, that is where the government 
should be putting its energies. That’s where the government 
should be concentrating — not in buying Web sites in the 
United States or energy marketing companies in Chicago or gas 
companies in Chile. They should be concentrating on building 
an agricultural sector for the 21st century. 
 
Well we also know if the government is looking at things they 
need to be doing to strengthen the economy we know that this 
province does not have a future unless we end the 
marginalization of our Aboriginal peoples — unless we make 
them full participants in our economy. 
 
We are told that by the middle of this century Aboriginal 
persons will represent 35 per cent of our population. I have no 
problems with that statistic, but I say this, Mr. Speaker, if 
Aboriginal peoples are 35 per cent of our population without 
being as engaged in the economy as everyone else, we face a 
very, very grim future. 
 
Does the government take seriously the need to once and for all 
end the marginalization of Aboriginal peoples and make their 
full and complete participation in the economy and the society a 
key goal of the government? A goal even more important than 
buying gas companies in Chile. 
 
Well when the Minister of Economic Development was asked 
to explain the fact that the NDP had promised to create 30,000 
new jobs and instead we’ve lost 21,000, he said, well actually 
that figure of 30,000 jobs was more of a party target. Well that 
sounds like, that sounds like an echo the Minister of Education 
who discounted what he said in the last campaign as political 
rhetoric. 
 
We need people’s whose commitment to building the economy 
and creating jobs and keeping our young people here at home is 
more than a party target, more than political rhetoric — it is 
something deeply felt and a deep commitment. 
 
It does not matter whether the 30,000 jobs of which the NDP 
spoke is a promise or a party target. The fact is we now have a 
discrepancy of 51,000. Instead of moving towards our target, 
we have the truck in reverse and it’s going the opposite 
direction. Instead of creating 30,000, we have lost 21,000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was 3,000 years ago that the writer of Proverbs 
observed that without vision the people die. The people of 
Saskatchewan have received no hope, no vision of how we can 
build an economy and provide for a future for our young 
people. Our population is suffocating without that vision. 
Without that vision and hope there is nothing on which to build. 
 
The government tells us we need an optimistic attitude. They 
are correct. They are absolutely correct. But that optimism, that 



1758 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

hope has to be built on something. It can’t be created out of thin 
air. And it can’t be created out of the foreign investments or out 
of the competition with private business on which they are 
pinning their hope. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Contrary to what the government tells us, the lack of hope has 
not come from opposition MLAs (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) quoting Statistics Canada. The lack of hope comes 
from a government which alone in the western world still 
believes that you can build an economy through the private 
sector, and which believes it makes sense for civil servants to 
fly around the world looking for investment opportunities and 
selling gadgets we can’t make work here at home. 
 
If our government needs to leave . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
not in those areas we don’t. The hon. member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle says do we need a public sector. Do we need a 
public sector to buy Web sites and home monitoring systems 
and gas companies in South America and telephone companies 
in Australia? The answer is no; no we don’t. 
 
That’s not what . . . we have a public sector, and this is where 
there is a strong, basic philosophical objection, Mr. Speaker. 
The public sector exists to provide services to the community 
over which it rules. That is why we need a public sector. No, we 
don’t need a public sector to buy up companies on the other 
side of the world. So if he’s saying, do I think we don’t need a 
public sector? If he’s talking about buying up companies on the 
other side of the world, they say no we don’t, no — that’s not 
why we have a public sector. 
 
We have a public sector to provide necessary services to the 
people of Saskatchewan. That’s why we have it. Do we need 
anything more? Absolutely not. And if that separates me from 
the hon. member from Regina Qu’Appelle, so be it. But this is 
what I believe. 
 
If our government needs to leave Saskatchewan to find 
opportunities, as the member for Regina Qu’Appelle asserts, it 
is inevitable then that our young people will do likewise. We 
need vision here at home. We need hope here at home. This 
government is not giving us that vision and therefore as 
Proverbs warns us, this will kill our province. 
 
I therefore have agreed to second this motion, and I know that 
in so doing I speak for the vast majority of Liberal supporters 
throughout this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The NDP House Leader commented in this 
House last week that my resignation from the government had 
led to a tremendous spurt in economic growth in this province. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, if the resignation of just one member of that 
government can lead to an economic jump-up for this province, 
what would the resignation of the entire government do. We 
would be in a boom. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Hillson: — I second the motion before this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m extremely 
pleased today to enter into this debate. And at the conclusion of 
my remarks, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will be moving an 
amendment: 
 

To delete all the words after Assembly and substitute the 
following: 
 
that we encourage the government to continue to look at 
policies to diversify the Saskatchewan economy, to offset 
the loss of jobs in the agricultural sector, and to work 
towards the target of creating 30,000 jobs over the next five 
years. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m extremely, extremely concerned about 
the doom and gloom attitude that’s portrayed by the members 
opposite across Saskatchewan. Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, one 
thing that we all should do as elected representatives in this 
province, is help build our province. And the members opposite 
seem to forget that they have a responsibility to the public to 
help build the province; to in fact build confidence in our 
province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
No, they repeatedly go out across the province and talk about 
doom and gloom, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s why my most 
recent letter to the editors in rural Saskatchewan has talked 
about why so glum, chum. It talks about the attitudes of the 
members opposite as they portray our province, both within the 
province, and across Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that does nothing to help us diversify 
our economy, to build our economy, or build confidence in the 
business people in our province that in fact this is a good place 
to live, to raise your family, and to enhance your businesses. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to start by talking about a few 
things in this year’s budget. From day one this province has 
been . . . or this government has been concerned and this 
province has been concerned about the economic development 
in our province. There’s no doubt we’re in the midst of a very 
serious economic situation in our agricultural economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s not a single member on this side of 
the House that is not concerned about the well-being of the 
people in rural Saskatchewan, our farm families, and the 
children of those farm families and the future of our farming 
life. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this budget started out by talking about 
this government being committed to continue to improve 
Saskatchewan’s economic climate to encourage investment in 
job creation. Those are words that, when the Minister of 
Finance spoke them this spring, he took very seriously. 
 
The personal tax reform plan announced one year ago improved 
the tax system’s fairness, simplicity, and competitiveness and 
lowered personal income taxes for Saskatchewan people. 
 
We have made efforts to help Saskatchewan families and help 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1759 

 

Saskatchewan businesses, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and we are 
going to continue to do so. 
 
For 2001 we have eliminated the flat tax, the high income 
surtax, and the debt reduction surtax, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
the most regressive styles of taxes, flat taxes on people. 
 
An Hon. Member: — They were implemented by a right-wing 
government, weren’t they? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Yes. The member asked if they were 
implemented by a right-wing government. Yes, they were. They 
were implemented by a right-wing government. 
 
The 2001-2002 budget also significantly enhances the personal 
tax credits available to Saskatchewan residents to support . . . in 
support of education, the disabled, and caregivers. We’re 
targeting those who need assistance most in our society, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We’re trying to help those who need the most 
help. 
 
On January 1, 2002, personal income tax rates will be further 
reduced again, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And personal tax cuts for 
seniors and families with children will again be enhanced. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 2001-2002 budget also includes a 
business tax package — targeted tax reductions to improve 
competitiveness, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In response to concerns 
of small-business owners across the province, the 
small-business corporate income tax rate will be cut from 8 per 
cent to 6 per cent. That’s a 25 per cent cut, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Very significant. 
 
Effective January 1, 2002, the annual amount of income to 
which the small-business rate will apply will increase from 
200,000 to 300,000. 
 
This budget also introduces tax royalty and fee reductions that 
will create jobs in our resource sector. Of particular importance 
is the creation of a new tax credit for mineral exploration to 
promote exploration and development in the North, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
All these developments — this entire direction proposed in the 
budget — was voted against by the members opposite. Yet they 
stand here today and criticize the government for not being 
interested in economic development in our province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to also talk to a few of the fiscal 
situations that we currently face in this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the debt to GDP (gross domestic 
product) in this province has dropped significantly since 1991 
to today. And let me tell you it has dropped to the point that in 
the year 2001, government debt as a percentage of GDP is 
down to 23.2 per cent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from nearly 70 per 
cent in 1991. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 23.5 per cent . . . 23.2 per cent from over 
70 per cent in 1991. Now the trend during the 1980s when we 
had a right-wing Conservative government in place was just the 
opposite. We saw repeated increases in the debt year after year, 

and we saw the debt as a percentage of GDP grow year after 
year. Mr. Deputy Speaker, they didn’t balance the budget once. 
 
I want to talk about credit rating. When the NDP government 
took over in 1991 our credit ratings were quite frankly 
deplorable. Today we have straight A credit ratings across the 
board, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a significant turnaround in 
progress. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is no doubt that there is 
difficulty in our agricultural sector in this province. There’s no 
doubt that significant difficulty in the agricultural sector over 
time is going to create difficulty in some other sectors in our 
province which is so highly dependent upon agriculture — 
more dependent upon agriculture than any other province in 
Canada, Mr. Deputy Speaker. More people are employed in the 
agricultural sector in this province than anywhere else. That’s 
there for a reason, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have such a 
significant impact when we have a downturn in the agriculture 
economy. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about statistics, job statistics in our 
province though, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I’m going to go 
across the various sectors of employment by industry in 
Saskatchewan. I’m going to talk in comparison in 1991 to the 
year 2000, the last year that we have full statistics, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
In 1991, we had 83,500 people employed in the agricultural 
sector; in 2000, we have 62,100, Mr. Deputy Speaker — a 
significant decrease of employment in the agricultural sector. 
But let’s talk about the other sectors in our economy, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because I think it’s very important to talk 
about how diversified our economy has become over the last 9 
or 10 years. 
 
In manufacturing in 1991 there was 23,700 people employed in 
Saskatchewan. In 2000, there’s 29,200 — more than 5,500 
more people employed in manufacturing. In construction, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in 1991 we had 20,800 people employed; in 
the year 2000, over 24,000. Transportation and warehousing 
and utilities, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 23,000 in 1991; 31,700 in the 
year 2000 — a change of 8,700. 
 
Clear pattern forming here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 
diversification of our economy, diversification of our 
workforce. And our dependency on agriculture, we’re becoming 
less dependent upon agriculture. 
 
In trade, in 1991, 70,500 jobs; in 2000, 76,300 jobs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. In the service industry, 166,100 in 1991; 192,500 in 
the year 2000. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, public administration is the next 
number. And we repeatedly hear from the members opposite 
how we spend too much money on government. Well in 1991 
we had 29,500 people employed in public administration; in 
2000, we have 26,700, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The government’s become more efficient. We have listened to 
people. We have continued to strive to make government more 
efficient, to reduce its cost and reduce its size. 
 



1760 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

Other primary industries, Mr. Deputy Speaker. In 1999 we had 
13,200 people employed in other primary industries, and in 
2000 we had 15,900. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the total number of people 
employed in Saskatchewan in 1991 was 453,400 people. In the 
year 2000 it’s 485,000, an increase of 31,600 — that despite 
significant pressures in the agricultural community; despite 
significant pressure in the agricultural community, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite, they will continue to say, well 
that’s not good enough and we need to do more. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we know we need to do more. We will continue to 
work to improve our province. And we will not go out and talk 
about the doom and gloom as they portray it across this 
province. We will talk about this as being a province where we 
want business to come, where we want to build the economy, 
and we want to grow for a prosperous future for our children. 
 
We won’t talk about the gloom and doom the people opposite 
do because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, talking about doom and 
gloom is a self-fulfilling prophecy. If you talk about nothing but 
negative, that’s what you’ll get as an outcome. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And the members opposite have done more to hurt this 
economy in the last three years than they would even want to 
think about because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they don’t want to 
think about anything but their own political lives. They only 
care about pointing out all the negatives, looking for something 
to say is bad and negative so that they can try to win political 
favour. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s no way to run a 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about gross 
domestic product. I have a little chart here that shows, from 
1990 to 1999, that our gross domestic product rose from 
21,617,000,000 to 26,547,000,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. A 
significant increase in gross domestic product. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that only occurs through the hard work of 
the people of this province. It only occurs because you’re 
creating economic growth, creating jobs in our communities. 
But they don’t want to acknowledge any of that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to take a few minutes to talk about 
some various projects across the province and new jobs that 
have been created throughout Saskatchewan in the last year. 
 
I want to talk about the Co-Op Refinery expansion in Regina. 
Capital expenditure for that expansion is 250 to $300 million, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And at its completion, it’ll employ 60 new 
people. Now is that not economic growth? Is that not expanding 
our economy? 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, IPEX Inc. of Weyburn is currently 
manufacturing PVC (polyvinyl chloride) pipe for the oil 
industry. In April they completed an expansion of that project 
by investing $500,000 to add new equipment to produce PVC 
piping for fibre optic cable for the computer communications 

network. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, DirectTel Call Centre opened in 
Saskatoon in May, 2000. This call centre will employ 225 
people. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite, every time 
you talk about a new job, have some criticism of it. Can they 
not say anything positive about the expansion and growth of our 
province? No, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They can only say negative 
things about our province. 
 
We wonder, we wonder on this side of the House, if the 
members opposite can ever say anything positive about this 
province. Now how — how, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can they ever 
expect to be government if they do not view things in a positive 
manner. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Staples opened a call centre in 
Regina in January, 2001. The inbound call centre will employ 
over 600 people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Staples call centre in 
Regina will employ over 600 people, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
members opposite, they don’t want to acknowledge any of the 
progressive growth made in our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Alberta Garment Manufacturing Co. acquired the Peter Nygard 
Apparel factory in Saskatoon in 2000. This facility scheduled 
for closure by Nygard has been expanded to now employ 145 
people. An Alberta company saw the opportunity to come to 
Saskatchewan and expand their operation. They didn’t expand 
in Alberta. Where did they expand? In Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now the opposition, no, they would never talk about a company 
from their land of opportunity coming to Saskatchewan and 
creating new jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 2000, Alcatel Canada won 
approval from its French parent to proceed with a $19.6 million 
expansion designed to increase the output for sales, primarily to 
the southwest United States. After the full ramp up for 
production, Mr. Deputy Speaker, employment is anticipated to 
increase between 90 to 150 people, Mr. Deputy Speaker; 
another potential 150 jobs in our province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite keep talking about 
negative things. I’ve got several pages of positive things and 
that’s just the start of my speech, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mitchell’s Gourmet Foods Inc. is currently constructing a $42 
million smoked sausage and wiener processing facility adjacent 
to its existing operations in Saskatoon. This facility will open in 
2001 and will create 155 new jobs. 
 
Harvest Meats Co. Ltd. has completed an expansion of its sow 
slaughter line at the company’s Yorkton plant. It’s created 60 
new jobs and a steadily growing economy in Yorkton. 
 
FarmGro Organic Foods Inc. has completed construction of its 
organic flour mill and grain processing facility located 1 
kilometre east of the city of Regina. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, continued expansion in Saskatchewan. 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1761 

 

The members opposite don’t seem to ever be able to hear that 
type of news. It’s always doom and gloom. 
 
Maple Leaf Foods has completed the expansion of its bacon 
plant in North Battleford. We heard a minute ago the member 
from North Battleford talking about how bad the economy is. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 100 new jobs are created with that 
expansion in his community. Yet how bad? No, he just tells us 
how bad everything is in the . . . 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite continue to 
shout and yell. Obviously it’s . . . there’s an old adage, if you 
throw a stone and somebody yelps that you hit the dog, right? 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re having some difficulty over 
there. Because they can’t deal with good news. They only want 
to deal with the doom and gloom. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Centennial Food Corporation of Calgary, 
Alberta — another Calgary company has announced the 
construction of a new meat-processing plant in Saskatoon. The 
Centennial Food Corp. of Calgary, Alberta is moving to 
Saskatoon again. The company will be investing 34 million and 
the plant is expected to employ 190 people, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They have so much 
difficulty with good news. 
 
The Saskatchewan Food Industry Development Centre is 
currently under construction, with completion expected in 
mid-March. 
 
Dumur Industries of White City has been very successful by 
adopting quality management systems such as ISO 9000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, businesses in this province are continuing 
to improve, diversify, and divest themselves to improve our 
economy. The members opposite don’t want to acknowledge 
any of that. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can go on for hours but I’m going to just 
highlight about 20 more, 20 more. 
 
CNH Saskatoon, formerly Flexi-Coil, is in the midst of hiring 
up to 300 additional production workers — 300 additional 
people. Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the company has added gas 
production products to that plants. 
 
Doepker Industries of Annaheim was part of a four-way deal 
between the Department of Highways and Transportation, the 
village of Annaheim, and the RM (rural municipality) of St. 
Peter to rebuild the Annaheim access road. With this agreement 
in mind, Doepker decided to purchase another manufacturing 
facility in Humboldt. So they’re expanding; Doepker is 
expanding now in Humboldt. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, Schulte Industries of Englefeld has 
been purchased by the Alamo Group from Texas. And because 
of the low cost of the manufacturing plant in Englefeld, the 
business will be staying there and has plans for expansion in the 
coming year. More good news for rural Saskatchewan. They 
never talk about any of these good things from their 

constituencies, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, PMC-Sierra Incorporated of Saskatoon, 
this high-tech manufacturer of integrated circuits for the 
communications industry with research offices in Saskatoon, 
plans to hire an additional 20 full-time employees here in 
Saskatchewan this coming year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, International Road Dynamics, one of our 
Saskatchewan companies, was awarded a $4.3 million contract 
with New York state to manage 71 traffic data collection sites. 
Sales for the company have increased by 40 per cent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. A Saskatchewan company building products 
here and becoming successful in the world market. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many, many, many more 
success stories in Saskatchewan. But I think I’m going to move 
on to talk a little bit about how others view our province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
I want to start out with an article from The Globe and Mail. Its 
title is “Saskatchewan emerges as star of the ’90s.” Now The 
Globe and Mail — not exactly an NDP rag or a left-wing 
thinking paper, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but let’s listen to what 
the . . . what Bruce Little says about Saskatchewan: 
 

When we look back on the nineties, which province will be 
remembered as the star (of) economic performer of the 
decade? 
 
The winner is Saskatchewan. 

 
The winner is Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So this 
left-wing rag from Toronto, Toronto Globe and Mail, says that 
Saskatchewan is the star of the ’90s. It goes on to say: 
 

What we’re measuring here is simple gross domestic 
product per person (Mr. Deputy Speaker), and 
Saskatchewan leads the nation. 

 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have about 60, 60 or so articles 
from various papers I want to share with the members opposite. 
 
Now next I want to talk about an article from the Macklin 
Mirror — the Macklin Mirror, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s 
Wednesday, January 24, 2001 edition. So, you know, very 
recent. 
 

The Saskatchewan business community is projecting 
continuing market growth in the year ahead, according to 
the results of the 2001 Economic Outlook Survey just 
released by the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce. 

 
So the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce isn’t showing the 
doom and gloom that the members opposite are. They’re 
looking towards the future. 
 

“Job growth predictions show some confidence”, Davis 
said. “Survey results indicated that 38 % of respondents 
expect to hire additional full and part-time staff . . .” 

 
Thirty-eight per cent of businesses in Saskatchewan expect to 
hire more staff. That’s good news for Saskatchewan, Mr. 



1762 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about sales in our 
province. This title is from The StarPhoenix, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and it’s from May 15. And it says: 
 

Auto sales accelerate in Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan 
outperforms the rest of the country in first quarter results. 
 

It doesn’t sound like a province that is falling apart to me, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. New vehicles sales in Saskatchewan bounced 
back in the first quarter of 2001. Sales are up 7.9 per cent. The 
largest increase among all the provinces in the first three 
months of the year. Good news for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The Leader-Post, February 23, 2001, headline is: “Retail sales 
up,” Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
February 21, 2001: 
 

Wholesale rises: provincial wholesalers sold more than 1 
billion in sales increases over 1999. The second largest 
growth spurt in Canada. 

 
Doesn’t sound like an economy that’s falling apart, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, March 8, 2001, The Leader-Post again: 
“Homes market strong.” 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The StarPhoenix dated April 6, 2001: 
 

Prospects improve for third straight year. 
 
Canada’s economic growth during the past seven years is 
finally benefiting youths aged 15 to 24, who are finding 
jobs and getting better wages according to Statistics Canada 
figures. 

 
“Saskatchewan showed some positive growth for jobs. It is 
a lot better place for youth than a lot of people make it out 
to be.” 
 

Says Roger Sauve from People Patterns who did the survey. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, people who do independent surveys 
think Saskatchewan is not a bad place. But they also indicate in 
their quotes that people out there, perhaps the members 
opposite would be the ones to target, are out there trashing our 
province and saying that this isn’t a good place for young 
people to raise their families, to build a future. 
 
It showed, this survey . . . the survey showed most 
Saskatchewan youth enjoyed better than average employment 
than their counterparts elsewhere in the country in 2000. So 
youth had better than average employment in the year 2000 
above youth in other parts of the country. That’s what the 
survey shows. 
 
Saskatchewan moved up one place to third in the ranking 
system among all the provinces in Canada, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 

The title says, “Youth gaining in job market.” The members 
opposite obviously haven’t read the papers. 
 
(15:45) 
 
May 6, 2001, “Regina house sales up 21%.” 
 
A lot of very positive indicators, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The 
Leader-Post, May 9, 2000, “Home market blooming.” Hardly 
talking negative about our economy. 
 
Here’s one from the Swift Current Booster . . . The Southwest 
Booster, from Swift Current, dated April 21, 2001. The title is, 
“Swift Current house sales record biggest increase in Sask.” 
Hardly talking negative about the economy in Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have the National Post, a quote from the 
National Post here. It says that: 
 

. . . index shows fewer companies are hiring and can signal 
a weak . . . (and signals, pardon me) a weaker employment 
market. The number of jobs advertised in newspapers last 
month fell in seven of the 10 provinces and rose in three. 

 
So jobs in papers fell in seven provinces and rose in three. 
Guess which three? Alberta went up by 4 per cent; 
Saskatchewan by 2.1 per cent. They had the largest increases in 
the country, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s not bad to be second 
behind Alberta in number of jobs advertised in our papers, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Saskatoon StarPhoenix, March 29, 2001. 
The title is: 
 

Saskatchewan growth to outdo national average: TD 
(Bank) . . . Only Alberta and Newfoundland, at four and 2.9 
per cent respectively, will beat Saskatchewan’s growth this 
year, also based on “sizzling growth in the crude oil and 
natural gas industries,” says the TD report. 
 

It goes on to say that they: 
 

. . . expect Saskatchewan’s economy to grow at three per 
cent next year, a rate he . . . (sees as being) sustainable for 
the province. 

 
A title here from the Prince Albert Herald, dated March 9, 
2001, “Businesses are optimistic.” It goes on to say that: 
 

Prince Albert businesses are more optimistic about their 
futures than the province’s prospects, according to a 
chamber of commerce survey. 
 
“I think typically there is room for optimism,” said Jim 
McLeod, general manager of the chamber of commerce, 
noting respondents expect a 14 per cent increase in profit 
(this year). 

 
There doesn’t seem to be pessimism in Prince Albert. There 
seems to be the only place there’s pessimism is in the benches 
across, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — The sky is falling. 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1763 

 

Mr. Yates: — The sky is falling, doom and gloom, that’s all 
they seem to know. 
 
I have the Miner-Journal from Esterhazy, Saskatchewan dated 
Monday, April 30, 2001. Now Esterhazy, Saskatchewan — 
represented by one of the members opposite — and they talk 
about “Committee’s optimism is encouraging.” The Esterhazy 
economic development committee’s optimism is encouraging. 
 

It is encouraging to know (it goes on to say) that despite the 
gloom and negative attitudes that surface about town from 
time to time, there are key players who are resolved to find 
some positive approach to preserving Esterhazy’s future. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they talk about the doom and gloom 
occasionally around town. I think it only occurs when one of 
the MLAs from the Saskatchewan Party happens to be in town 
talking about the doom and gloom. Because it seems the 
business leaders in those communities are optimistic, but their 
political leaders that they elected certainly aren’t. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about record growth with 
Saskatchewan manufacturer. “IRD posts record growth” it says 
February 13, 2001. 
 

Sales leap 40 per cent for Saskatoon manufacturer of 
transportation systems. 

 
Hardly talking about a negative economy in my books, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Weyburn Review, January 24, 2001: 
 

New flax straw plant will create 50 full-time jobs.” 
 
More jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
“Saskatchewan again posts a positive economic outlook,” 
Saskatoon StarPhoenix, February 23, 2001. 
 

Packaging plant up and running. Saskatoon location of 
Quebec’s Norempac employs 10 people from the city. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, 10 new jobs in Saskatoon again. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, May 21, 2001, Regina Leader-Post, “New 
mine going after frac sand.” More expansion in our 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Regina Leader-Post, March 5, 2001, “Ag 
biotech firm sets up in Saskatoon” will employ 12 to 15 
employees from the Saskatoon area, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
“Farm Credit Corp. stays in Regina.” Nine years after the Farm 
Credit Corporation moved here they signed a new 13-year lease 
to remain in Regina, keeping its jobs here in Regina. 
 
The Shaunavon Standard, May 1, 2001, the paper that the 
member from Cypress Hills would be very familiar with. And 
it’s about a topic we’ve discussed in this House before — 
“Honey Bee Manufacturing begins expansion project,” Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. More good news to Saskatchewan . . . for 
Saskatchewan. 

Now the member opposite says, no thanks to the government. 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we on this side don’t believe the 
government should be the generator of all economic activity. 
 
Now the members opposite talk out of both sides of their mouth 
day to day. They say they don’t want the government to be the 
driver of economic activity in our province and then they 
complain when we’re not, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I don’t know. I 
don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Next article I have, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the May 2, 2001 
article from the Weyburn Review. It says, “Weyburn Co-op 
Assoc. to pay $1.1 million to members.” Obviously they’re 
doing fairly well in that community. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Humboldt Journal says the “Local 
economy getting $40 million injection from producers.” It talks 
about the Stomp Pork Farm Ltd. — $40 million. It goes on to 
say, any time you bring 50 jobs to the area it’s significant to our 
economy. 
 
I don’t know, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have many, many more 
articles talking about good news in Saskatchewan. Wednesday, 
May 2, from The Watson Witness, again talking about the 
Stomp Pork Farm and the impact on the whole rural economy 
around Watson. 
 
Next I want to quote from the Lanigan Advisor, April 30, 2001 
— “Joint venture announced.” 
 

A successful livestock operator is joining forces with the 
LeRoy Agra-Pork Co-op Ltd. for a major hog operation and 
feed mill expansion in LeRoy. 
 
Construction of the project is set to begin in June 2001, 
with estimates that construction will be completed in one 
year. 

 
It will create more than 100 new jobs in the Lanigan area. Good 
news for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, The Estevan Mercury — “Business is 
booming at the Estevan Co-op,” dated May 2, 2001. 
 
Next I have The Canora Courier, dated Wednesday, May 9, 
2001, talking about: 
 

Sod-turning ceremony marks start of $2.5 million 
construction project. 
 

In Canora, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The Outlook paper says: 
 

Record sales for Riverbend Co-op, again. 
 
Dated April 30, 2001. 
 
I have the Humboldt Journal, dated January 18, 2001: 
 

Doepker plans expansion into Humboldt. 
 
Doepker estimates when this building is up and running it 



1764 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

could have as many as 75 employees working for them (at 
that location). 

 
Seventy-five new jobs in Humboldt. 
 
I have the Gravelbourg Tribune, dated Monday, May 7, 2001. It 
says: 
 

Proud moment for community — Kincaid General Store 
opening. 

 
More jobs in Kincaid. 
 
The Saskatchewan Valley News, Wednesday, May 2, 2001: 
 

New greenhouse open in Rosthern for upcoming season. 
 
More new jobs. 
 
I have the Northwest Herald from Unity, April 30, 2001: 
 

Council supports local feedlot project. 
 
It’s talking about a 1.5 million to start the construction, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite want to talk 
about the doom and gloom around the province. We know that, 
as with any province, we have to continue to grow the 
economy. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have a plan. I want to 
talk a little bit now about what our plan is. I want to start by 
talking about the Partnership for Prosperity. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government put a plan together, then 
went out and talked to the people of Saskatchewan about that 
plan. They had extensive consultations. They included public 
meetings, stakeholder meetings with business, labour, 
co-operatives, and community partners. 
 
In total about 10,000 people in this province expressed their 
views about the future of our economic prosperity and 
development. They provided suggestions, ideas, and a 
framework. On top of that, a number of MLAs held public 
meetings in their constituencies to talk about economic 
development. 
 
As you read through the document — if you ever take the time 
to read the document, which I’m not sure the members opposite 
would — they will see that there are a number of key targets 
focused on a number of key areas. They include attitude, 
competitiveness, the new economy and innovation, 
participation of First Nations and Métis people, modern 
infrastructure, jobs for youth, and diversification, and 
value-added processing. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, maybe the 
members opposite don’t want to pay any attention to growing 
our economy, but the members on the government side 
definitely do. 
 
Now I want to talk a little bit about the targets that the 
Partnership for Prosperity set. And they’re aggressive targets to 
build our economy. Our first target is to increase the number of 
jobs by at least 30,000 jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 30,000 jobs 
by the year 2004. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to reduce provincial income taxes 
by over 25 per cent for an average Saskatchewan family 
between 1999 and 2003. These are the targets that we are 
putting forward as a government to achieve, to build our 
economy. 
 
We want to increase the average personal disposable income by 
20 per cent. 
 
We want to achieve net youth in-migration. We want our 
children not only to stay here in this province to build a future, 
but we want youth to come here seeking employment to build 
their futures and to raise their families, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We want to increase the proportion of working-age people with 
some post-secondary education or higher by 15 per cent. We 
want to continue to build on a very strong, well-educated group 
of people in our society, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We want our 
youth to take advantage of the opportunities of education. 
 
We want to increase the number of businesses and families 
connected to the Internet by 40 per cent. 
 
We want to increase the employment rate of First Nations and 
Métis people by 20 per cent. 
 
And we want to target among the comparable provinces and 
states, Saskatchewan will be the most competitive jurisdiction 
in which to do business in our key sectors. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
we want to improve our competitiveness. 
 
We want to see 7,500 start-ups for new businesses and 
co-operatives annually. An aggressive target, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, but one that we take very seriously. 
 
And we want to increase non-traditional exports by 60 per cent. 
 
Well the members opposite talk about a plan. We don’t hear a 
plan over there except that they’ll grow the economy if the 
national economy co-operates and we have good weather. 
They’re basing any increase on the rain. 
 
We also have a target to become a world leader in research and 
development that enhances our ability to benefit from our 
unique resources, infrastructure, market and market interests, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(16:00) 
 
We want to have 90 per cent of Saskatchewan people see this 
province as a great place in which to live, work, and do 
business. And we want to increase the sales of agri-valued 
process products by 50 per cent. 
 
We want to develop a safe and efficient highway and 
transportation network that supports economic development. 
And we want to increase our per capita gross domestic product 
by an average of 2.5 per cent per year. We also want to increase 
our tourism revenue by 25 per cent to 1.5 billion annually. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve spent a lot of time putting 
together targets and a plan to build our economy. Now the 
members opposite may want to talk about the doom and gloom 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1765 

 

that the situation in our agriculture economy is creating, the 
downshift in the agriculture community is putting significant 
pressure on our province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But we on this 
side don’t want to focus on the negative, we want to build for 
the future. And that’s what our plan is about — building for the 
future. 
 
And so for those reasons, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to 
move, seconded by the member from Regina South: 
 

That all the words after “Assembly” be deleted and 
substituted with the following: 
 
encourage the government to continue to look at policies to 
diversify the Saskatchewan economy, to offset the loss of 
jobs in the agricultural sector, and to work towards the 
target of creating 30,000 jobs over the next five years. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
It’s a pleasure to follow my colleague from Regina Dewdney 
who I have to say I enjoyed his speech very much. In fact it 
used a lot of the same material I was going to in mine, but 
fortunately good news always bears repeating. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to address a couple of issues today 
that several of the members have spoken about. Both the mover 
and seconder of the original motion, and indeed the mover of 
the amendment, talked about the job numbers in the province. I 
want to speak about putting these into perspective. 
 
Let me start by saying job numbers are one of the things that we 
watch in this province to see the overall trend and the direction. 
All of us, all of us are concerned by the large number of job 
losses in the agricultural sector. The fact that we have seen 
roughly 16,000, almost 17,000 jobs move out of the agricultural 
sector over the past year is of concern to all members on both 
sides of the House. 
 
I say some concern, but I don’t say that it is really that much of 
a surprise. We have seen this really as something that has been 
coming for some time over the last several months. We have 
seen a decline in agricultural employment. We have seen a 
decline, frankly, for the last 10 years in terms of this. This is, 
however, an accelerated decline and it’s having an impact on 
our overall job numbers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have spoken during this 
debate. They’ve talked during the question period, phrasing 
their questions, speaking of a death spiral of the Saskatchewan 
economy. A death spiral is far, far from what this is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that perhaps the members 
opposite have been confusing the employment stats with their 
popularity ratings and that they’re confusing a death spiral with 
the death roll that their party is in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we take these job stats into account, 
when we put them in perspective, what we saw is that from 
April to May a loss of 5,000 jobs in Saskatchewan. Those 5,000 
jobs primarily were lost out of the agricultural sector. Although 
they were offset by some gains in other sectors, we’re still 

talking about a loss of 5,000 jobs. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to talk about some of the things 
that we are seeing in our economy today and how it impacts on 
job numbers. When we take a look at the agricultural numbers 
in particular, I want to address some of the comments that were 
made by the seconder of the original motion when he talked 
about the loss. And this was not particularly any different 
anywhere else, but that Saskatchewan somehow should be 
immune to it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the House should know that agriculture 
lost nearly 59,000 jobs during the May 2000 and May 2001 
time period throughout the country — 59,000 agricultural jobs. 
But the members opposite don’t mention this. 
 
Now we wonder why the job losses here, the 16,000 — let’s put 
this in perspective — 16,000 in the province that has roughly 11 
per cent of its jobs based on agriculture — 11 per cent of the 
province’s jobs are in agriculture. So we have had a loss of 
16,000 jobs in agriculture. 
 
Nationally though, 60 . . . nearly 60,000 agricultural jobs were 
lost. The members opposite say, well, we should be doing 
something about it. This clearly points to the fact that we have a 
national problem that the federal government has to take more 
time to take a look at. 
 
I say to the members opposite that they should do whatever they 
can to implore their federal party, the Alliance Party, to get off 
of its kick of its own death spiral and start paying attention to 
the Saskatchewan farmers that sent those MPs (Member of 
Parliament) to Ottawa. That’s what they should be doing, Mr. 
Speaker. They should spend less time, I say, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, worrying about the cheap politics that they play in this 
House and more time focusing in on the problems. 
 
The fact that we have seen nearly 60,000 agricultural jobs lost 
in Canada in the last year says to me that this is an issue that the 
federal parliament has to address. This says to me that this is an 
issue that all members of parliament have to address. And I 
would say that the day they need to address that is now, not to 
continue with their petty bickering within their federal party of 
the Alliance Party, not for the Prime Minister to simply put on 
blinders and say all is well. 
 
We need to speak with a common voice so that people 
understand what’s happening in our economy. This is not 
something unique to Saskatchewan; this is something which is 
happening across the country and impacting in Manitoba and 
impacting in Alberta. 
 
The member for North Battleford said, oh, there was a job 
growth in agriculture in Manitoba and Alberta. Well I’m afraid 
he should check his figures, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because he is 
wrong. 
 
In Manitoba employment in agriculture was down 4,800 over 
that same time period. And the members opposite should hear 
this. There were 14,500 fewer agricultural jobs in Alberta 
during that time period. Oh yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, even in 
Alberta nearly 15,000 farmers were out of work. 
 



1766 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

But the members opposite don’t talk about this as being the case 
with this industry needing help. The members opposite don’t 
talk about it as being something which is affecting us across this 
nation. What they do is they selectively pick a stat and they 
drive it and they drive it and they drive it over the cliff to the 
point that it plummets and is simply splattered to the point that 
it makes no more sense. 
 
The member opposite from North Battleford went on saying 
that agricultural jobs are growing in other provinces. Complete 
and utter nonsense — complete and utter, utter nonsense. 
 
Now let’s put this in perspective. The 14,000 jobs that were lost 
in agriculture in Alberta are comparable to here. Comparable in 
number. We lost almost every . . . for every job that was lost 
here in Saskatchewan in the agriculture sector, Alberta lost one 
as well. 
 
The difference, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the magnitude of 
agriculture in our economy. Here nearly 11 per cent of the jobs 
in Saskatchewan are in the agricultural sector. What are they in 
Alberta? Well I don’t hear the members from the Alberta party 
say anything today. The number over there is about 3.8 per cent 
— less than 4 per cent of the jobs in Alberta are agriculture 
related. 
 
Even in Manitoba, where the member for North Battleford says 
that these two provinces — Manitoba and Saskatchewan — are 
virtually alike, it’s simply not true. In Manitoba, roughly five, 
five and a half per cent of the jobs are agricultural related. 
 
So it’s one thing for the members opposite to say, oh, we should 
be being more like Alberta, we should be being more like 
Manitoba. The fact is that we have a problem in agriculture 
which goes across this country. But the impact is obviously 
here, felt hardest here in Saskatchewan because agriculture 
continues to be a major part of our provincial economy. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve listened to the speeches with great 
interest, and I think we need to understand here that there are 
going to be, from month to month, job growth in some sectors, 
job losses in others. The overall trend is what we need to keep 
our eye on. And I can tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the 
overall trend for Saskatchewan is a very, very positive one. 
 
The members of this Assembly may be interested to know that 
since this government took office in 1992 — its first full year in 
office — non-agricultural employment increased by 56,000 
jobs; 56,000 new jobs were created here in Saskatchewan in the 
non-agricultural sector. 
 
What’s the non-agricultural sector? Well the members opposite 
might know that as the private sector, because that’s where the 
jobs were created — in the private sector. 
 
But the members opposite never mention this. The members 
opposite, Mr. Deputy Speaker, never talk about the 56,000 more 
people who work in the non-agricultural industries. They never 
talk about the tens of thousands of families in this province who 
have found employment during the last 10 years. They don’t 
talk about the job growth which has been steady, steadily 
increasing during that time period, year over year over year. 
What they focus in on, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are the negatives. 

Now we cannot be Pollyannas over here. We have to also take a 
look at the negatives and we’ve got to understand what’s 
happening. We know that there’s been a loss in agricultural 
employment. We know that there has been a job loss and we 
know that there has been a steady job loss for decades. 
 
What is of concern to us, and we have talked about on many 
occasions in this Assembly — through all-party resolutions, 
through representations made by the Minister of Agriculture to 
the federal parliament, to the federal minister — is the need for 
us to have a national strategy to deal with trade-related 
employment issues and agriculture. That is an essential item to 
have if we were to reverse the trend in agricultural loss. 
 
But, but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the members opposite seem to 
neglect this point, and instead, simply point the finger to us on 
this side and say why aren’t we correcting it, why are we not 
correcting it. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when you have a national problem that 
sees 60,000 jobs vanish in one year in one industry across this 
country, when you see Saskatchewan losing no more really than 
the number of jobs lost in Alberta in terms of the number in 
agriculture, you have to say, gee, maybe there’s something that 
the federal government has to take a look at. 
 
Now the member for North Battleford, the all-powerful, 
independent Liberal, certainly I’m sure he has picked up the 
phone and called Ralph Goodale to talk to him about it. Perhaps 
Mr. Goodale is not taking his phone calls — it wouldn’t 
surprise me. I’m sure that high-powered true Grit that he is over 
there has been on the phone to the Prime Minister. It wouldn’t 
surprise me at all, high-powered member that he is. But perhaps 
the Prime Minister is not taking his phone calls either. 
 
Because I’m sure if these individuals were taking that member’s 
phone calls, they would be hearing from him the same thing 
that you hear from us which is that agriculture is an issue that 
has to be addressed on the floor of the House of Commons and 
in the cabinet room in Ottawa. That’s where he was last year 
when he sat on the coalition benches, and because he is an hon. 
member who is consistent and so . . . keeps telling us his 
principles, I’m sure that’s the same song he is singing today. 
 
It’s unfortunate, it is unfortunate that he has fallen in with a bad 
crowd over there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It is unfortunate that he 
has lost his way. But I am sure that as this debate goes on, he 
will see that the people who stand up for Saskatchewan are 
seated on this side of the Assembly and that we are continuing 
to work for the economic development of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I want to speak for a bit about how the 
approach . . . the approach that we need to take in this province 
in order to grow our economy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We need to understand that the growth of jobs in this province 
are happening throughout the province. They’re happening here 
in Regina, they’re happening in Saskatoon, they’re happening 
in our smaller urban centres, and yes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1767 

 

are happening in non-agricultural parts . . . in the 
non-agricultural industries in rural Saskatchewan. I think the 
members opposite who represent some of these ridings should 
feel compelled to stand up and talk about the growth that is 
going on in their constituencies in terms of jobs. 
 
I never hear — despite the fact we’ve given them many 
opportunities in this House — I never hear members from the 
forest fringe riding stand up and talk about the growth in the 
forestry sector. I never hear the members on the opposition side 
stand and talk about the growth that’s happening in terms of the 
manufacturing in their communities. I never hear the members 
stand up and talk about the positive things that the member for 
Regina Dewdney has outlined that have been chronicled in the 
daily and weekly newspapers of this province. The members 
refuse to celebrate the successes of this province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you may say, why do I mention 
this? I mention this because the chamber of commerce in their 
economic development strategy, in their economic development 
strategy called Action Saskatchewan, said one of the single 
most important things that has to change for economic growth 
is attitude — is attitude. And you have to ask, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, if that kind of a bad attitude from the members 
opposite is the kind of attitudinal change that the business 
leaders are looking for as they take a look at investment climate 
and job growth. 
 
I dare say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that’s not what the 
chamber of commerce had in mind. I dare say that that’s not 
what the business leaders are saying to us as we meet with them 
across this province. That’s not what working families are 
telling us as they come back to this province and they continue 
to work here. 
 
As I talk to young people who are starting their career in this 
province, they feel optimistic, Mr. Speaker. And I think it’s 
incumbent on the members opposite to leave behind their doom 
and gloom of political opportunism, leave behind your scripts 
that are written for them neatly by a bunch of staffers in their 
offices, and that they should move instead to listening to people 
like the chamber of commerce. They should listen to the 
business leaders, they should listen to the entrepreneurs, they 
should listen to the young working families, they should listen 
to the labour unions who say Saskatchewan is a great place to 
live, it’s a good place to invest, and it is an economy which we 
are going to continue to see grow. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, or sorry, Mr. Speaker, we are seeing 
Saskatchewan’s economy grow. We are seeing the growth in 
virtually all sectors of our economy and in all regions of our 
province. And this is something we should be particularly proud 
of. 
 
It is, I think, a positive sign of the strength of our previous 
economic development strategies, the Partnership for Growth 
and the partnership for — What was the first one? — 
Partnership for Renewal. It was a little bit before my time, Mr. 
Speaker; unfortunately I didn’t get here until 1995 so I missed 
the first one. But the Partnership for Growth and now the 
Partnership for Prosperity, I think are continuing to show the 
way for Saskatchewan business to grow and for our 
Saskatchewan economy to grow. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I don’t know why the members opposite 
continue to point to the doom and gloom. I read here a report, 
capital market report from the Investment Dealers. Oh, I say 
there’s a socialist lot if there ever was, wasn’t there — those 
Investment Dealers. What are they saying in May 2001? They 
are saying the Saskatchewan economy, I’ll quote now: 
 

The Saskatchewan economy is on track to completing its 
ninth straight year of expansion. 

 
Ninth straight year of expansion. Quoting again: 
 

Growth in 2000 was estimated at 3.4 per cent and will 
likely moderate this year to the 2 per cent range as weaker 
demand for exports adversely affects provincial expansion. 

 
And even with that, Mr. Speaker, still economic growth. There 
was a time in the early ’90s when people thought you would 
have economic growth without job growth. We were concerned 
as we moved into ’95 and into our new phase, or at that point 
our new phase of economic partnership strategies, that we were 
not seeing the accompanied job growth that came with the 
economic growth. By 1995 that had changed and had corrected 
itself. And as I pointed out earlier, we have seen during that 
time of this government a 53,000 job increase — 53,000 in the 
non-agricultural sector. 
 
The previous government, when it was in, constantly said we 
need to diversify our economy. They’ve constantly harped from 
the opposition side that we need to diversify our economy. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m pleased to tell you today we have diversified our 
economy. Saskatchewan’s economy today is more diversified 
than it has been at any point in its history, and we are 
continuing to push that economy and allow it to expand and 
grow and diversify more again. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we are doing this for several 
different approaches. Innovation is central to seeing job growth, 
innovation in the business sector. Business however tells us 
there are many things that they need support from government 
on —many things. The members opposite will know this and I 
know the member for Kelvington in particular will know this 
because of her role in the Saskatchewan Research Council 
many years ago. 
 
She will know that research and development are one of the 
areas where government can help provide the infrastructure and 
the support which will allow our economy to grow. If we need 
proof of that, if the members opposite don’t believe it, I say all 
they need to do is go to Saskatoon, take a look at the great 
things that have come out of Innovation Place, and they will 
understand the thousands and thousands of jobs that can be 
created where you have partnerships that are supported through 
common sense. 
 
As we see the great Saskatchewan business success stories, I 
can point to many of those being started with a sense of 
co-operation and partnership between government and the 
private sector. In many cases, Mr. Speaker, the private sector 



1768 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

has acted alone to create jobs, and to those people I salute them 
for the work and the innovation and the capital they put at risk 
to do that. 
 
I also want to say to the member for Redberry, who speaks 
often in this House about the labour climate in this province, 
that we have much to owe in this province to the labour unions 
who also work with business and work with our economy to 
make sure that we have a relatively stable labour force; that we 
have a relatively stable environment for business to function in. 
We are successful here in Saskatchewan because people pull 
together to make the ventures work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken a look at some of the areas where 
we have seen new ideas in innovation move us in directions that 
we didn’t think, even five years ago, were possible. I was 
recently down in Weyburn at the oil and gas show and had the 
opportunity to talk to people there about some of the new 
innovations and how this is expanding their opportunities in 
oilfields that they thought were nearing the natural end to their 
natural producing life. 
 
We see areas where they were using CO2 to extract more oil 
from resources. We see areas where they are using new 
innovation from biotechnology to make better use of crops. 
We’re seeing areas where we are expanding our IT (information 
technology) knowledge that we didn’t expect were possible 
before. And I point to the area that’s clearly one of my favourite 
projects — the Petroleum Technology Research Centre at the 
University of Regina — and what will soon be its sister station 
with the climate-control centre. 
 
Areas that we have been able to bring together — innovation, 
technology, business, government, the co-operative sector — to 
work to build an economy that will prosper and create jobs and 
economic growth throughout the province, not just here in 
Regina, not just in Saskatoon, but in communities, in the 
oilfields, in the wheat fields throughout this prairie, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s what we’re seeing because Saskatchewan 
people are working together. 
 
That is what we’re talking about by setting an economic climate 
for growth. That is what we’re talking about when we talk 
about a partnership, a partnership between businesses, between 
business and government; a partnership that allows us to create 
a regulatory environment that people can work in, create a 
labour environment people can work in, to create a business 
environment for businesses to come forward and people to work 
in. That’s what we believe in. 
 
We don’t simply believe, as the members opposite do, that you 
simply throw your hands up, throw the doors to the vault open, 
and let people come take what they need in hopes that this is 
going to create growth. 
 
They’ve tried this before, Mr. Speaker. We’ve seen the 
members opposite try this approach and it’s very much the basis 
of their approach. It’s a recipe for disaster. Today we are still 
paying almost $2 million a day on interest to clean up the mess 
that they created the last time they opened the province for 
business. 
 
Opening, unfortunately opening Saskatchewan for business 

really meant just opening the vaults. And it is something that 
Saskatchewan people today have to wonder how much better 
off we’d all be if we weren’t still paying for the debt — their 
legacy to this province. How much better off we would be if we 
could move more aggressively to reduce the income taxes. How 
much better off we’d be if we can invest more aggressively in 
our post-secondary institutions. How much better off we would 
be if we could invest in new technology. Imagine, just imagine 
what we could do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you and tell members of this House 
that we’re moving in that direction. The budget laid down by 
the Minister of Finance had many important initiatives in it on 
the public sector spending side, but it had many important 
initiatives in it for the business climate of this province. 
 
The fact that we have reduced the small-business tax is a very 
important signal to Saskatchewan business and to investors 
across this country. We are doing this in a smart way. 
Saskatchewan small-business corporate tax will be reduced by 
25 per cent this year — a 25 per cent reduction — down to 6 
per cent from 8 per cent. This is something that we are doing in 
order to encourage small-business people to continue to grow 
their businesses here in Saskatchewan. We’re increasing the 
threshold for the income that is counted under that cap, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Those are the areas that this government is moving in, and it’s 
something I think we need to be very positive about. 
 
I want to talk for a minute about some of the revitalization 
initiatives that we are making, Mr. Speaker. We, on this side of 
the Assembly, have set out an economic framework that is a 
balanced approach to economic growth and improves the 
quality of life while we grow the economy. 
 
We are fostering a competitive environment in which to do 
business. I’ve talked about that in terms of reducing the overall 
debt of the province; how we’ve been able to apply this to 
reducing the corporate tax rates, how we’ve been able to invest 
in other areas. And we’ve undertaken a regulatory review to 
make sure that people have a better understanding of the 
regulatory framework they’re working under. We have 
embarked on a great number of positive initiatives to foster our 
competitive environment. 
 
It may interest the members opposite to know that 
Saskatchewan is indeed quite a competitive place. When they 
take a look at the . . . I don’t think I have the graph in front of 
me. But when we take a look at the competitiveness of our 
major cities, in our markets around us, including the American 
ones, what we find, Mr. Speaker, overwhelmingly, is that 
Regina and Saskatoon — because these are the two centres they 
take a look at in the larger urban centres — remain among the 
most competitive not only in the Prairie provinces . . . Yes, 
incidentally, Regina is more competitive than Calgary and 
Edmonton and Winnipeg and Minneapolis and, with due respect 
to our American legislators who are visited, than many of the 
Midwestern centres that are compared against. 
 
We find that Saskatoon is equally competitive. It’s competitive 
because we have a solid and balanced approach to building our 
economy. People will tell you, business people will tell you if 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1769 

 

you spend any time with them, that as they take a look at the 
cost of doing business here in Saskatchewan, particularly when 
you do the comparisons with other places, our costs are really 
quite reasonable. 
 
We hear time and again about the costs in Ontario and how the 
payroll taxes are affecting them. We hear time and again about 
how the costs of attracting labour are so much more than other 
places. We hear time and again about how people are having 
difficulty attracting people to come and work. 
 
Saskatchewan has its fair share of problems. But I can tell you, 
it has its fair share of successes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see Saskatchewan people talk about . . . You 
need only talk to the people who moved with Crown Life to 
Saskatchewan, now that it’s been here for some time, and they 
love it. 
 
A friend of mine actually recently moved from Toronto; he 
works with a pharmaceutical company. He’s moved his family 
back out here so he could work in this province. Why? In large 
part because of the quality of life. Also in part, the quality of the 
job. He wanted to raise his daughters here because he thought 
there was something inherently valuable about Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think that the members opposite should spend less time 
talking to their speech writers in their closed offices and more 
time talking to ordinary Saskatchewan people and listen to what 
they have to say and the successes of why they think this is a 
great place to live. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is part and parcel of our partnership program 
and the economic climate that we are trying to set here in 
Saskatchewan. To simply believe that you can do it all with tax 
cuts as the members opposite say, is not — not — the way to 
build your economy. It is not the approach. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are working with people in every sector of this 
economy to strengthen the opportunities there. My colleague 
from Regina Qu’Appelle Valley has spent a fair amount of time 
working with the ACRE committee in terms of — the Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy — taking a look at 
opportunities there. I hope that later today when he has a chance 
to address this, if he’ll talk some about some of the initiatives 
he’s working on now as the Legislative Secretary responsible 
for ethanol development and the opportunities that this has for 
growing our economy. 
 
Because I think that in many ways we need to start paying 
attention to some of these issues and the seriousness of their 
application in terms of helping to build and foster a diversified 
economy throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Ethanol production, I won’t say much about it because 
obviously the member from Qu’Appelle will say more when he 
stands up, but it provides a real opportunity for us to take a look 
at this. 
 
When I listen to what businesses say throughout the province 
. . . Recently when I was at the oil and gas show I had the 

opportunity to listen to several people talking with SaskPower 
officials about energy issues. 
 
Many of us took energy for granted as simply always being 
there, electrical energy. I think as we take a look over this last 
six months, we start to understand what an important part 
secure, cheap supply has in terms of building your economy. 
 
Take a look at the problems that they have in southern 
California, northern California, and San Jose, and the Silicon 
Valley in terms of having secure power supply, and you hear 
that. You hear this in terms of the concerns as we talk to the oil 
sector about price. 
 
It will interest the members opposite to know that today we’re 
selling power, electrical power, cheaper than they are in Alberta 
to the energy customers — cheaper. But the members opposite 
never say anything good about that. 
 
The members opposite only like to cherry-pick the bad 
comparisons. They like to come and they like to say 
Saskatchewan is such a horrible place to do business, terrible 
under this government. But they are simply wrong, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
This government’s economic development plan has taken into 
account labour; it’s taken into account business; it’s taken into 
account taxes; it’s taken into account the inputs, Mr. Speaker. 
This is a great place to do business. And it’s one of the reasons 
Saskatchewan was called by The Globe and Mail the star of the 
’90s. It is one of the reasons we are continuing to see solid 
growth, despite falling exports. It is one of the reasons we are 
going to continue to see job growth over the next decade that 
this government is in power. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I didn’t 
talk a little bit about what their alternative is and what underlies 
their motion and the reasons for us needing to amend it today. 
 
We’ve listened to the Leader of the Opposition talk about his 
great economic development plan, a plan, and I’m quoting now 
from The Leader-Post of April 6 where he says: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party wins the next election, 
Hermanson said the population outflow would be stemmed 
within a year or two and the province would then grow (oh 
but wait) if the weather and the national economy 
co-operate. 

 
Oh well I didn’t know that this was . . . I guess we can simply 
call this the sunshine policy or maybe it’s a policy from the rain 
man, I’m not completely sure, Mr. Speaker. But as I take a look, 
this is a pretty weak economic development platform that says 
that the province would then grow if the weather and the 
national economy co-operate. 
 
Well wouldn’t that be nice. Wouldn’t that be nice. I have to say 
that this is the kind of genius from the opposition that I know 
Saskatchewan people are going to take great faith in as they 
listen to the members opposite. I know it’s the kind of thing that 
they’re going to be saying, well what exactly do you mean? Do 



1770 Saskatchewan Hansard June 12, 2001 

 

you mean that it’s got to be sunnier out or it’s got to be rainier 
out or what are you talking about? And what about the national 
economy? You mean Ottawa has to take complete 
responsibility? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite know that their plan is 
paper thin and I think it’s a shame that this is what they’re 
attempting to tell Saskatchewan people. We’ll turn the corner 
— we’ll turn the corner and then we will see continued growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that that’s not the way to do economic 
development. I appreciated getting an advance copy of the 
Leader of the Opposition’s speech to his party faithful at the 
Sheraton Cavalier on May 23. It was a brown envelope that was 
delivered to us and I appreciated the advance copy. It made for 
entertaining reading. 
 
In it he outlines slightly more, slightly more about his economic 
development platform. And he says . . . Let me read this to you 
here from his speech. The Leader of the Opposition said that 
their platform would be — as opposed to ours — their’s would 
be a virtual checklist for economic renewal. 
 
They would cut taxes on productivity. Well that’s a good idea. 
It’s too bad they voted against it in the provincial budget when 
we introduced it, Mr. Speaker. They say they would reduce the 
public debt. All I can say to the members opposite, okay, we’ll 
take your word on it but I’m not exactly sure that even if your 
leader did sign this speech that I would believe it. After $15 
billion, Mr. Speaker, of debt that they built up I have to wonder 
whether . . . or what’s this new-found interest in reducing the 
debt. 
 
I would also have to ask, Mr. Speaker, where this money for 
debt reduction would come from. Where would it come from? I 
suspect, Mr. Speaker, that the answer to that question is from 
the fire sale of our Crown corporations, because that’s what 
they believe, is that you sell off the Crowns to pay down the 
debt. Sell it for whatever you can get for it. Reduce the debt and 
go on a spending spree. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition says he would stop propping up 
dying industries. Now this is my favourite comment from the 
member, the Leader of the Opposition, in his economic 
development plan. He says they would not prop up dying 
industries. 
 
As I look through this speech, I don’t see much detail but I 
would sure be interested to know what dying industries he is 
talking about. I would be very interested to know which dying 
industries the Leader of the Opposition is going to stop 
propping up. The list is one that I would hope that the Leader of 
the Opposition would soon define because I think 
Saskatchewan people are going to want to know pretty soon 
what he means by stopping propping up dying industries. 
 
When I take a look at the job losses that we are seeing in 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker, I would say that with all the problems 
the farmers are facing, the last thing they need is for the Leader 
of the Opposition to bring in his economic development plan to 
further help them out. 
 
The member goes on to say that he would, in their economic 

development plan, keep the cost of doing business including 
labour costs competitive and improve the incentive to work 
through welfare reform. Well there’s an original idea. I half 
wonder who wrote this, if it wasn’t my good friend Grant 
Schmidt from Melville because this is what it sounds like. It 
was those poor people keeping our economy down again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But this is exactly the kind of platform that they have brought to 
the Saskatchewan people, that they say this is the way to 
change, this is what needs to be done in order to grow jobs in 
population and increase investment. 
 
And believe it or not, Mr. Speaker, they even sucked in the 
member for North Battleford into this. Clearly months and 
months of isolation have had an impact on him because he 
would surely have seen through this paper-thin approach to 
economic development that the members opposite advocated 
back when he was part of this side and helped to develop our 
economic development plan. And now he claims to have no 
knowledge of it. But that’s what the member opposite got 
sucked into. It’s unfortunate. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, that is the plan of those members opposite: 
cut off the dying industry, stop propping them up, pick on the 
poor people, cut the labour costs. Well we all know what that 
means. We know we’ve listened to the member from Redberry 
Lake go on at great length about how the unions are job killers, 
he calls them. Their mean-spirited plan is not a plan to 
re-engineer our economy. It’s a mean-spirited plan to 
re-engineer the Saskatchewan society, and Saskatchewan will 
have nothing — I repeat, nothing — to do with it or the 
members opposite as they start to take a closer look at it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have learned little in their 
time in exile. They have learned little in terms of how you build 
an economy. And they have not learned from their mistakes. 
 
The economic development platform that the Leader of the 
Opposition outlines is not really that much different than Grant 
Devine’s open for business. A plan that saw jobs decline. A 
plan that saw debt increase. A plan that saw Saskatchewan 
people driven out of this province in record numbers. That was 
the plan they pursued, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our plan, our plan is very different. Our plan focuses on 
partnerships. Our plan focuses on economic growth. Our plan 
focuses on the strength of this province, which are our business 
sector, which are our investors, which are our Saskatchewan 
working people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our plan targets a growth of 30,000 new jobs. The 
members opposite say that’s not possible, but I point simply to 
the 56,000 new jobs that were created in the non-agricultural 
sector since this government took office in 1992. I point to that 
and I say that 60,000, nearly 60,000 jobs were created in that 
sector since we came to office show that we can create another 
30,000 during this term. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, our plan says that we will 
reduce income taxes. I think it would interest the members 



June 12, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1771 

 

opposite to know — if they happened to read the National Post; 
clearly as the member for Wood River would point out, nothing 
but a socialist rag — but that National Post said on Saturday 
that in 2002 Saskatchewan would continue to be a national 
leader in terms of its marginal, top marginal tax rates. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Say that again. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — It would continue to be a national leader in 
terms of its top marginal tax rates. 
 
It would interest the members to know that the top marginal tax 
rate on income here in this province today is the second lowest 
in Canada. The second lowest in Canada. 
 
Now why is that important? That’s important because in those 
top income brackets we often find the people who are the 
investors, who have the money to drive our economy, who have 
money to invest in business, who are the entrepreneurs of this 
province. And we’re saying to them, Saskatchewan is right up 
there, right up there with Alberta. 
 
Even after Gordon Campbell comes in in British Columbia, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to tell you that Saskatchewan will still be in the 
top Canadian jurisdictions for those income earners. 
 
We have also implemented a plan of tax fairness, Mr. Speaker, 
which sees all people see a decrease in their income taxes. We 
were able to do this through fiscal prudence, and through a 
balanced agenda. 
 
We want to see an increase in the average disposable income, 
Mr. Speaker. We want to see an increase in the rate of First 
Nations and Métis people participating in our economy. And I 
say to the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, that I find it 
interesting — interesting that nothing more than lip service is 
paid to that in the speech from the Leader of the Opposition to 
his business dinner. Paper-thin promises, that’s a most 
unfortunate thing. 
 
But our plan is a real plan for economic growth. A plan for 
economic growth in our cities. A plan for economic growth in 
our rural areas. A plan for economic growth in all people. 
 
I listen to the members opposite talk about how we need to 
move forward. And we do. I think it’s important to note that 
this House has put forward family-friendly legislation to allow 
people to stay home with their . . . spend more time with their 
children and continue to go back to the workforce on their 
terms. That’s an important piece of legislation, which shows 
that we have a balanced agenda, not to just economic growth 
but to the well-being of families. 
 
We will remain competitive and comparable in terms of our 
economic . . . our business environment. I found the graph that I 
was looking for earlier, Mr. Speaker, which does show that 
Regina is, in terms of the cost rankings, the most competitive 
place to do business among Edmonton, Calgary, Winnipeg, 
Dallas, Minneapolis. Mr. Speaker, we need to start spreading 
that message — not the gloom and doom from the members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I could go on at some length to talk about the 

things that we are going to do to diversify our economy; the 
things that we’re going to do to make sure that Saskatchewan 
people share the wealth and enjoy the benefits of that new 
economy, but Mr. Speaker, we’re going to be here a long time. 
 
And over the next decade I look forward to the opportunity, the 
good people of Regina South willing, to stand many times to 
talk about the successes that they — they, the Saskatchewan 
people — have in building this economy and to continue to 
point to the holes in the gloom and doom attitude of the 
members opposite. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to take this opportunity to adjourn 
the debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 16:45 until 16:55. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Wartman Thomson Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 
Harper Jones Higgins 
Kasperski Trew Osika 
Lorjé Yates McCall 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken McMorris D’Autremont 
Weekes Bjornerud Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert Hillson 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 
 
 


