















































Hansard: May 18, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1217 
 May 18, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
once again today to present petitions on behalf of my 
constituents, many of them who would like to see Bruno 
become part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 

 
And we have an additional 28 signators on this petition, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of three unions representing 
employees in the community-based organization sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier and I had the pleasure of meeting with 
a group from CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees), 
SEIU (Service Employees’ International Union), and SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union) 
this past February 20 to receive these petitions at the end of the 
group’s signature-gathering tour around the province to impress 
upon the public and the government the importance of the work 
being done by workers in the community-based human services 
sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the prayer of these petitions reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioner humbly prays that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to recommend to the provincial 
government that it implement a major policy initiative 
aimed at raising the wages of employees of 
community-based agencies in the broader public sector. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present today 
from people in my constituency who are concerned about the 
Fyke report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena Health 
Centre be maintained in its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services available to 
users from our district and beyond. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 

Hendon. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to rise today to present a petition on behalf of citizens 
of Saskatchewan who have expressed an interest in maintaining 
and upgrading of the Saskatchewan road network. And the 
prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 
increasing the funding to $900 million over the next three 
years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 
 

And this petition is signed by the good folks from Regina. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
signed by citizens concerned with the condition of Highway 
339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 

And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest and Hearne. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of the citizens of Saskatchewan 
regarding EMS (emergency medical service) service. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intentions to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the people in the Alida, Antler, 
Bellegarde, and Redvers area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to the Government of Saskatchewan for a new 
regional hospital in Swift Current. The prayer of the petition 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 



1218 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition come from the city 
of Swift Current, from Stewart Valley, from Elrose, from 
Dalmeny, and from Climax, Wymark, and the communities of 
Kyle and Tompkins. I’m pleased to present this petition on their 
behalf. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan concerning 
improving the cellular telephone coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Rabbit Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, 
Borden, Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 

Signed by the citizens of Blaine Lake and Battleford. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens concerned about the rate increases for residential and 
business customers: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Saskatoon, Warman, 
Davidson, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present on 
behalf of concerned constituents. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signators to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Springside, city of Regina, Wynyard, and 
Elfros. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed 
by citizens regarding cellular telephone coverage. And the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Chitek Lake, Spiritwood, and Mayfair. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition from concerned 
citizens of the province and it’s in regards to the high energy 
costs. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to the Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from Unity, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
with a petition from concerned citizens with reference to the 
cuts to the long-term care in southern Saskatchewan, 
specifically at Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Assiniboia and Mossbank. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
this morning. The prayer for relief reads as follows: 
 

Your petitioners pray that your Hon. Assembly may be 
pleased to call on the provincial and federal governments to 
provide immediate financial assistance to the city of North 
Battleford in order to facilitate necessary improvements to 
the North Battleford water treatment plant. 
 

And your petitioners this morning are all patrons of the 
Battlefords Co-op. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1219 

 

reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions that are similar to the ones earlier presented 
and are hereby tabled as addendums to sessional papers nos. 3, 
4, 10, 58, 110, 146, 149, 155, 156, and 158. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, to the Minister of Health. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 45 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the end of March 31, 2008, what was the original cost 
estimate for the SHIN project; is the project within budget 
to date; what is the estimated final cost for SHIN; and is 
SHIN’s development on time and on schedule? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s not often 
that I get guests and visitors down to the legislature 
representing a constituency so far away, but when they do come 
they are of very high quality. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to take the opportunity to 
introduce to you and to other members of the Assembly, a 
group of students from Jonas Samson Junior High in Meadow 
Lake. There are 53 members, Mr. Speaker, in the west gallery; I 
believe all a part of the Junior High Band as well. 
 
With them is their teacher, Mr. Terry Paley. Also as 
chaperones, we have along Sally Geigo, Pat Beaulieu, Nola 
Lepage, Darlene Senn, Liela Zacharias, and Debora Walker. 
 
I met with the group earlier this morning. They asked me a 
number of interesting questions. We had a tour through the 
cabinet room and through the Premier’s office, which I know 
they enjoyed. And I know they’re headed off, just a little bit 
later here, off to Moose Jaw to see more of the sights and 
sounds of southern Saskatchewan. 
 
So I’d ask all members to please join with me in welcoming this 
wonderful group to the Chamber today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the rest of the Assembly, I too have a school group in 
from the town of Montmartre, Montmartre High School. Grade 
12 students from Montmartre made the hour trip in, or hour and 
a half trip in, I guess it probably should be — not an hour trip 
— from Montmartre. 
 
There are 22 grade 12 students sitting in the east gallery. Their 
teacher is Janice Skene, and chaperone, Sandra Lipsett. I am 
going to try and find time to meet with them later on after 
question period, if time permits. 
 
So I’d like to welcome them here and hope you enjoy the 
proceedings. And I’m sure you’ll have lots of questions once 
you see question period. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, to you and through you to all 
members of this Hon. Assembly, I would like to introduce a 
very good friend of mine. Seated in your gallery is Helen 
Krzyzewski from Ottawa. Helen works in the Senate in Ottawa 
and she will be here for the weekend, a little mixture of 
business and pleasure, as we are both attending a wedding in 
Estevan tomorrow and I . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
you’re right, more pleasure. 
 
I’d ask all members to join me in welcoming Helen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the House, a 
group of 20 residents of Moose Jaw. Now I get the privilege of 
standing and introducing this group but they represent both 
residents of my constituency and from Moose Jaw North. 
 
This is the Moose Jaw Camping Club, a group of residents that 
pack up the gear and travel off every weekend to various parts 
of Saskatchewan, enjoying the beautiful sites of our province. 
And what a better way to travel than in the company of good 
friends and have a good time while you’re doing it. 
 
I look forward to meeting with you later. And just as an aside, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to thank Marie Wright for arranging 
the group’s first excursion of the season to come to Regina to 
visit the legislature. But also I’d like to congratulate, Marie; she 
just retired after a long and distinguished career from 
Providence Place in Moose Jaw. So enjoy your retirement and 
you’ve got a very good group to enjoy the summer with. Thank 
you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Memorial Cup 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, about a year and a half, a little more than a year ago I 
stood in the House and gave the city of Regina great credit for 
submitting a bid for the Memorial Cup, 2001 Memorial Cup. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that 2001 Memorial Cup is here. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be teams from across Canada coming 
into Regina for a week-long tournament to determine the best 
junior hockey club in Canada. The Regina Pats will be hosting 
three other clubs — the Red Deer Rebels from the Western 
Canada League, the Ottawa 67’s from the Ontario Hockey 
League, and the Val d’Or from the Quebec Hockey League. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be fans, friends, players, scouts from all 
over Canada, making Regina the hot spot for junior hockey for 
a week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have the privilege of attending the opening 
banquet tonight in Regina where Clark Gillies will be the guest 



1220 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

speaker. It’s a kickoff to what will be a great week of hockey. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that anybody that loves hockey will love 
this next week of May in Regina, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Regina first stunned the sporting world with Huddle Up in 
Saskatchewan a few years. And now, as the member from 
Indian Head Milestone has said, it is time to do it again with the 
Memorial Cup with the Breakaway in May. 
 
Mr. Speaker, over 700 volunteers have become involved since 
Regina won the bid to host the Memorial Cup. Saskatchewan is 
going to put on what is sure to be the best Memorial Cup ever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, an estimated 50 per cent or just over 50 per cent of 
spectators and guests attending the Cup will come from outside 
Saskatchewan. These visitors are estimated to leave behind 
between 9 and $11 million into the local economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Regina has already demonstrated to the rest of Canada that 
though it is not the biggest centre, it can sure throw a party. On 
the topic of parties, Mr. Speaker, all of the scheduled and 
ticketed events taking place for the Memorial Cup have been 
sold out. 
 
Not to worry however, it will be easy to get into the Memorial 
Cup spirit and forget all your troubles at events such as the 
parade or the free concerts during the lunch hours next week in 
Regina’s Market Square. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a big thank you must go out to Ron Clark and the 
organizing committee who put all this together. 
 
As well I would like to take a moment to recognize and 
congratulate the players, coaches and staff of the Regina Pats, 
Red Deer Rebels, Ottawa 67’s and Val d’Or Foreurs on winning 
their respective divisions and coming here. Congratulations to 
everyone involved in this very significant event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of Fame Inductee 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize an outstanding individual from Maple Creek 
who will be inducted into the Saskatchewan Baseball Hall of 
Fame on August 18 this year. 
 
Mr. Lucien Chabot, better known locally as Frenchie, began his 
baseball career at Lac Pelletier at the age of 15. At 17 he joined 
the Canadian Army and was stationed in Chilliwack, BC 
(British Columbia) where he played in the international league. 
Later he pitched for the Viscount Royals in a semi-pro league 
which included Prince Albert, Colonsay, Saskatoon, and 
Delisle. 
 
In 1953, Mr. Chabot played with the Golden Prairie Chinooks 
in the newly formed Sask-Alta Baseball League. And I 
understand that league has run continuously now for over 50 
years. The following year Maple Creek joined the league and 

Mr. Chabot toiled on the mound for his home team for many 
years to come. 
 
Mr. Chabot’s strong arm and hitting ability added to the team’s 
success on the field and, in later years, strengthened the team 
through his coaching skills. He also served as a highly respected 
umpire for 15 years and called games around Maple Creek and 
other places, other communities in the Sask-Alta League. 
 
The selection to the Hall of Fame follows on the heels of 
another significant achievement when the 2000 Grant Ehnisz 
Award was bestowed on him last July. This is the Sask-Alta 
League’s most prestigious award and is handed out for 
outstanding dedication and sportsmanship. I’d like to note that 
Mr. Chabot’s application was submitted and accepted on the 
first attempt, which to me suggests that he truly is deserving of 
this honour. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Ladies Choir Performing in Ottawa’s 
Canada Day Celebrations 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Saturday, I had 
the privilege of attending the spring concert of the Regina 
Ladies Choir under the direction of Wilma Bell Wessel. This 
was a very enjoyable and tune-filled evening. I even hummed a 
bit but very, very, very quietly, Mr. Speaker, because I know 
my limitations. 
 
But I mention this event because this year is a very special one 
in the 72-year history of the Regina Ladies Choir. They have 
for decades served their original mandate of providing 
fellowship and musical training for local singers and filling a 
cultural need in the city. They bring the gift of song to senior 
citizens homes and sing in various festivals held throughout the 
year. 
 
Currently there are 50 women of all ages in the choir. This year 
the Regina Ladies Choir are taking their show on the road. They 
have been invited to represent Saskatchewan at the Canada Day 
celebrations on Parliament Hill in Ottawa. They are actively 
involved in raising the necessary funds for their trip. 
 
I can think of no finer representatives of our province, and 
especially, Mr. Speaker, since a prominent member of the 
Regina Ladies Choir is our own Monique Lovatt from the 
Clerk’s Office without whom we know this Assembly could not 
function. 
 
So I’m sure all the members will join with me in offering our 
best wishes and congratulations to Monique and all the 
members of the Regina Ladies Choir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Road Safety Week 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today marks the 
beginning of National Road Safety Week across Canada. Here 
in Saskatchewan as everyone prepares for the long weekend 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1221 

 

ahead, members from both sides of the House ask travellers to 
be extra careful. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that drivers and their passengers use 
their seatbelts. The disturbing fact is that nearly half of the 
children in Saskatchewan, age 8 and under, are not properly 
restrained in vehicles. We all know, Mr. Speaker, that seatbelts 
save lives. Injuries and fatalities resulting from not buckling up 
are preventable. It is our responsibility to take care of our 
children, and that duty most certainly extends to vehicle travel. 
 
As National Road Safety Week kicks off, the members of the 
House would also like to remind our highway travellers to 
remember and obey the rules of the road. Pay extra attention to 
other drivers as well because, Mr. Speaker, a recent survey 
found 75 per cent of people admitted to performing personal or 
work-related tasks while driving. These are distractions, 
potentially dangerous activities that could lead to serious 
accidents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we ask all travellers this holiday weekend to allow 
lots of time for their trips, be courteous drivers, and avoid 
making hasty decisions while behind the wheel that could have 
an impact on them and their families for the rest of their lives. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Resident to Receive Medal of Bravery 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take 
this opportunity to recognize a remarkable man from my 
constituency. Glen Mooswa from Loon Lake will receive the 
Medal of Bravery, along with 17 other people. The medal is 
awarded for acts of bravery in hazardous circumstances. 
 
During a house fire, Mr. Mooswa pushed his wife and her 
granddaughter out of their bedroom window. He then plunged 
into the thick smoke to reach another child’s room. Despite 
burns to his face, chest, and shoulders, he crawled back inside. 
He found the two-year-old boy and carried him outside to 
safety. 
 
By the time the Fire Department arrived the whole interior of 
the house was now engulfed in flames. After the fire, Mr. 
Mooswa was treated for smoke inhalation and minor burns. 
 
Mr. Mooswa is the only recipient of the Medal of Bravery from 
Saskatchewan this year. He will be invited to accept his 
decoration at the ceremony to be held in Ottawa. 
 
I ask all members to help me in recognizing Mr. Mooswa’s 
courageous act of bravery. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

70th Wedding Anniversary Congratulations 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members of the legislature, it gives me great pleasure to extend 

warm congratulations to Mr. Gordon and Mrs. Edith Taylor on 
their 70th wedding anniversary. 
 
This extraordinary couple survived the great depression, and in 
spite of many other world’s trials, they managed to raise six 
children who have blessed them with 10 grandchildren and 17 
great-grandchildren. 
 
Gordon met Edith at the Ethelton store where she worked, and 
would come by to visit friends. Mr. Speaker, I would like to 
quote from the local paper, The Melfort Journal, and I quote: 
 

After two years of going together, Gordon said, I said to 
her one day, we should get married. She said, if it’ll suit 
you, it’ll suit me. 
 
It gets better as the time goes along. We were happy when 
we got married, and we’re still happy about it. 
 

Gordon and Edith continue to live together and look after each 
other. They each boast about the other’s cooking abilities, enjoy 
having people to come to taste the food that they prepare. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is with delight that I ask the Assembly to join 
me in congratulating this special couple on their 70th wedding 
anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Positive Attitude Key to Success 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to read 
into the forum of the legislature, Mr. Speaker, an article from 
the Biggar Independent. It’s entitled “We need to believe in 
ourselves and keep our attitudes positive.” It has a quote 
underneath. It says, “Success is more attitude than aptitude.” It 
goes on to say: 
 

There has been a lot of talk about attitude recently — that is 
attitude in rural Saskatchewan. It does seem that, at every 
turn, rural Saskatchewan is taking a beating. 
 
We are losing our population. We may be losing more 
hospitals. We are going to be forced into amalgamation — 
both in municipalities and hospital districts. 
 
But really, is it that we are “losing” these things or are we 
merely being forced to make some changes. Change is 
neither good nor bad, it is simply change. And the success 
of any kind of change depends in large part on our attitude. 
 
The population of Saskatchewan, and more specifically 
rural Saskatchewan, is declining. So, with the declining 
population we are forced to rethink how we deliver services 
still keeping within our budget. 
 
Yet, in spite of these drawbacks, there are a number of 
people that still prefer to reside in rural Saskatchewan. Our 
towns are not yet on the way out. We often hear of 
“success” stories in small town Saskatchewan — whether it 
be the building of a new school, a new park, or simply 
coming together to help someone when needed. 

 



1222 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

The reason (for) all these projects are considered a success 
. . . because of attitude (Mr. Speaker). When we believe 
something can be done, it gets done. 
 
With a positive attitude we can achieve whatever we want. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Action Saskatchewan — A Blueprint for 2005 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is for the Premier. 
 
The Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce has sounded the 
economic alarm. After 10 years of failed NDP (New 
Democratic Party) economic policy the chamber is warning that 
we in Saskatchewan are running out of time. Yesterday the 
chamber released . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order, order. Members of 
the Assembly, I’m sure there are many witty things that are 
being said, but when they all come at once it sounds like a lot of 
hollering. And I would ask that members give the member an 
opportunity to ask the question and then give proper 
opportunity for the question to be answered. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday the 
chamber released a very interesting report entitled Action 
Saskatchewan — A Blueprint for 2005. We were particularly 
interested in the chamber’s view of the role of government in 
rebuilding our economy. I quote: 
 

The role of government is to be a facilitator, 
complementing the business community’s growth. 

 
But the NDP government told us last week that the only way to 
grow the economy was to grow SaskTel. And the NDP’s latest 
budget made government bigger by hiring almost 600 more 
government employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the chamber of commerce says that the way to 
turn Saskatchewan’s economy around is to grow the private 
sector. So my question to the Premier is: why is the NDP 
buying companies to compete with the private sector and 
making government bigger? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I had opportunity to be 
with the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce several days ago 
and they were kind enough to provide to me, at that time, a 
copy of the Action Plan. And in conversation with the chamber, 
there is very much we share in common with that plan and with 
our hopes with the chamber to build the economy of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition wants to introduce the 
question of Crown ownership in this province, which will and 
has and will continue to play a significant role in the economy 

of the province. I’ll tell you that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I think today is the day the Leader of the Opposition needs 
to come clean on what his party policy is, Mr. Speaker. In the 
last provincial election they went to the people of Saskatchewan 
with something called The Way Up, a document with their party 
policy, in which they said, quote: 
 

Saskatchewan people are shareholders of Crown 
corporations. They must be consulted directly through a 
provincial referendum on any specific proposal to sell any 
Crown utility. 

 
That’s what they said in the election, Mr. Speaker. Now I have 
a document, 2001 policy, and what does it say? No mention of a 
referendum; privatization will be considered if demonstrated 
that it’s a good idea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want the Leader of the Opposition: will he 
consult the people of Saskatchewan with any proposal to 
privatize our Crowns? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think about the 
only thing the Premier and the chamber of commerce have in 
common is that they both have a copy of the report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the chamber report says that the test of whether an 
environment for economic growth exists is whether 
entrepreneurs are willing to invest capital in Saskatchewan. The 
chamber says that most entrepreneurs are saying Saskatchewan 
is not a business-friendly place and they are not investing their 
capital in the province as a result. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to Statistics Canada, residential 
construction in Saskatchewan is down 33 per cent, commercial 
construction is down 62 per cent, and industrial construction is 
down almost 70 per cent. Business has obviously lost faith in 
the NDP government that is buying businesses to compete with 
them. 
 
Meanwhile the government is growing itself by hiring 600 new 
government employees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the chamber is saying we need to grow 
Saskatchewan. Why is the NDP government insisting on 
growing the government instead of the business sector? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite 
should pay a little closer attention to the facts of the matter — 
the facts of the matter. 
 
Right here, right here, Mr. Speaker, from an institute he’s 
familiar with — the Fraser Institute — the Fraser Institute 
reports the change in aggregate real business fixed investment 
1992 to 1999. What’s the Canadian figure? 48 per cent. What’s 
the figure in Saskatchewan? 64 per cent. Higher than the 
Canadian average. 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1223 

 

Which, Mr. Speaker, which province in all of Canada had a 
larger growth in the GDP (gross domestic product) per capita in 
the 1990s than any other? The province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people are interested in our province. They are 
investing in our province because it is a good climate in which 
to invest. And that climate, Mr. Speaker, is being competitive 
on the tax front as we are quickly becoming, but competitive 
also in quality of life. The quality of life that’s ensured by good 
public services. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier lives in a different world than the rest of us. 
 
Sask Trends Monitor said that among key economic indicators, 
Saskatchewan is at the bottom of the list in the Prairie 
provinces. And the chamber of commerce we believe has gotten 
it right. The chamber says that Saskatchewan’s future is all 
about growth. Unfortunately the way the NDP interprets this 
growth is to grow the government. 
 
We keep hearing about the NDP’s failed business adventures 
and its plans to buy even more business ventures to compete 
with existing Saskatchewan businesses. Mr. Speaker, this is 
what the chamber is saying about the NDP’s massive expansion 
of Crown corporations, and I quote: 
 

Respondents were strongly opposed to Crown participation 
in economic ventures where they are competing with other 
Saskatchewan private enterprise. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain why the NDP keep 
buying more companies — security companies, farm equipment 
sales advertising companies, cable companies — to compete 
with existing Saskatchewan companies when everyone in the 
province is telling the NDP government just to get out of the 
way? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve had an opportunity in 
the last number of weeks to be with business groups in the 
communities of Prince Albert, Saskatoon, here in Regina, a 
large group, Mr. Speaker, earlier this week with the Moose Jaw 
Chamber of Commerce. 
 
And you know what I hear from the business community in 
Saskatchewan. They are applauding the budget that is under 
debate in this legislature. They are applauding the cuts — 25 
per cent cut to small business. They are applauding the lifting of 
the ceiling on the definition of small business. They are 
applauding the incorporation of professionals in our province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, there’s a headline right here in The 
Leader-Post, “Budget applauded by business.” 
 
Now the question that the Leader of the Opposition — again I 
challenge him to answer because the province wants to know — 
is it your plan, sir, to privatize the Crown sector . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask . . . Order, order. I have two 

requests of the Assembly, two requests of the Assembly. First 
that the questions and the answers be heard. Secondly that all 
remarks go through the Chair. The Premier of Saskatchewan, 10 
seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I ask the Leader of the Opposition: 
which is it? His commitment to the people of Saskatchewan in 
the last election that any privatization would be first proceeded 
by a referendum or is it the policy, which is now being 
distributed that says they will just make a decision and sell the 
Crown? Which is it, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments in Private Sector Companies 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Chamber of 
Commerce has told the government that Crown corporations 
should not be competing with private businesses in 
Saskatchewan. And what does the NDP do? They spend $8.3 
million to buy an Ontario-based company to compete with 
IRON Solutions in Outlook, to compete with The Western 
Producer, and to compete with a small business in my 
community. 
 
FamilyFarmers.com is an on-line magazine service located in 
Archerwill, Saskatchewan. They make money by selling 
classified ads for farm equipment — just like Ag Dealer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation): why is the NDP using 
taxpayer’s dollars to buy an Ontario-based company to compete 
with a small business in Archerwill, Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again this goes to 
show how much the opposition is aware of what really is going 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, FamilyFarmers.com — for the public’s 
information, Mr. Speaker — is a dot-com company that does 
Web hosting, they do designs, they do consulting, and Mr. 
Speaker, as I say they design Web sites, Mr. Speaker. They do 
not sell magazines as does Ag Dealer, Mr. Speaker. They are 
not in direct competition whatsoever with FamilyFarmers.com . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister says 
they’re not competing. Well I have a letter from Karla Folstad 
who runs FamilyFarmers.com and she says and I quote: 
 

I took a look at Ag Dealer this morning. We consider them 
direct competition. Or rather, we did. Now our competition 
is the Government of Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Karla Folstad started this business just three years 
ago and now she has four people working under her. And now 
her own government is spending millions of taxpayers’ dollars 
— hers and mine and everybody in this province — to compete 
against her. 
 



1224 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

Why is SaskTel buying companies in Ontario to compete 
against small businesses in places like Archerwill, 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has partnered 
with over 170 — 170, I repeat — private sector companies so 
that they can ensure that these companies have an ability to 
compete with the multinational companies from outside of our 
province and outside of our country. That’s what they have 
done. They have partnered to ensure their viability, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the Leader of the Opposition 
however where the real competition is. Mr. Speaker, the real 
competition comes . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Minister for Crown Investments, 
another 20 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition ought to know that the real competition comes from 
the member from Rosetown, the member from Canora-Pelly for 
the leadership, Mr. Speaker. That’s where the real competition 
is coming from. And he ought to know also, Mr. Speaker, that 
they are doing due diligence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
FamilyFarmers.com just received a major contract to host a 
Web site for the indigenous nomadic communities of northern 
Russia. It’s pretty sad when the nomadic people of northern 
Russia can find a business in Archerwill, Saskatchewan, and 
SaskTel doesn’t know they exist. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in her letter, Karla Folstad goes on to say: 
 

I was one of the young people who left this province to 
move to Alberta, and I came home because I strongly 
believed in the future of this province. That choice has had 
heavy consequences for me. I have been overcharged on 
telecommunications, the telecommunications I do receive 
are substandard, and my repeated requests for fixing the 
problems are ignored by my own government. 
 

Mr. Speaker, why doesn’t SaskTel concentrate on providing 
better services for the people like Karla Folstad, instead of 
spending $8 million buying an Ontario company to run her out 
of business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, as the Premier 
indicated earlier, the agenda of this party is to privatize. The 
agenda of that party is to privatize, Mr. Speaker, and I need 
only quote from yesterday’s Leader-Post, May 18, 2001, where 
it says the following, Mr. Speaker: 
 

During the 1999 election campaign, the Sask. Party 
promised to hold a plebiscite before privatizing a Crown. 

 

That is no longer — I repeat, no longer — their party policy. 
And, Mr. Speaker, in the face of what our Crowns currently 
offer for the people of Saskatchewan, they employ over 9,000 
people, Mr. Speaker. They purchase over $1.2 billion worth of 
goods and services from Saskatchewan businesses and 
suppliers, Mr. Speaker. And the Crowns spend over $400 
million every year in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, creating 
thousands of jobs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the agenda of this party is to 
grow the province. To grow the province and the people — 
that’s our agenda. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Karla Folstad ends her letter this way, and I quote: 
 

I guess what I’m trying to explain to you, Mrs. Draude, is 
the importance of this government to stand behind what 
they say when they talk about revitalizing rural 
Saskatchewan. And if they can’t do that, at the very least 
stop directly competing with those individuals and 
businesses that refuse to give up on this province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, will the NDP at least do that? Will they listen to 
the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce? Will they listen to 
the Karla Folstads? Will they listen to the people in the 
businesses in this province, who believe in this province, who 
want to see it grow? And will they stop competing with 
Saskatchewan businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, it becomes clearer and 
clearer for the public of Saskatchewan, I hope, what their 
agenda is. It is clearly to privatize our Crown corporations, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and I say, Mr. Speaker, as it pertains to the 
companies that she says SaskTel is competing with, I again 
want to quote from The Leader-Post of Tuesday, last Tuesday, 
May 15, where there is a letter from Robert Freburg, who’s the 
president of Brigadier Security Systems, who says of one of the 
companies she is criticizing, says . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. It is at this time the turn 
of the Minister for Crown Investments Corporation — 30 
seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. This quote comes 
from The Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, and it’s from the president 
of Brigadier Security Systems, Robert Freburg, who says that: 
 

SecurTek has more than 16 dealers in Saskatchewan and is 
providing a much-needed service to Saskatchewan people, 
protecting lives and personal property and all the while 
creating jobs and profits that stay (right here) in 
Saskatchewan (Mr. Speaker). 

 
From the president of Brigadier Security Systems Ltd., a 
company that she says SaskTel is competing with. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1225 

 

Drinking Water Quality 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Environment. On Monday the minister and 
his department released the list of 119 communities, which they 
believe, have drinking water related concerns; 37 of those 
communities lacked minimum water treatment facilities, most 
of which have also been issued boil-water advisories. 
 
The other 82 communities have been red flagged by SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) as at 
some risk due to a variety of concerns, such as a history of 
bacteria in the water, high trialomethane concentration, or 
elevated levels of other substances like arsenic or selenium. 
 
At the time, SERM said they were working with these 
communities to deal with the water problems. But as many of 
our MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) have learned 
over the last few days, some of these 82 communities didn’t 
know there was any concern with their water until they read 
about it in the paper. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why are these communities not 
being informed by SERM that there are concerns with their 
water supply? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — In a very public way, in a very public 
way, SERM issued boil-water advisories to a number of 
communities. We have done that on a continual basis. And in a 
very public way, SERM has approached a number of these 
communities on a continual basis, indicating that you have 
problems with your water, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to go back a little bit, Mr. Speaker, to when his 
provincial cousins were in power during the 1980s, Mr. 
Speaker. What happened at that time, Mr. Speaker, is 50 per 
cent of the communities in Saskatchewan had drinking water 
problems when the PC (Progressive Conservative) government 
was in power in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker. On this side, only 23 
per cent are at that stage right now. 
 
It’s a remarkable turnaround, Mr. Speaker, and something that 
he should not criticize because there’s been great progress on 
this file. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Once again the minister has completely 
evaded the question, gone back to the don’t worry, be happy 
strategy of this government when it comes to this issue. Maybe 
we can provide the minister with some specifics. 
 
The community of Davidson says they have been regularly 
sending in water samples and weren’t informed by SERM that 
there was any concern with their water. They read about it in 
the paper. The town of Lanigan was just as surprised to see 
themselves listed as having water at some risk. 
 
(10:45) 
 
The villages of Ceylon, Big River, Bracken, Cabri, Midale, 

Senlac, and Viscount, all reported the same thing — that they 
either learned that SERM considered their water at elevated risk 
by reading about it in the paper, or by talking with their MLA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why hasn’t SERM been talking to these people 
and these communities? If SERM is doing its job to manage the 
water quality in this province, why aren’t these communities 
aware that their water is at some risk? And why isn’t SERM 
working with them to correct the problems? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I will say in a 
very public fashion, we have documented all the 130 
communities that have had challenges over the years. We have 
continued to say that these are problems in these communities 
and we’re going to make sure we take the very safe step to issue 
a boil-water advisory until we are absolutely sure that the water 
is safe, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, as well is that it is no 
question that the responsibility for safe water lies with a lot of 
people. And SERM and this government is going to take a very 
strong stand to make sure we do our part. What we’d also 
encourage the communities and all the people that operate the 
systems throughout the province, all to be diligent on this 
particular challenge. We’ve said that time and time in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, is we have been very 
proactive. When they were in power, Mr. Speaker, 50 per cent 
of the communities had problems with safe water. When we’re 
in power — down to 23. That number’s going down. But as 
always, we have to work together to make sure we continue 
pushing that number down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, well the minister talks 
about his department’s communication strategies. Let’s see just 
how effective they’ve been. 
 
The town of Cabri is on SERM’s list as having elevated levels 
of trialomethanes. The local administrator said they had talked 
with SERM about a year ago about their water, but since, they 
had heard nothing. They have had no contact from SERM until 
the administrator called the department yesterday herself. 
SERM confirmed the town was on this list and then 
recommended the community should be doing more testing. 
This sounds very familiar, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last year the minister of Environment adopted an, if they don’t 
ask, don’t tell, policy over all of his department’s fee increases. 
And the same thing is obviously happening here again. Does it 
take a community to have to phone the department before they 
learn they should do more testing? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is SERM not fulfilling its 
legislated mandate to supervise and regulate water quality in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1226 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, in a very public way we 
issued boil-water advisories. In a very public way, Mr. Speaker, 
we increased the amount of money that SERM gets and we 
increased the amount of response time for the provincial lab to 
make sure that the documents and all the samples sent to the 
provincial lab are returned to these communities as quickly as 
72 hours, Mr. Speaker. In a very public way we issued a 
document through the cabinet to make sure people out there 
understood that we have water quality problems in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And what I will say again, Mr. Speaker, it’s very clear — very 
clear — that we take the responsibility and role that we have as 
a government across this way as very serious. We have a lot of 
work to do, Mr. Speaker. We are going to encourage all the 
towns and villages throughout the province to also share in 
some of that work that’s very necessary to ensure safe drinking 
water to all the residents of this great province. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, furthermore I’m going to go 
back to history again. When you were in power, Mr. Speaker 
. . . 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well now we’ve got the minister 
bragging about all of the funding that he’s providing these 
communities — well perhaps we should check that out. 
 
The town of Ceylon applied for federal-provincial infrastructure 
money, but were turned down. The town of Davidson applied 
for $40,000 for a new water pump and motor, and were turned 
down. The town of Midale in 1999 and in 2000 applied for a 
water filtration system, but were denied. This year they applied 
to renovate their sewer lift and buy new pumps, once again 
denied. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these communities, first of all, are alarmed with 
this moderate-risk classification SERM has given them. And 
second of all, these communities are trying to make 
improvements, and trying to do it, are not receiving assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister table his long-term plan for 
dealing with these outstanding water quality issues specifically 
related to these 82 communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The people of 
this province and a lot of people here fully understand that since 
1992 there have been a lot of messes to clean up. And there’s 
been a lot of attention paid to water quality. Mr. Speaker, what 
the member opposite is doing is attacking small communities. 
 
He wants a response to Ceylon. Ceylon’s project was not 
eligible under the CSIP (Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program) program because the work had already been 
completed. They may apply again. 
 
Davidson’s was to replace equipment at the treatment plant that 
would increase capacity, but not water quality. Mr. Speaker, the 
priority was given to those 39 communities that will receive 
$8.2 million to upgrade water services — 21 communities 
identified by SERM as lacking minimum treatment facilities 
were approved under those programs. 

I want to remind folks that those decisions were made by 
representatives . . . by the review committee for these various 
projects, Mr. Speaker, which include representatives from 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), from 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). 
They developed the rating criteria; they established it, and 
they’re following those project guidelines, and they’re working 
with the small communities. 
 
I wish the opposition would support those small communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 36 — The Public Trustee Consequential 
Amendment Act, 2001/ 

Loi de 2001 apportant les modifications corrélatives à la loi 
intitulée The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I move Bill No. 36, The 
Public Trustee Consequential Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 37 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 37, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 

 
Bill No. 38 — The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 

2)/Loi corrective de 2001 (no 2) 
 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 38, The Statute Law Amendment Act, 2001 (No. 2) be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the Government House Leader. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce 
guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, five guests in your gallery. At least I 
think they’re all here, yet. 
 
I’d like to introduce Meagan, Spencer, Mari, and Chlöe Pitzell, 
who are the children of one of my staff members, and with them 
is their cousin, Nancy Grace from Muenster, Saskatchewan, and 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1227 

 

she is here having a little visit with the Pitzell family. 
 
I understand that this is Nancy’s first time observing the 
proceedings in the House, and so I would like all members to 
give these fine young Saskatchewan residents, a very warm 
welcome to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — To request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you 
members for granting the leave. 
 
Seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, are two people who didn’t 
arrive together but I’m going to take the opportunity while I’m 
on my feet to introduce each of them, together but separately. 
 
We have with us Councillor Mike Badham, seated at the top 
back corner. Welcome, Mike, to the legislature. And seated just 
this side of Councillor Badham, is Barb Byers, the president of 
the Saskatchewan Federation of Labour, and it’s a delight to see 
you here this day. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming both of these guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It makes me a great 
deal of pleasure to stand and answer questions 190, 191, and 
192 on behalf of the government. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 190, 191, and 192 have been 
submitted. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 
Bill No. 30 — The Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise in support of The 
Labour Standards Amendment Act, 2001. This Act will provide 
benefits for parents. It will benefit children. It will benefit 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to outline what this Act does and why it’s 
being put forward at this time. The Act before us does several 
things, Mr. Speaker. For birth mothers or primary caregivers of 
an adopted child, it increases the parental leave protections 
under The Labour Standards Act to 34 weeks. This is in 
addition to the 18 weeks of maternity or adoption leave that’s 
now provided under the Act. 
 

The amendments we’re proposing will increase the parental 
leave for birth fathers and for spouses of primary caregivers to 
37 weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this legislation is rooted in the belief that additions 
to the family by birth or by adoption benefit from the nurturing 
and the care given by both parents. As a result of these 
amendments, the birth mother or primary caregiver would be 
entitled to maternity leave of 18 weeks and parental leave of 34 
weeks for a total of 52 weeks of job-protected leave. 
 
Birth fathers and spouses of the primary caregiver would be 
entitled to 37 weeks of job-protected parental leave. Together 
the combined maternity and parental leaves a family is entitled 
to total 89 weeks. The amendments before us would also enable 
birth and adoptive parents to begin their parental leave 12 
weeks before the estimated birthdate or reception of the adopted 
child. 
 
I should also point out, Mr. Speaker, for those parents who 
intend to return to work early from such a leave, the notice that 
must be given to their employer is being increased from two 
weeks to four weeks. The increase in the notification period is 
to provide employers with a reasonable amount of time to 
adjust their workforce plans when an employee chooses to 
return to work early. This also provides fair notice for anyone 
hired to fill in for the employee on leave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the legislation does. It increases 
parental leaves and provides job protection for parents. It 
increases the notice an employer gets should an employee 
decide to return to work early. And it also gives fair notice to 
any temporary workers who may be hired to do the work of the 
parent on leave. 
 
Like the legislation itself, the rationale for this legislation is 
straightforward. Members will recall about a year ago the 
federal government passed Bill C-32, An Act to implement 
certain provisions of the budget tabled in Parliament on 
February 28, 2000. In a nutshell, Bill C-32 extended the number 
of weeks of maternity and family leave benefits payable 
through Employment Insurance. 
 
As well, Bill C-32 says the 35 weeks of parental benefits must 
be taken within 52 weeks of the child being born or placed with 
the family. Parliament also amended the Canada Labour Code 
to extend job protection for workers using full Employment 
Insurance benefits accordingly. 
 
This is the first opportunity we’ve had to introduce the changes 
required to ensure that Saskatchewan parents will have their 
jobs protected while accessing EI (Employment Insurance) 
benefits. Mr. Speaker, like the other provinces and territories, 
Saskatchewan is increasing its parental leave provisions to 
provide job security for families while one or both parents 
receive the increased level of Employment Insurance benefits. 
 
We’re doing it because it’s good for families. We’re doing 
because it’s the right thing to do. 
 
I don’t think I need to spend time today explaining the 
importance of family. It was Charles William Elliot, the 
American educator and president of Harvard University, who 



1228 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

said, quote: 
 

The security and elevation of the family, and of family life, 
are the prime objects of civilization and the ultimate ends 
of industry. 

 
I think it’s also true to say that within the families, the care and 
nurturing of children is one vocation whose importance is 
universally recognized. 
 
By this legislation, we are moving to increase the time the 
parents, both parents, can spend with new children. I don’t think 
anyone will object to that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before concluding, I want to briefly outline the 
anticipated impact of this legislation; that is, who is affected by 
it. Employees whose child was born or came into their adoptive 
care on or after December 31, 2000 and who are on leave at the 
time this amendment is passed can extend their leave to the new 
maximums. 
 
I know many Saskatchewan people have given birth to or 
adopted a child since December 31 and that they’ve been 
waiting this legislation before making their decision about when 
to go back to work. I want to assure those parents that we 
recognize their situation and have taken it into account when we 
drafted this Bill. 
 
I should also note parental leave is available to both parents. 
The birth mother and the primary giver of an adopted child are 
entitled to a total of 52 weeks. The birth father and spouse of 
the primary caregiver are entitled to a maximum of 37 weeks. 
 
In recognition of the importance of both parents in the early 
development of a child and to help families deal with work and 
family responsibilities, this provision has been extended to both 
parents whether the child is born to them or adopted by them. 
 
The provision of 89 weeks of combined job-protected leave for 
both parents will ensure that no matter what the circumstances, 
the maximum Employment Insurance benefits can be accessed 
by the parents. In addition, the extended parental leave will 
assist employees in balancing their work and family 
responsibilities. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I want to emphasize that we’re 
increasing the parental leave provisions in The Labour 
Standards Act to provide working parents with a job protection 
while they make use of the recently increased level of 
Employment Insurance benefits. This will result in 52 weeks of 
job-protected leave for birth mothers and primary caregivers, 
and 37 weeks of job-protected leave for birth fathers and the 
spouses of primary caregivers. 
 
I think it’s important to note that in 1999-2000 there were fewer 
than 5,200 claims in Saskatchewan for parental leave benefits 
under the Employment Insurance program. It seems reasonable 
to assume a similar, slightly larger number of families will 
benefit from the changes that we are proposing. We think this is 
a good thing because families are the social building block of 
our society. We cannot succeed at anything if we cannot protect 
and enhance family life. 
 

As I said at the beginning, this legislation is good for children. 
It’s good for parents. It’s good for families. And I invite all 
members to join us in supporting Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 30, The Labour 
Standards Amendment Act, 2001. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
enter into the debate I guess on this Bill No. 30, The Labour 
Standards Act . . . amendment Act. It’s one area that we 
certainly were aware of and as the minister opposite had 
mentioned before, that the federal government had passed C-32, 
Bill C-32 — so we knew that it was through the federal 
government. 
 
If you check with a number of the provincial governments, 
they’ve already gone down this road and also have passed 
legislation similar to this I believe. 
 
This legislation, as the minister has talked about, mainly deals 
with extending the leave that is granted of course to the parents 
— the spouse or the mother — and you know, for the most part 
we think that’s a very good idea. I mean it seems to be the 
provincial trend, the national trend, and it’s a trend that we’re 
moving towards here in Saskatchewan. 
 
One of the areas . . . and I was interested to hear the minister 
talk about how the notice . . . when the person with leave is 
away with leave, the notice that they have to give before they 
come back into the workforce. And I believe it was extended 
from 14 days to four weeks, which is an area that we have heard 
the most concern about is how — I can just speak from a couple 
of examples of friends of mine that own small businesses and 
that was their biggest concern — is would they get enough 
notice when the person that was on leave was planning on 
coming back. 
 
And depending on the job and depending on a lot of the . . . I 
mean the situations, of course there’s so many different 
situations out there, but it was a great concern for a number of 
small-business owners that we have talked to. 
 
Now we’ve heard that it is extended from 14 days to four 
weeks, which we think is a good thing, but I would like to take 
some time to be able to consult with a number of the business 
owners that we deal with that we are talking to that raise this 
concern right off the bat with the whole legislation, and get 
their feeling for it and how it’s going to affect them and perhaps 
whether the four weeks is sufficient in their eyes or perhaps 
needs to be longer. We don’t know that until we take this Bill 
back and the information back to a number of the business 
owners. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, until we are able to consult with 
the people we need to consult with, not only on the extension of 
leave but on the notice of return from that leave, Mr. Speaker, at 
this time I’d move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 30. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

The Chair: — Why is the member on her feet? 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1229 

 

Ms. Draude: — With leave, Mr. Chair, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you and thank you to the members. Mr. 
Chair, to you and through you to members of the House, I’d 
like to introduce a group of students from Foam Lake 
Composite High. There are 27 grade 12 students in the east 
gallery. The teacher is Ian Cooper, and Anne Cooper and 
chaperone Dennis Friesen are with them today. 
 
The MLA from Canora-Pelly has asked me to greet you and 
having the opportunity to meet with you on the stairs for a few 
moments. I hope you enjoy the proceedings. You’re going to 
see some estimates right now, which is really the real work of 
the Assembly at this time. And I’m sure that you’ll benefit from 
everything you’ve learned here at this time. 
 
So welcome to the legislature and I’ll see you in a few minutes. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And to you and 
to my colleagues in the Assembly, I’d like to introduce on my 
immediate left, Mr. Clare Kirkland, who’s the president of Sask 
Water. And on my immediate right is Mr. Wayne Dybvig, who 
is vice-president of water resource management. Tom Gehlen, 
vice-president of utility and engineering operations as well. And 
immediately behind me is Dave Schiman, who is the manager 
of financial planning. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to welcome the 
minister and his officials here this morning. Hopefully — I see 
a new minister than was here last year — so hopefully we’ll get 
some insight into Sask Water’s department’s operations. 
 
One of the first items I’d like to discuss has been what’s in the 
. . . which has been in the news and is very important to the 
residents of Saskatchewan, which is the safe water in this 
province. 
 
And I guess I would start with, my question to the minister is: 
what is Sask Water’s role in providing safe, reliable drinking 
water to the people of the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, to the member opposite, 
thank you for the question. 
 
Sask Water is involved in utilities and water utility projects as 
well as water quality advisories with communities throughout 
the province and approve of various methods of dealing with 

some of those issues. 
 
Sask Water offers technical advice to various communities as 
well involved in different projects so there is a good working 
relationship and the availability of Sask Water technicians to 
advise various communities with respect to the issues dealing 
with water in a variety of capacities. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, we’ve 
asked I guess the Minister of SERM what his department knew, 
and when, regarding the water problem in North Battleford and 
around this province. I would like to ask the minister opposite 
what knowledge did Sask Water officials have of contaminated 
water around the province, particularly the situation in North 
Battleford, and when were you alerted of it? 
 
(11:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, these are very good 
questions, and I’m sure a lot of the same questions that we’ll be 
asked during the inquiry that’s been . . . that we’ve put in place. 
 
What I want to point out, Mr. Chair, is that Sask Water does not 
have any direct role in monitoring or compliance, and to 
specifically say when we were notified of the problems in North 
Battleford was probably around the same time that the public 
was made aware through the Health . . . through the Health 
department. So it wasn’t as if somebody picked up the phone 
immediately notifying any particular department; it was through 
the Health department that these notifications came forward. 
 
Sask Water technicians then became involved subsequently as a 
support service and an offer of assistance by allowing the 
resource people, the technicians in North Battleford who’d been 
working rather strenuously because of the situation . . . Sask 
Water’s technicians and staff offered support to that community 
by making their technicians — familiar with those types of 
situations or at least the project situations — available to give 
those employees who had been working virtually night and day 
and very, very hard some respite time. 
 
So Sask Water, in that instance, would work as a backup or 
support to communities. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, you indicated you 
basically found out from the newspaper reports or from . . . 
when you said when Health . . . when the Public Health Board 
was informed in North Battleford. What I was asking you was, 
was SERM . . . did SERM contact you personally at that time? 
Or was it . . . did they contact you after or did you read it in the 
newspaper and you . . . your officials contacted them of any 
assistance you could give to them? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chair, the . . . Sask Water was 
contacted directly by SERM; I wasn’t personally phoned 
directly. But Sask Water officials were phoned and notified, and 
it then became a team effort — people working in conjunction 
with one another in their particular areas of expertise, technical 
knowledge, and responsibilities. 
 
So in that respect the notifications did come internally, not just 
by reading it through the newspaper. 
 



1230 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. Well 
since that happened, I’m going to ask you: has Sask Water 
taken any action to ensure that safe drinking water is provided 
to the residents and are they working in coordination right now 
with SERM? Since this happened in North Battleford, has there 
been any other change in your policy? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. Just again to 
remind the member, as my previous answer indicated, Sask 
Water has no role in compliance or monitoring. The question 
about change in policy, no. There is no change in policy per se. 
There has been underway since last December long-term review 
— a long-term strategy review — to deal with water situations. 
But remembering again that the water quality testing and 
monitoring is not Sask Water’s mandate. That would fall under 
SERM. As I mentioned, since last December Sask Water has 
been undergoing a review, province-wide, and working towards 
a strategic plan. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, you were talking about the 
review. I know we have a document, and you have the same 
document over there, that was presented to cabinet basically 
regarding poor water quality in Saskatchewan. It was dated I 
believe September 22, 2000. It states that Sask Water along 
with SERM and the Department of Health will jointly develop 
another document within six months that will outline further 
long-term strategies to further reduce the risks involved with 
drinking water. 
 
Now that you’ve mentioned it . . . and I believe that was 
supposed to be done by March of 2001. Can the minister 
provide the House with an update on whether or not such an 
action has taken place and how you are coming along with that 
or if it’s finished? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I’m told that the September 
22 document, from what I understand, was a draft document. 
Once those documents did come into play, by December is 
when the strategy began. And the reports, the target date for the 
report, for the final submission to cabinet would not . . . was 
extended until June. And that remains in place. 
 
And I’m told that that report will be submitted in a timely 
fashion, as was indicated at the outset. And I believe, if the 
member will recall, in March we again with Health, SERM, and 
Municipal Affairs had referred to this project that was 
underway as well. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister. I’ll 
just read just a little bit from here. It says they: 
 

. . . would like Sask Water to evaluate the current state and 
infrastructure for all municipalities and communal private 
systems to determine upgrade requirements to meet safe 
drinking water objectives. Sask Water will provide 
leadership and report back to the government by March 
2001. 

 
Have you completed that infrastructure study and have they 
reported back to the government by March? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, again to the member 
opposite. Again, the draft document in September did not 

initiate any process until December. Therefore the additional 
months that were added on for the final report, which is on 
target and will be presented in June as was pointed out in March 
of this spring, that it was a proactive approach that was taken 
for this review and everything is in place. 
 
And there will be a report of the findings in June as was 
indicated during our March announcement of National Water 
Day. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I take it then that you 
are doing a complete review of all the infrastructure, water 
facilities in every town, and will report back by June. We will 
still be here in June so I will ask you then the questions to see 
that report. 
 
I would like to discuss a little bit about a program that I see in 
the Estimates here about rural water quality advisory program. I 
believe it was introduced in the fall of 1997. Could you please 
tell me what this program is all about, why was it introduced, 
what does it do, and is it still running? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, throughout Saskatchewan, 
as we all know, there are rural residents that rely on water 
sources from dugouts, groundwater, and some of that may be of 
poor quality. So recognizing that there may be potential health 
hazards that exist in these rural supplies of water from potential 
contamination from such things as perhaps coliform bacteria or 
naturally occurring metals such as arsenic or selenium, the 
sources of those waters need to be tested. And that is typical of 
these types of rural water supplies right across Canada. 
 
So it’s not an unusual situation. And most of the supplies 
throughout the province can be readily treated in an affordable 
manner to supply the suitable supplies of water that do in fact 
meet health standards. 
 
The concerns around the rural supplies was why Sask Water 
had initiated the program that the member opposite had alluded 
to, Mr. Chairman — the rural water quality advisory program. 
And that was initiated three years ago. 
 
Under that program, rural residents receive a comprehensive 
analysis of their supplies and are provided with advice on how 
they can safeguard their supply and how they can treat it. There 
are about, I’m told, about 30 parameters of testing that are done. 
And people with private wells or private water sources in rural 
areas — private wells particularly — can, with the assistance of 
Sask Water, apply for testing of their water supply. The fee is 
$100 and subsidized then in the event there are additional costs. 
But that’s the cost to the request for a testing of a water supply 
in rural areas. 
 
And recognizing the fact that yes, there are many rural areas, 
private wells where people get their own private water sources. 
So it’s important that the availability and the opportunities 
through Sask Water to have that . . . the sources, the water 
quality tested is very, very important. 
 
There are a variety, as I mentioned, there are about 30 
parameters that undergo close scrutiny to determine the quality 
of water and to ensure that people are able to address perhaps 
the potential harmful qualities or coliforms or whatever in that 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1231 

 

type of water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Minister. As everybody on this side 
of the House and yours said that yes, water is very important in 
rural Saskatchewan and needs to be tested. You say you charge 
a minimum of a $100 or maximum? Or is there a different fee 
structure? If they would like their water tested every six months 
or a year do they still have to pay that fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, under this rural water 
advisory program that fee for $100, yes, is for each time there is 
a call for testing of that water supply. 
 
Now what that entails is that a water technician visits the farm 
site and takes a sample from the supply. The sample then will 
be analyzed, as I mentioned, for 30 different constituents in that 
particular sample. And then the information or the results will 
be sent to the landowner indicating any quality concerns and 
advice. 
 
And that’s important that the customer receives the advice 
necessary to deal with whatever the problem is. It may not be 
anything that is health threatening or life threatening, but it may 
be some constituent in that water that needs to be addressed to 
lessen the potential perhaps for a health problem. 
 
I’m told that there are about 150,000 people throughout this 
province that rely on supplies from individual wells or systems 
that are largely untreated. 
 
So I believe this is very, very important and it’s good questions 
that the member opposite is raising, because perhaps it will now 
allow those people in rural communities and areas may not be 
aware of this type of service that’s being offered, will now be 
apprised and know that they have the opportunity for a great 
deal of assistance to give them some assurance with respect to 
that very vital resource that we require in our daily lives. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well most of the 
people know about it, but I’ve had quite a few contact my office 
about the price — $100 is costly. When you talk about being 
maybe once, but you remember that SERM requires towns to 
test weekly, some of them daily. If somebody on the farm 
would like their water being tested every six months or once a 
month —especially if you’re dealing with surface water where 
contaminants can run into from different areas, especially in the 
spring when there’s runoff — it can get quite costly. 
 
And most people just won’t test it for the simple price is they 
can’t afford it. I would wonder even if city residents would pay 
a hundred dollars to have their water tested every few months, 
themselves. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And once again, 
these are good questions, very good questions, and I appreciate 
them. Again because it will also allow people that may not be 
aware of the fact that for those people you’re concerned about 
that pay a hundred dollars, that hundred dollars covers, as I say, 
a wide number of constituents within a sample of water. And 
I’m also told that if the customer individually decided to do it 
without having Sask Water’s involvement, it would cost them 
upwards of $300. 
 

Now for a fee through Sask Health, of $16, the testing will be 
done . . . can be done in the spring for coliforms and nitrates 
only. And I believe that’s what the member opposite has 
expressed. 
 
The spring runoffs that may contain some contaminants that 
would, or may very well . . . and I’m not saying this from a 
technical aspect, but I suspect that because of Health’s 
involvement with testing only for these coliforms and nitrates, 
that it would not be as extensive . . . well obviously not as an 
extensive water testing of constituents in a sample as with the 
laboratory being involved; Sask Water’s involvement in the 
opportunity for that hundred dollar fee, as opposed to doing it 
as an individual without going through Sask Water and costing 
almost three times more. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister, on that one. But 
I also would like to impart that I think they should provide even 
free testing like it is for small towns, cities. They’re just asking 
basically the same things that are afforded to them people — 
testing either at free . . . maybe even . . . or even if they can only 
do it once a month. But they should be allowed to test. 
 
Because it just isn’t . . . I’d mentioned runoff. But I mean you 
can have a heavy spring or heavy rain at any time, or if there’s 
somebody doing spraying around you, people have been 
concerned about their water supply. So they would like to test 
on a half . . . (inaudible) . . . basically on a regular basis like 
cities and towns are. Because it’s nice to know that the water 
you are drinking from is safe. 
 
One other question I want to ask you on that is with this 
program, do you do any random testing — just pick spots 
through the province that you . . . oh I would say if you’re 
testing for all these different kinds, you just pick spots and you 
keep a record of it to see if it’s been changing, going up, 
different kinds of contaminants been coming in water, all 
different through . . . all through the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I’m told that 
there has been testing, random testing done throughout the 
province in about 1,000 wells, and what’s being found is a wide 
variation across the province. The results of the testing of the 
waters across the province varies considerably. 
 
The data is being maintained and now there is a good base for 
the water quality throughout the province. So those kinds of 
things are happening. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, for the member opposite as well, when he asks 
for free water testing, I want to let him know that if there’s an 
act of God, and we use Vanguard as an example when they had 
that horrendous problem in that area, all the water quality 
testing was done at no cost to any individual. So that service is 
in fact provided. 
 
And with this testing of a variety of wells, and up to this point 
I’m told it’s at a thousand level, throughout the province, gives 
us a fairly good idea of water quality. And it also indicates the 
variation of water quality from one part of the province to the 
other. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, and it’s interesting to know that 



1232 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

that service is provided. When you do the testing on the 
thousand, you mention, wells, does that include testing surface 
water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, it is surface and well water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, I ask, do you test for pesticides 
when you do this random testing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. The recent 
study, or at least inspections done by the Research Council, of 
dugouts, tell us that they have found some evidence . . . 
 
I’m just getting ahead. I guess my first answer to your question 
is no, Sask Water has not been testing for pesticides in waters. 
But the Research Council has done some testing in dugouts, and 
has found some evidence of this type of contamination, but not 
to the extent that is beyond the standards of what it should be. 
 
So I want to underline and clarify so that there’s not a serious 
concern suddenly emanates from our discussions and our 
questioning here. This is very, very important because Sask 
Water is now looking at the . . . because of the 
Wakaw-Humboldt system that Sask Water has some direct 
operations with, Sask Water is looking at the possibility of 
perhaps expanding and doing something beyond what’s being 
done now, given that . . . as I say, the Research Council has 
found some evidence, but nothing serious. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On that end I hope 
that you keep testing, keep data, because it is a concern from 
some of my constituents about testing for pesticides and making 
sure that it always stays below the minimum level in surface 
water, in well water. And also I would keep encouraging you to 
do the random testing, maybe even more, so you have a good 
database of water quality through rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And one other question on the pesticides. When you talked 
about the $100 testing, the 30 different tests, did they test for 
pesticide in that $100 fee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I understand that they do not, Mr. Chair. 
And having answered that, let me just clarify something — and 
I apologize, Mr. Chair, to the member — in the 
Humboldt-Wakaw system that Sask Water has a direct 
involvement with, there is ongoing testing for pesticides and 
there has not been any serious evidence of serious 
contamination found in that system. 
 
So I just wanted to clarify that Sask Water is doing that. But on 
the tail end of that, given what the Research Council has found 
through their preliminary testing of some dugouts, Sask Water 
will be examining perhaps the need to expand from a similar 
process that’s being followed at the Wakaw-Humboldt plant. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. That is one of the 
reasons I brought it up. Because I’ve had one or two 
constituents send in the water samples and, you know, spend a 
hundred dollars, and basically come back and found out it 
wasn’t tested for pesticide and they were just as worried of 
being tested for pesticide as was other contaminants. 
 
So I would encourage you, especially if you’re charging a 

hundred dollars, you know, to include that in your testing and 
not kick your testing up. I don’t know how expensive it is, or 
even what other . . . I’ll ask you, what other avenue would a 
constituent have if they just wanted to test the water for 
pesticides? Would they send it to you, or would it have to be 
sent to another department, or would they have to send it to a 
private lab? 
 
(11:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, this is a very topical issue, 
no question about it. I’m told as well that the costs for trying to 
identify specific contaminants related to pesticides, the 
Research Council is involved in that exercise now, which is a 
costly exercise. 
 
Sask Water will be working with folks to try and perhaps look 
at how those concerns can be addressed. And I would suggest, 
Mr. Chair, that if there are individuals in a specific area that 
have a serious concern about specific pesticides, because that’s 
where I’m told . . . I’m not a technician in this area, but it’s 
extremely difficult to specifically identify a particular pesticide. 
 
And it gets complicated for those people, the technicians that 
need to try and sort that out and probably have to go to 
university for 11 years or whatever to determine how to nail 
down with some fairly expensive equipment how to sort out 
those pesticides from perhaps other contaminants. And that’s 
something I’m not qualified to address. 
 
But I know that with the concerns, that there needs to be 
something done to perhaps alleviate some of those concerns and 
be able to address such things as serious pesticide 
contamination in certain areas that will affect water. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I hope that you 
continue on down that road. 
 
Talking about the rural water quality advisory program, could 
you provide some details on its level of funding starting in 1997 
when it was started, 1998, 1999, 2000, and 2001? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, I must apologize to the 
member opposite that I do not have the earlier year data. But I 
will supply that information for the years in question. 
 
I do have for 2001-2002. There’s been committed $330,000 to 
the rural water quality, and in addition to that, $70,000 for rural 
water quality research. And those are the monies that have been 
committed for the current year. 
 
But as I mentioned, for those years that you mentioned, for 
previous years, I will certainly submit that information in a 
timely manner for the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I hope you . . . 
I’d be interested if you can forward that to me. I know in other 
estimates there’s been one or two ministers that said they would 
forward me stuff in timely manner, and haven’t yet. 
 
But what I want to know is has the funding decreased since 
’97-98, or has it gone up? You should have that. Your official 
should know that — whether it’s gone up or down. 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1233 

 

Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Chairman, thank you. I want to assure 
the member opposite I will supply the information in a timely 
manner, because I know it’s critical. But I do know, and he will 
see from the figures that are supplied, that I’m happy to say that 
the funding has been increased. There’s been no decrease; it’s 
been on the rise. 
 
And again, Mr. Chair, people will recognize that the efforts and 
attempts to address issues that are of a concern to the public at 
large throughout the province, that those are programs that need 
to be supplemented and need to be addressed. And hence, the 
funding is on the rise. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And good 
morning to the minister and his officials. I’d like to move from 
the micro aspects of water to the macro, if we could. 
 
From time to time over the last 40 or 50 years the idea of a large 
dam has been proposed for the boundary between 
Saskatchewan and Alberta. The dam idea is commonly referred 
to as the Meridian dam. And the proponents of that dam have 
been silent until fairly recently, and now we’ve had a number of 
people suggest that a dam in that particular area would be of 
considerably good consequences, especially in view of the 
drought and the difficulties that the southeast part of Alberta 
and the southwest part of Saskatchewan are experiencing. 
 
I understand that as of last fall, Sask Water took the position 
that a dam of that nature wouldn’t be practical, would be far too 
costly, and there would be serious negative consequences to the 
environment. But I’m wondering if the department has changed 
its views in the last six months on the possibility of the 
Meridian dam project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I welcome 
the question from the member from Cypress Hills and that area. 
Yes, I’m aware of the efforts. 
 
The other concern that Sask Water had with that kind of a dam 
and the location of it may perhaps — and all of this was may 
perhaps restrict some of the flow of water into the Diefenbaker 
area. 
 
So there was . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They do, and 
you’re right. This has been an ongoing discussion about 
whether or not that a dam would be feasible and would it be 
practical. Would it be environmentally acceptable to folks on 
both sides? And who would it benefit most? Would it be 
advantageous for the people in Saskatchewan? For Alberta? 
 
These have been ongoing discussions and they continue to be 
ongoing. And I’m pleased to report to the House today that 
there will be a feasibility study done to determine perhaps once 
and for all, either in the short or long term, whether or not it 
may be a project that might be considered. 
 
But there needs to be real due diligence I guess, if I may use 
that term — I’ve heard that used in the House here earlier — so 
there needs to be due diligence done with respect to that 
massive an undertaking. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
through you to the minister, I understand that the Department of 

Environment under the auspices and direction of the 
Government of Alberta is going to be undertaking a feasibility 
study. 
 
Will our Department of Environment or Sask Water be part of 
that study? Will they be contributing to the study? Will they be 
helping to fund that study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Again, I’m pleased to report, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, to the member opposite that, yes, Sask Water will be 
participating with an investment of up to $25,000 to participate 
in this very important study, as I mentioned, again to determine 
the positive, negative impacts that perhaps this massive 
undertaking, very massive and costly undertaking . . . So I 
appreciate the different departments that will be involved will 
come together, will have public meetings, and will determine 
whether or not it is something that should be pursued 
vigorously. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure if you 
want to get into the hypothetical or not but let’s make some 
assumptions. 
 
If the study . . . and I assume this is a pre-feasibility study, not 
the definitive feasibility study yet, but if the terms of reference 
are such that this pre-feasibility study concludes that the dam 
would be economically viable and certainly would enhance the 
water and agricultural issues of southwest Saskatchewan and 
southeastern Alberta, can I assume that the government would 
be willing to move ahead with a project of that magnitude? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member. The 
small investment of monies at this point is for a feasibility 
study. Once that study has been completed, determining the 
impacts — if there are major positive impacts for the province 
— then there may need to be considerably more money put in 
for all the environmental studies and all the side effects that a 
project of that magnitude will have. 
 
So at least these preliminary reviews to determine is it going to 
be good for Saskatchewan or are there perhaps some 
possibilities that it may not be so good in the long run — the 
dam being built, the location of the dam may have some effect 
on our access to water. 
 
And I appreciate and understand that we do have an agreement. 
We work very closely with the province of Alberta through that 
agreement. However, there are those implications that need to 
be adequately sought out to determine whether or not we should 
then go to the next step. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chair, as you know there’s always 
pros and cons to these kinds of projects. And I’m sure that 
eventually a fair and thorough hearing will be given to both 
sides of the proposal. 
 
I am interested, Mr. Minister, in knowing though why Sask 
Water, and by extension the Government of Saskatchewan, 
decided to get involved in the feasibility study now, when there 
didn’t seem to be any interest in that as early or as recently as 
last fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I understand that the impetus seems to 



1234 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

have moved more quickly now from the Alberta side than it had 
up to last year; that things had kind of settled down. I want to 
underline that there’s a great amount of co-operation between 
provinces on both sides of us when it deals with issues of water 
and resourcing water supplies. 
 
I guess what I’m saying is that last year Alberta did not seem to 
be quite as interested as they are this year, and the pressure is 
on again, the impetus, as I mentioned. And that could be as a 
result of something that southwest Saskatchewan is facing, and 
particularly southeastern Alberta, and that’s a shortage of 
moisture, a shortage of water, and a shortage of runoff from the 
eastern slopes of the Rockies. 
 
So that has again created the urgency on the Alberta side to 
proceed. And at this point, in order to be good neighbours and 
work with our neighbouring province to say okay, let’s take a 
look, we want to continue to co-operate with you in the 
agreement we’ve had from way back when, over years and 
years and years. 
 
So the fact is that the feasibility study is going to go ahead and 
we’re pleased to be participating in it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Just a final question, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the 
minister. Will you assure the House that a copy of the 
feasibility report will be made public as soon as possible after 
its completion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it is our understanding 
that that feasibility study will likely take until the end of 2001. 
And once that happens, the report I understand will be made a 
public document. And that’s all I can tell you on it. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, I believe our time for these 
questions is allotted. I would like to thank the minister and his 
officials today, and also knowing that they’ll be coming back 
and we will have some more questions for them. I would like to 
thank them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would also like to 
express my appreciation to the members opposite from Cypress 
Hills and from Arm River for the dialogue and the good 
questions that allows us to clarify for folks in our great province 
here that we are trying to look after things the best we can. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I move the committee rise and report 
progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 

(ED01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Mr. Minister, I would ask you to 
introduce your officials at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. And it 
certainly is a pleasure for us to be back to talk about Education 
estimates again. 
 
With me today I have Craig Dotson, deputy minister of 

Education, to my immediate right; and I’ve got Ken Horsman 
directly behind me, associate deputy minister of Education; and 
to my immediate left is Michael Littlewood, executive director 
of legislation and school administration. 
 
And in the back of the room is John McLaughlin, executive 
director of Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. And behind 
me as well is Frances Bast, director of finance and 
administration corporate services. And also at the back of the 
room, beside John McLaughlin, is Daryl Richter, facilities 
planning. And also . . . where’s Gerry? And Gerry Sing Chin, 
grants manager, school finance. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister. Welcome to your officials. 
 
The last time we had an opportunity to speak, we talked about 
the global questions that were not available at that time but I 
believe you had thought they’d be available today. Are they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we have not as 
yet finalized with regard to the global questions. They are in 
preparation; we should have them very soon. 
 
But just before we actually get into some further questions, 
what I’d like to do is just kind of highlight some of the major 
impacts that this Education budget has had here. And certainly 
when we look at how we can put this into perspective, when we 
look at last year’s budget for Education as originally presented 
and ultimately passed by this Legislative Assembly, it was good 
for Education. 
 
Now over the course of this last year we provided significant 
additional financial resources in responding to changing 
circumstances. And last year we provided the necessary 
additional funding to address the new teachers’ collective 
agreement, which was only concluded halfway through the 
year. We made the commitment to do that and of course we met 
that commitment in full, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
We also provided an additional $5.6 million by way of special 
warrant for compensatory operating grant payments to school 
divisions adversely affected by assessment appeals mandated by 
the Court of Appeal. 
 
So for calendar year 2000 the actual effective amount of 
provincial financial support on the foundation operating grant, 
not including that one-time $5.6 million, was an increase of $29 
million. That was more than twice the size of the annual 
increase that we’d seen in the past 15 years. Now of course, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, that was very much a difficult act to follow. 
 
Our education partners were very clear in telling us, prior to this 
current budget, that the coalition government had to invest in 
education. Indeed our colleagues with the Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association, for example, were very specific. They 
wanted to see at least 32 million added to the foundation 
operating grant on a calendar-year basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we did listen to our partners and we heard them. 
In this year’s budget we provided for a substantial increase in 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1235 

 

the foundation operating grant. The grant pool, calendar year 
2001, is $460.1 million — an increase of $33.7 million. This is 
the largest operating grant increase in 15 years. That’s an 
increase of almost 8 per cent in a year when inflation is 
projected to be around 2 per cent. 
 
On a budget-to-budget basis, as distinct from the 
calendar-to-calendar-year basis, the increase to the grant pool 
from last year’s budget is 40.7 or 9.6 per cent, bringing the total 
to $466.8 million. 
 
As well, during the most recent round of collective bargaining, 
the development of the new extended health benefits insurance 
plan was a very important item for teachers, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
And in accordance with that new agreement, we are providing 
in this budget, $9.3 million specifically for this new extended 
health insurance plan. 
 
This year will be the final year of the phase-in for provincial 
payments of grants in lieu of taxes to local governments. In this 
coming year the amount paid to school divisions will increase 
by 2 million, to an annual total of $7 million. 
 
Our partners also asked us to extend programs and services to 
help the most vulnerable children in our society. And, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, we listened to our partners and we heard them. 
 
Recently, Mr. Deputy Chair, I accepted the final report of the 
task force on the role of the schools called SchoolPLUS A Vision 
for Children and Youth. Under the leadership of Dr. Michael 
Tymchak of the University of Regina, the task force set forth a 
vision for the future of education in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, the Role of the School Task Force 
recommended that an expansion of the pre-kindergarten 
program in the range of 25 per cent to 50 per cent would be 
reasonable. Our pre-kindergarten program in this budget 
initially implemented in 1997 has been very successful. 
Consistent with the recommendations of the Role Of The 
School Task Force, we are substantially increasing our 
pre-kindergarten financial support by increasing the number of 
pre-kindergarten spaces by more than 80 per cent this year. 
 
Saskatchewan’s award-winning community schools program 
has long been recognized as an effective model for meeting the 
complex educational needs of at-risk students. 
 
Since 1995 we have doubled the number of community school 
programs. The task force on the role of the school recently lent 
its voice to the chorus of others in praise of our community 
schools program. And they said, and I quote: 
 

The community school program is one of the most helpful 
and hopeful changes to be initiated in recent times. Given 
its remarkable success and evident benefits, not only for 
children, but for parents in the whole community, the task 
force is of the view that the time has come for a major 
community school initiative in our province. 

 
In its final report, the task force recommended an increase of 26 
school programs over the next three years. In fact in this 
coming year we are more than doubling the number of 
designated community schools. 

We are enhancing this successful program by increasing the 
number of new community schools by more than 40 and 
expanding into rural communities and into secondary schools. 
This is great news for children of this province. 
 
This year the Department of Education is making a major 
contribution in support of the government’s strategy for early 
childhood development. The purpose of this strategy is to foster 
children’s healthy growth and development by providing a 
continuum of integrated early intervention supports and services 
to better prepare preschool children for their educational 
experience. We are taking an integrated provincial approach 
involving a number of provincial departments including 
Education, Health, and Social Services. 
 
There will be provincial leadership of this critical initiative 
which will be administered at the local level through school 
divisions and health districts. Mr. Deputy Chair, school 
divisions in health districts will work with communities and 
local community-based agencies to ensure our children have the 
support they need to succeed in life. 
 
The Education budget this coming year includes $1.6 million 
explicitly identified for early childhood development. The total 
amount identified for this initiative this year will be 10 million, 
rising to a cumulative total of $73 million over five years. And 
this is Saskatchewan’s share of the federal financing announced 
last fall. 
 
It is also important that we continue to provide direct provincial 
policy and financial support to our northern, rural, and urban 
school divisions to support culturally affirming educational 
programs for First Nations and Metis students in our 
classrooms. 
 
This year alone we are providing an increase of more than 90 
per cent in our financial support for Aboriginal education 
programming through the operating grant. This includes 
increased support for the Indian and Metis Education 
Development Program, Aboriginal Elder/Outreach, and 
financial support for innovative partnerships between school 
divisions and Aboriginal communities. 
 
A little more than a year ago, I received the report of the Special 
Education Review, Directions for Diversity. Our response to the 
Special Education Review was called Strengthening Supports. 
This budget reflects a strong commitment to make that a reality 
for special needs and at-risk students. 
 
There are two important changes in our support for special 
education this year, together entailing a significant increase in 
provincial financial support through the operating grant 
program. 
 
First there is a 20 per cent increase in support for designated 
students with disabilities. In this upcoming budget year, our 
total supplementary financial support for these students will be 
more than double what it was just a scant four years ago. 
 
Second, we will be combining several programs into a new 
diversity program and increasing our financial support in that 
area by more than 25 per cent. 
 



1236 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

These enhancements again, are in keeping with the 
recommendations of the Special Education Review Committee. 
 
This year, Mr. Deputy Chair, the recognized expenditures for 
all categories of special education increased by 32 per cent, 
from 82 million to 108 million. Since 1995, when the provincial 
budget was balanced, special education recognized expenditures 
have risen sharply from 48 million to 108 million, an increase 
of 127 per cent. 
 
Our education partners talk to us about the need to enhance the 
use of technology in our education system. Mr. Speaker, we 
again listened to our partners and we heard them. Saskatchewan 
Education will be building on our past state-of-the-art learning 
technology initiatives such as the Evergreen Curriculum, with 
some exciting new developments, CommunityNet, high-speed 
Internet connectivity for all Saskatchewan schools. 
 
For school divisions this means much better Internet access and 
lower costs. We will cover the 3.7 million cost of connecting all 
provincial schools over the next three years and they will 
immediately begin to save an estimated $1.5 million each year, 
that school divisions will no longer have to pay. 
 
Connectivity through the Centenary Capital Fund, we will be 
providing a further $2 million per year over the next three years 
for improved in-school distribution and connectivity. 
 
(12:15) 
 
And content, Mr. Deputy Chair. In this budget we have 
provided 3 million in direct financial support for the 
development of Made-in-Saskatchewan, on-line learning 
resources to be initiated and developed by teachers and school 
divisions. 
 
So that’s the package — CommunityNet, connectivity, and 
content. These sets of initiatives will benefit all Saskatchewan 
students and particularly those in northern and isolated schools. 
 
Our education partners told us about the particular needs and 
challenges for rural education. They wanted to see specific 
initiatives to support rural education. Mr. Speaker, we again 
listened to our partners and we have heard them. 
 
We have worked with education leaders over the past year to 
see how we can build on the success of the shared services 
program, which provides specialized supports to teachers and 
students in our schools. We will now be implementing these 
improvements, including a 90 per cent increase in provincial 
support to shared services. 
 
We are making changes to the way the grant recognizes rural 
transportation costs, as well as adding a new isolated schools 
factor to help address the challenges of providing quality 
education in isolated areas. 
 
And in addition, Mr. Deputy Chair, we have allocated 1 million 
to support teacher recruitment, particularly in northern 
Saskatchewan, and recruitment of specialist teachers in rural 
school divisions. 
 
And also the education property tax rebate on agricultural land 

will continue this year, and we recently extended the deadline 
for both the years 2000 and 2001 for rebates, to February 15 of 
2002. 
 
In summary, this budget, this Education budget is providing 
strong provincial financial commitment and support to public 
education. The 33.7 million increase to the foundation operating 
grant this calendar year is the largest operating grant increase in 
Saskatchewan in 15 years. Compared to the 397.5 million paid 
out in operating grants in calendar year 1999, this 460.1 million 
for calendar year 2001 is an increase of 62.6 million, or almost 
16 per cent in just two years. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, all children deserve to have a complete range 
of high-quality education opportunities available to them. All 
across Saskatchewan our education system and our schools 
continue to strive to provide the highest quality education to our 
students. This government is proud to provide increased 
program and financial support to meet that common goal. 
 
Mr. Deputy Chair, this is the best Education budget this 
province has seen in many, many years. 
 
And so I’m looking forward to further questions from the 
members opposite. And just having highlighted some of the key 
initiatives within this budget, I’m looking forward to more 
specific questions. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that rant. And it 
sounded more like an election speech. 
 
Mr. Minister, I know that you’ve got a . . . this patting yourself 
on the back for the last 15 minutes has given me an opportunity 
to think of some more questions, so I’m sure that we’ll be able 
to discuss them in August when we’re still sitting here. 
 
Mr. Minister, I have a lot of specific questions about the grant, 
and I know you’re talking about all the extra money that your 
department put into education this year. But I take $33.7 
million, which was the additional funds over last year, take 
away the 32.1 which was a direct result of teacher contract 
money, really there’s $1.7 million extra. 
 
We spent 1.6 on early childhood development. We have more 
than double the money for special education, increased diversity 
money, so we know that there’s a shortage. Some school 
divisions are paying a lot more money this year. I know we’ve 
discussed this a number of times, that many of the farmers — 
well people right across this province — are seeing a significant 
increase in their education property tax this year. 
 
I think that you probably received a copy of the information 
from The Western Producer on the Saskatchewan farmers that 
are steaming over education tax hikes. We have every one of 
our members on this side of the House can talk about the school 
divisions in their area, that even though they saw a decrease in 
their mill rate, they saw an increase in revenue because of the 
reassessment. But we won’t go into that right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to talk more specifically about some 
questions that we’ve received from school divisions that they 
haven’t had adequate responses from your department on. And 
I’m going to start with the Hudson Bay School Division. And I 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1237 

 

think this letter you would have received quite . . . in the short 
. . . just recently. 
 
The letter came from someone who is dealing with truancy. 
And I’m going to just read a couple of the statements that she 
has made and maybe ask you how you’ve responded to her and 
how you’re responding as an overall problem in the province. 
 
According to The Education Act, a parent can be charged if a 
child under the age of 16 does not attend school. The Act 
outlines that a parent can be fined not more than $100 for the 
summary conviction. The RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted 
Police) sergeant in that area said that the actual result in . . . the 
parent getting the child back to school, but in this case they 
weren’t sure this was going to happen. 
 
They also contacted the Department of Social Services and she 
said that there was nothing the department could do to force a 
child to go back to school. 
 
So the frustration from the writer of this letter said that The 
Education Act says that parents are responsible for ensuring that 
their children under the age of 16 attend school regularly. The 
attendance counsellor can institute proceedings against a parent 
who does not ensure this. 
 
However, there is no teeth in The Education Act or in the 
justice system or in the social services system. There is no 
effective mechanism to convince parents and children that they 
have to attend school. In some cases the family would easily 
pay the $100 and still not have their child in school. 
 
You and I both know that one of the brightest hopes, or the only 
hope we have in this province for the future is having educated 
children. So I’m wondering how your department is dealing 
with this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you to the member 
opposite for that question. Certainly the letter from the Hudson 
Bay School Division was very thoughtful and very civil in its 
tone. 
 
Under The Education Act, of course, it is a requirement and a 
responsibility for parents to ensure that they are attending 
school under the age of 16. We recognize that this does provide 
some difficulties if the parents do not accept that responsibility. 
 
The question that arises is, The Education Act is there, the law 
is clear. It comes down to what do you do with a parent who is 
unwilling to accept that responsibility and should it be the 
responsibility of the state to ensure that that happens? 
 
These are difficult issues. I don’t know if there are any answers 
that are readily apparent for Saskatchewan, and perhaps in other 
jurisdictions as well. But it’s certainly an issue that we are 
looking at and hopefully we can come up with some solutions 
on how we can have better attendance in very specific cases. 
Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m sure the 
response you’ll give to the Hudson Bay School Division won’t 
be really just reiterating what they said. I know that you know 
it’s a problem; they know it’s a problem. So are you going to 

offer any suggestions, concrete suggestions, to them? Are you 
also looking at this on a province-wide basis? 
 
Maybe as you’re talking to your officials you can also give me 
an idea if you keep track of truancy in the province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To be exactly 
clear on this issue, certainly it is the parent’s responsibility 
legally to have their child attend school. It is the school 
division’s responsibility to monitor truancy. 
 
In terms of the Department of Education’s response, 
recognizing that truancy is an issue that requires leadership and 
direction, we look to innovative programs that help to alleviate 
some of the concerns of communities in making sure that 
children are in attendance. And some of the root causes of why 
children do not attend school are being dealt with by such 
programs as our community schools initiatives. 
 
With the doubling we show a considerable investment in not 
only the policy direction with regard to community schools, but 
the financial support. And what we found is that by providing 
greater links between parents and our education . . . our school 
divisions and our schools themselves, that we are improving not 
only the attendance of children in schools, but also the retention 
of those children in schools. 
 
And myself having had an opportunity to actually visit schools 
like Pleasant Hill and Westmount, which are community 
schools in Saskatoon, what they have shown over the past five 
or six years, that not only have their enrolments increased but 
the retention rates of those students who come in in the 
kindergarten and then graduate in grade 12 has been markedly 
enhanced as well. 
 
So our approach is one of, let’s look at the root causes of why 
children are not attending school. What are the issues 
surrounding parents and communities and schools. In what can 
we do better to make sure those children are in school, and also 
dealing with some of the diverse cultural things that we see as 
well. 
 
So we have expanded our community school program. We are 
providing leadership in both policy and in finances and funding. 
And we certainly have increased the support with regard to 
some of the core neighbourhood issues and some of our 
Aboriginal educational issues with culturally affirming 
programs. 
 
So it’s not a simple solution to basically say, this child is not in 
school; it’s the parents’ responsibility. The school division can 
monitor truancy, that’s true. But what are the root causes? Why 
are those children not in school? 
 
And it’s the policy of this government not to lay fines or not to 
lay charges against parents, but to look at those root causes and 
to deal with those root causes to make sure that coming to 
school is a positive situation, that there is a caring and 
respectful learning environment, and that that child and that 
parent want to have that child attend that school. 
 
So that is the policy of our government, and we are putting 
forward policies and programs to support that policy. 



1238 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so what are the root 
causes you’ve found for the reasons that children aren’t in 
school? 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, certainly having 
received the Role of the School Task Force recently and 
looking at the many recommendations that came from that task 
force, they certainly did look at the diversity of situations 
throughout Saskatchewan. But there is recognition that there is, 
you know, no one particular root cause, but there are some 
general things that can be seen in terms of fear of attending 
school, a lack of connectivity from the parents in particular 
neighbourhoods with their school environment. 
 
And just about a . . . well a significant amount of the 
recommendations that went around creating the SchoolPLUS 
environment that the Role of the School Task Force talks about 
was connecting families and communities to the school, 
providing services in support to deal with many of these root 
causes, and identifying them more primarily on a community 
and case-by-case basis so that we are finding that children and 
parents and communities are supportive of their schools and 
feel very comfortable in the school environment. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. One of 
these opportunities we have to get together and discuss 
education, we’ll probably spend most of that session talking 
about role of the school. And I look forward to that exchange. 
 
Mr. Minister, I don’t know if you had the opportunity or if you 
keep track of the numbers, but can you give me an idea of what 
the truancy rate is and is it comparable to other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. We do 
not have global figures on truancy, so we can’t make 
comparisons to other provincial jurisdictions. Where we do 
collect statistics is in relation to dropout rates. And 
Saskatchewan has one of the lowest dropout rates in any of the 
recorded provincial jurisdictions. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. I would 
like to have your comments on a letter that I have from Wakaw 
School Division, and it’s an example of some of the school 
divisions that have contacted my office regarding special 
education needs. 
 
There’s a concern, probably right across Saskatchewan but 
specifically in rural Saskatchewan, where there’s instances of 
behavioural problems and learning disabilities when many of 
the students have severe mental and physical disabilities. 
 
In the smaller areas where there is less staffing available to deal 
with specific problems when it comes to disabilities, this school 
division is struggling like many, to ensure that they have 
enough funds. 
 
Now I know that you told me in your earlier rant that there was 
two changes in the special education budget or funding, and the 
20 per cent increase to designated . . . for designated support. 
Maybe you can let me know if Wakaw is one of the school 
divisions that will benefit from this. 

And again I’m concerned. Because when we talk about the 
extra money that school divisions are getting, we know that 
because of the . . . keeping in mind the reassessment, some 
school divisions are getting less money this year than last year. 
And if they are, said, we have to spend so much of the budget 
we get from the government on special education, that means 
they’re again going to have to increase their taxes to pay for the 
normal operations. 
 
So can you tell me specifically which school divisions are going 
to be benefiting from this special education change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just with 
regard to a couple of the questions opposite. Wakaw did receive 
more grant dollars this year compared to last year. 
 
And on the special education allocation specifically, their 
allocation in the year 2000 was 465,000 and that was increased 
in 2001 to 553,000. So it’s, well, almost a hundred thousand 
increase, probably close to 20 per cent on the special education 
side. 
 
And just to clarify with regard to the designated disability 
program, if you have a designated disabled child come into your 
school division, for example say a blind child, then you would 
immediately get those dollars. And if that child were then to 
move out then those dollars would be taken away, and that’s 
why it’s called the designated disabled program. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to welcome the 
minister here and his officials. I want to talk about a school that 
I have in my constituency or maybe a lack of school. It’s going 
to be closed . . . or was announced closed yesterday, the school 
at Marquis. 
 
I have a letter here from the local board stating that each school 
in the Thunder Creek is experiencing major decreases in their 
projections and one of them schools is even in the city of 
Moose Jaw. But she goes on to state, our enrolment has been 
this low before and often enrolment often has a hill and a valley 
and right now they just happen to be in a valley pattern. 
 
The Marquis Economic Development Committee has put 
together a plan to address the enrolment issue and REDA, the 
rural economic development association, has given this plan 
their stamp of approval and said this plan is feasible. 
 
The village of Marquis, the RM (rural municipality) of Marquis, 
are on board. Even the local board has gone so far to say that 
they would willingly close the school in two years if the 
projections were not met. In this case then, the division board, 
the trustees, would not have to follow the process of closure. 
They could just close the school at any time with local board 
agreement. But the trustees have gone against this and voted 
closure. 
 
The reason for closure they have stated that the concern for 
meeting program needs for children. Yet she goes on to state, 
they’re willing to put our children on a bus for two to three 
hours a day and they don’t think this will affect the quality of 
their education. 
 
She goes on to state, we as parents are responsible for seeing 



May 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1239 

 

our children receive quality education and we believe they are 
receiving quality education. That the students are coming out of 
St. Mark’s, from there most of them go to Lindale where they 
all . . . the enrolment there over the past few years . . . they’ve 
all graduated and so going in there, their marks are all high. The 
parents basically have spoken passionately that the closure of 
St. Mark’s School is not in the best interests of their children. 
Do they have no say at all in their school, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Certainly the 
member opposite asks a fairly specific question with regard to 
the St. Mark’s School in Marquis. 
 
This government has a policy and a program and a long history 
of recognizing the local autonomy of school divisions. The 
Education Act, 1995 specifies that local school boards have 
jurisdiction over school closures, and final decisions rest with 
those duly elected boards of education, not with the minister 
and not with the Department of Education. 
 
These boards are locally elected and make their decisions based 
on their analysis of the overall needs and circumstances of their 
particular school division. We do have a process in rural 
Saskatchewan where notices of motion, public dialogue, have to 
occur. There has to be feedback from communities, but in the 
end, the final end, the decision is made by the school board. 
 
And I must say that, generally speaking, these are difficult 
decisions that any school division would have to make, but they 
do, by and large, have obviously the best interests of children in 
their minds, and sometimes these decisions have to be made. 
 
It’s my understanding that the enrolment, for example at St. 
Mark’s School, which is a K-8 school, was 33 students, with 
3.85 teacher full-time equivalents designated. So again, the 
answer is that the school division, after consultation and 
notification, does make that final decision on whether a closure 
will occur. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you, Mr. 
Minister. A question I’ll put to you I guess . . . It almost sounds 
like a business decision, six people making a . . . just a . . . 
supposedly an economic decision. 
 
I have two other schools in that area. Eyebrow, Loreburn may 
fall in that category. Children then could be on the bus four to 
five hours a day. Does that matter to the minister? When 
basically would they step in? 
 
What’s not allowable on busing, or would you let maybe six 
people in each division make decisions that would close 
basically most of the schools? Put the kids on . . . maybe they 
can just come to Saskatoon, board for a week, go back home on 
Friday morning. When would the minister step in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly it seems that the 
suggestion from the member opposite is that the Minister of 
Education should override the decisions of autonomous, locally 
elected school boards. I don’t think that was his intention. 
 
But we are very concerned with especially young children, in 
the amount of travel that they have to sustain. We also 
recognize that school divisions do make these decisions. What 

the provincial government has recently done in this most recent 
budget was to create a new isolated school factor that does 
provide additional support for school divisions and does 
recognize schools that are truly isolated in terms of providing 
additional financial support so that the travelling distances can 
be minimized. And this is formula driven and it’s something 
that we take very seriously. 
 
But if the member opposite is insinuating that somehow this 
government or this Minister of Education should be overriding 
decisions of locally elected boards, we won’t get into that. 
That’s not our role here at all. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, Mr. Minister, I guess you didn’t 
really answer my question. I’m asking you, do you believe that 
in schools of necessity, and are you looking at a policy where 
you would limit the number of hours a child — kindergarten, 
grade 1, grade 2, grade 3 — would be on a school. Is there a 
limit that you have or that you’re looking at? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, this department 
does recognize some of the difficulties and challenges faced by 
school divisions in rural Saskatchewan. And that is why in this 
most recent budget and the estimates that we’re talking about 
today, that we have created this isolated schools factor, which 
does preferentially support schools, that are truly isolated. 
 
And we also recognize that that is one factor. But we also have 
to make sure that we have the resources so that these isolated 
schools can maintain quality and provide equitable learning 
experiences no matter where they are located in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And that is one of the reasons why we have 
moved towards our CommunityNet, our connectivity within 
schools, so that we can provide state-of-the-art learning 
resources to isolated and remote and in fact, every school in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So not only do we have concerns about supporting schools that 
are truly isolated in terms of the transportation, but also making 
sure that those isolated schools also have access to worldwide, 
credible resources wherever that location may be through 
high-speed Internet and distribution and connectivity within that 
school or environment. 
 
So supportive education in rural Saskatchewan is very 
important to this government but we also recognize that school 
divisions are locally elected, are empowered, and are in the best 
position to make decisions on local issues. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, would 
you have the added cost it’s going to cost to bus these children 
from Marquis to the surrounding schools — the added cost of 
it? 
 
Also you talk about this extra school necessity program. I ask 
you do you have a policy for school . . . do you believe school 
necessity? And is there just extra money to that? And does 
Marquis fall into that category is what I’m asking? Or does 
Eyebrow fall into that? Or Loreburn fall into that category? 
That they would get extra funding up and above the other 
schools that basically . . . because they have to be there because 



1240 Saskatchewan Hansard May 18, 2001 

 

if you close it you’re looking at bus rides of three to four hours. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Just with 
regard to very specific . . . with regard to the Marquis school, 
because of the isolated schools factor there’s an additional 
$39,000 in recognition on their grant formula with regard to that 
school, as isolated. 
 
And the other question was with regard to Loreburn, and its 
designated allocation, additional allocation, is $110,000 on the 
grant formula. 
 
And the way that the isolated schools’ factor has been 
developed is to look at where a school is located, where is the 
next similar school to that school, and if the distances are 
greater, then there is proportionately more dollars that go into 
supporting that school through the division grant. 
 
So it is a formula. If you’re close to a school you would get less 
grant. If you are further away from a similar school, then you 
would get more grant. But it still comes down to that school 
division and that board making a decision in terms of what is 
best for their students and whether it would be maintaining that 
school or transporting schools to other locations. 
 
It’s a local decision. It’s been a local decision in this province 
as long as we’ve had school boards and school divisions, and 
certainly this government is not going to change that local 
autonomy. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Talk about the local autonomy there, I think if 
them trustees would have said, when they were campaigning, 
that they would be closing St. Mark’s School, they probably 
wouldn’t have won the election. 
 
On the busing costs, you didn’t address that — how much extra 
it would cost. And also you’re saying Marquis received 39,000 
extra dollars. So now that school division, that’s 39,000 less 
they’re going to receive. To run that school I believe it costs 
$225,000 a year. Yet in taxes, the school division alone just in 
the RM of Marquis, takes in over $600,000. I think the parents 
have a say to where their tax money should be spent instead of 
having to go possibly to . . . to Moose Jaw is where it’s going. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, with regard to 
the Thunder Creek School Division, it is a large school division 
in terms of area that it covers. And we recognize that, you 
know, local decisions in terms of where services are provided 
within that school division are made by the local . . . by that 
school board. 
 
We also recognize that within the boundaries of that school 
division, whatever assessment they have — whether it’s 
residential; agriculture; whether it’s a home in a town; or 
whether it’s an oil well or a pipeline — that that global 
assessment goes to that school division for them to provide 
services on a global basis to all of the residents and to maintain 
the schools in their school division. 
 
So certainly it is a local decision. The decisions they make have 
to be publicized. There is a process that they have to follow as 
required under The Education Act. There has to be notices of 
motion. There has to be final motions of intent. And there is an 

opportunity for all the public to come and talk about the 
decisions that are being made and for those school divisions to 
give the reasons why that difficult decision had to be made. 
 
So in this circumstance, I certainly believe that the Thunder 
Creek School Board has laboured a long time in making this 
decision. But in the end it is their responsibility. They are the 
ones that are entrusted with providing services to the children in 
their school division. And by and large, throughout the history 
of this province, that local autonomy has worked very well. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Chairman, just two quick questions and 
then I believe our time is up. 
 
What I asked the minister was — one of them was — how 
much extra the busing is going to cost? Because I believe the 
province pays all the busing transportation so they’ll be able to 
. . . Can you provide details of that? If not today, within . . . by 
Wednesday of next week? 
 
And also I asked you if you’d looked at busing limits for 
children. Are you looking at it? Do you have . . . Like what do 
you call unacceptable? Four to five hours? Two to three? Six to 
seven? Has that even been discussed? Or is there a limit that 
you would not allow children to ride a bus to a school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Just very quickly because time is 
drawing to a close. 
 
Number one, we do have a rural transportation factor that is a 
recognized expenditure for school divisions in terms of the 
grant formula. 
 
And number two, we do not have a specific policy for the 
province of Saskatchewan. But every school division has 
specific policies with regard to transportation of, specifically, 
young children. And I think — it’s my understanding — that 
most school divisions will not allow a child of a certain age to 
be on a bus before 7:30 in the morning. So that’s the final 
answer. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before adjournment 
I’d just like to wish all of my colleagues a good weekend, and I 
hope you all take the opportunity to spend a little time with 
your families and get a little rest. And we’ll come back next 
week and we’ll get into the fray again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — I too would like to wish everybody a restful 
Victoria — and long — Victoria weekend. And this House 
stands adjourned until Wednesday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:57. 
 
 
 


