















































Hansard: March 23, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 81 
 March 23, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning I stand 
to present a petition on behalf of the residents of southwest 
Saskatchewan — residents who are concerned about the 
implications of the Saskatchewan EMS (emergency medical 
services) development project report. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents from Gull Lake, 
Shaunavon, and Eastend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
the EMS service in Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy, 
Radville and Weyburn. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petition has been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) it is hereby read and 
received: 
 

Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to 
oppose the centralization of ambulance services. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following questions. 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: how many times has the 
Farm Support Review Committee met in the current fiscal 
year; and how much has been expended for committee 

costs and per diems in the current fiscal year. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure this morning to introduce to you, Mr. 
Speaker, and to all my colleagues here in the Assembly, 16 
students from the great school in Springside, Saskatchewan. 
 
And those students are accompanied by some great people, the 
teachers: A. Morgotch, Mrs. Banks, Mrs. Weber, Mrs. Madson, 
Mrs. Larson, and Mrs. Monka. 
 
I want to welcome them here personally and would like all my 
colleagues to join me in welcoming them as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all 
the members of the House an additional supervisor that we have 
with us today, seated in the west gallery. We have the father of 
Lori Rosom, one of our pages. Don Rosom is here to help us 
supervise Lori today, and I ask all members to welcome Mr. 
Rosom to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Expansion of Consumers’ Co-operative Refinery 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And more good news 
for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — I rise today to advise the House that the largest 
expansion in the 65-year history of the Consumers’ 
Co-operative Refinery is beginning — $265 million of 
investment in the city of Regina increases the output of the 
refinery by 40 per cent. 
 
Right now construction crews are busy on the site putting in 
1,300 cement pillars to stabilize the foundation of the expanded 
refining units. The combined workforce at the expansion site 
will reach 400 later this year. 
 
Completion of this project is targeted for September of 2002, 
with start-up in October and the first oil flow later that month. 
 
Consumers’ Co-operative Refinery will hire an additional 60 
staff, bringing the total of employment up to 520. 
 
I am proud of our co-operative movement, Mr. Speaker. More 
investment, more jobs, more people, more good news, and still 
so little time. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

Melfort Youth Wins Skating Championship 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
congratulate Nicole Watt of Melfort. On January 20, Nicole, 
who is only 15 years of age, competed at the Senior Ladies 
National Skating Championship in Winnipeg, Manitoba. 
 
Despite the fact that Nicole suffers from juvenile arthritis, 
Nicole placed second and brought the silver medal home to 
Melfort. The crowds loved her and she is viewed as a young 
lady who we’ll certainly be seeing a lot of in the skating circuit. 
 
Nicole travels to Saskatoon for her training, as well as 
continuing her high academic standing at the Melfort 
Collegiate. She has the most beautiful smile and always 
maintains a positive attitude that she will do her best and let the 
judges decide. 
 
At the Four Continents Championship in Salt Lake City, 
Nicole’s strong skate wasn’t quite enough to earn her a berth at 
the World Championship. Nicole has, however, been named as 
an alternate. 
 
Nicole is the daughter of Doug and Maxine Watt; her proud 
grandparents are Bob and Imogene Watt and Ross and Orma 
Taylor — all of Melfort. 
 
Would the Assembly join me today in congratulating this 
incredible young lady. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

World Water Day 
 

Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, everyone in Saskatchewan is 
aware of the tragedy which befell Walkerton, Ontario when 
contaminated water took lives and threatened the health of 
residents in that community. With that in mind, Mr. Speaker, 
the Government of Saskatchewan recognized World Water Day 
yesterday with the announcement of an additional $1.2 million 
to improve the quality of drinking water for the people of the 
province. 
 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management 
announced spending of $720,000 of these targeted funds as part 
of its water quality program. The Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation will conduct technical assessment of the province’s 
water treatment systems with the goal of enhancing its rural 
water quality programs for families who rely on private wells 
for their water supply. 
 
Saskatchewan Health has also allocated over half a million 
dollars to improve the water-testing capacity of the provincial 
laboratory to ensure that both chemical and biological 
contaminants are not present in the province’s drinking water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues — the ministers of Health, 
Environment, and Sask Water — are all working together to 
ensure the residents of Saskatchewan have safe and high quality 
water. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Walt Disney Characters 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Sunday is 
Oscar night and the Liberals are obviously getting very excited 
about it. They’ve decided to put on their own little tribute to 
Walt Disney. The member for North Battleford is quoting 
Thumper. The Liberal president is calling his party Goofy and, 
Mr. Speaker, I guess it’s no wonder Doc is Grumpy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Doctors in Rosetown 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We have 
some good news in the riding of the Leader of the Official 
Opposition, Mr. Speaker. The good news is that two new 
doctors have been officially welcomed to Rosetown. Dr. Clint 
and Dr. Marguerite McDonald arrived in Rosetown on February 
2 and were welcomed by the town on March 7. 
 
The McDonalds arrived from their home in Durban, South 
Africa, where they’ve been practising medicine for the past four 
years. Young educated people like this arriving in our province 
further enhance our success. 
 
Both doctors are specialists and have been granted privileges to 
continue the use of their specialities. 
 
We want to welcome the McDonalds to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and trust they will enjoy working in one of the best 
health care systems in the world, and in a province that, despite 
the claims of the official opposition, is vibrant, thriving, and 
attracting many young well-qualified people. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Men’s Senior A Hockey Championship 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, after a 
long winter such as the one we’re experiencing and which is 
reluctantly coming to an end, we all know the importance of 
winter sports. And that’s particularly true in small-town 
Saskatchewan where the hockey arena is the centre of winter 
activity — where in the arena many towns have minor hockey 
teams which participate and bring fans into the arena, where 
they have figure skating clubs, and also many towns have senior 
hockey teams which seems to the centre of attention in many 
small towns in Saskatchewan. 
 
We all know of many, many rivalries that have developed 
between towns because of sports and particularly senior hockey. 
 
I’m proud to say, Mr. Speaker, today that I can confidently say 
that the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood will 
certainly be the home of the Men’s Senior A Hockey 
Championship, even though the final series, the championship 
series, will only begin on Sunday when the Raymore Rockets 
and the Cupar Canucks begin the best of three series on Sunday 
evening in Raymore. 
 
These two teams rose to the top. They were among 19 teams 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

 

that entered the provincial playdowns back in early February 
with teams from towns such as Meadow Lake, Kindersley, 
Weyburn, Churchbridge, Outlook, and Kinistino, to mention a 
few towns that had teams participating. 
 
Interestingly, three of the four semifinalists in senior A came 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood, with Southey being a 
participant. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to wish both teams the best of 
luck in huge crowds at their home games. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Centre Expansion in Gull Lake 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan, in particular rural Saskatchewan. 
 
I rise today to congratulate the residents of Gull Lake and area 
for their successful expansion of their health care services in 
their community. Gull Lake has a new addition to their health 
care centre. The addition was opened in early December, Mr. 
Speaker. It was built onto the Gull Lake and District Special 
Care Home. The addition was made possible by a local 
community contribution of more than $600,000, Mr. Speaker, 
and a $500,000 contribution from the provincial government. 
 
With the new facility . . . health centre and special home under 
one roof, 24-hour services such as convalescent care, palliative 
care, and observation are now available in Gull Lake. Previous 
to this opening, residents had to be transferred to Swift Current 
or Herbert for these services, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In addition to these expanded services, the health centre will 
provide and coordinate emergency trauma responses, home care 
services, public health nursing, X-ray services, and 33 other 
long-term . . . and other health care services, Mr. Speaker. We 
will also use the facility to serve local residents in many ways 
as special health care professionals come to the community. 
 
Previous to this situation, Mr. Speaker, residents of Gull Lake 
had to travel for many of these services. It’s good news for rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteers Working in Brazil 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to talk 
about a constituent of mine, whom I have the good fortunate to 
say is also my good friend and colleague. This past January, 
Clark Puckett of Davidson travelled to northeastern Brazil as a 
volunteer with the Rainbow of Hope for Children. This 
non-governmental organization, whose members come from 
across Western Canada, raise funds through charitable events 
and deliver these resources, along with volunteer services, to 
the poor and struggling people of Brazil. 
 
This mission, with Mr. Puckett as part of an eight-member 
team, landed in the city of Maceio, home to nearly 1 million 
residents — a large portion of which live in the over 200 slums 
where extreme poverty has left families near starvation and 
without hope. 
 

Guided by team Al Gerwing of Lake Lenore, Mr. Puckett’s 
group delivered much needed relief to poor families. Mr. 
Puckett indicated that living conditions he encountered would 
be unimaginable here in Canada. He states clearly that the aid 
from Canada and any form goes a long way to helping these 
people and that it is warmly appreciated by people who are 
largely ignored by their own government. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Mr. Puckett has informed me that Saskatchewan ranks as 
number one province in Canada in the high number of volunteer 
relief members that travel around the world to deliver aid to 
those in need. 
 
I congratulate Mr. Puckett on his successful mission to Brazil 
and wish him well in his volunteer efforts in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Health Care Issues 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Minister, on Tuesday the people of Saskatchewan got a 
sense of the NDP (New Democratic Party) vision for health 
care. And to nobody’s surprise it turns out that you don’t have 
one. No vision, no plan, no clue about fixing the mess that 
you’ve created and no intention of honouring the health care 
promises that your government made in the 1999 election 
platform. 
 
Mr. Minister, the NDP’s 1999 election platform promised to 
hire 500 new doctors and nurses. Well it’s been almost two 
years. Mr. Minister, how many nurses has the NDP hired since 
you made that promise two years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we here in Saskatchewan are 
proud of the accessible quality health care system that we have. 
We are going to work together with all of the professionals in 
this province, and I would like to say there are tens of thousands 
of highly educated people who are all working to do a very 
good job to provide our health care. 
 
We know that we have some challenges in recruiting people 
because they are North American challenges — they are right 
across the whole of the country. We have increased our nursing 
education positions, we have worked with the districts to find 
more people, we’re recruiting people around the world. We are 
going to continue to do the best that we can for all the people of 
Saskatchewan and we would ask those members opposite to 
come on to the positive side of the fence, not the negative side. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s pretty obvious that the best this government can do 
simply isn’t good enough. I didn’t hear a number. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister gives some more worn-out old NDP rhetoric. And 
the truth is you’re not hiring doctors and nurses; in fact you’re 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

chasing them out of the province. And the truth is in addition to 
that you’re laying off nurses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the headlines you see things like nurses axed. 
There is a story from The StarPhoenix that illustrates that point. 
Remember that, Mr. Minister? Just eight months ago the 
headlines were saying 110 nurses were going to be laid off as 
part of 170 health care professionals. 
 
Mr. Minister, is that your vision for health care? Doing the best 
you can simply isn’t good enough. Why are you letting nurses 
and doctors leave this province? In fact you’re chasing them 
out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, with the help of that member 
opposite and his colleagues — that’s exactly what they’re 
doing. Because the people, the people in this province do not 
want to hear the negative comments there. 
 
Last year there were 160 nurses . . . Mr. Speaker, last year there 
were 180 students in the class of nursing — this year there are 
273. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s a large increase. We are 
responding to the requests of the people to train more people. 
We’re recruiting more people. Give us a bit of help and put 
some positive sense about what we’re doing in Saskatchewan, 
not the gloom and doom we’re hearing here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
can’t believe my ears. Only the NDP Health minister would 
suggest that he’s counting on the official opposition to run his 
department for him. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it 
would . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The members will allow the 
member to put his question. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it would do the member well 
to listen and to read that Hansard transcript of my delivery to 
the Speech from the Throne yesterday because he might get 
some hints as what to do in this case, because he obviously is 
bankrupt for ideas of his own. 
 
But let’s take a look at another plan. Mr. Speaker, in 1999 the 
government opposite said they were going to cut waiting lists 
by 30 per cent but two years later it’s getting worse. Waiting 
lists are not shrinking — they’re growing. In fact Saskatchewan 
has the longest hospital waiting lists in the entire country. 
 
Is this the NDP vision? The longest waiting lists in Canada? 
Mr. Minister, are you going to ask us to fix that too? What’s 
your plan for fixing the waiting lists problem? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, any talk of bankruptcy in 
this province always references back to the forerunners of the 
members opposite — that’s why we have a lot of difficulties in 
this province. And what we are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Members will allow the 
minister to answer the question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, over the last couple of years 
we have made some special efforts to deal with the wait list 
question. What we do know, in emergencies there is no wait 
list. In urgent care, there’s a very, very short wait list because 
you can get into the hospital right away. In the elective care 
area, there are some wait lists, and we have some concerns 
obviously about those people that have to wait as well. 
 
We are working on that. We’re part of a western Canadian 
initiative which includes all four Western provinces on 
addressing how these waiting lists are categorized. We’re 
coming up with a common protocol. We are working with the 
professionals who know this — that’s the doctors, the 
administrators, the nurses — and we are going to continue to 
solve this problem. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
understand that the minister doesn’t have all the tabs in his 
briefing book yet, Mr. Speaker. But I really would hope that he 
would at least read some of the headlines and talk to the 
medical professionals. And I quote from The StarPhoenix on 
February 15 in which it says surgery waiting lists grow longer: 
 

Waits for (the) most elective surgeries — particularly joint 
replacement and gynecological procedures — continue to 
climb due to a shortage of nurses and anesthetists, says a 
Saskatoon District Health vice-president. 

 
That’s the professionals that he’s talking about working with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, unless you deal with the serious manpower issues 
in health care, you’re never going to get these waiting lists 
down. And if you want us to show us the way . . . want us to 
show you the way, we’re prepared to do that because we did it 
in our position paper. 
 
Mr. Minister, if you need some more help just ask for it, but 
don’t continue to blame your own inaction for a lack of . . . 
shortages and waiting lists. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we know that there is some 
flipping and flopping on that side as it relates to agriculture. We 
also know that there’s some flipping and flopping as it relates to 
health. On the 15th of March your . . . the Leader of the 
Opposition ended up saying it’s not so bad to end up with 
private MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) systems within this 
whole country. 
 
What we know is that the star candidate of the Saskatchewan 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

 

Party in the Saskatoon Riversdale by-election ended up going 
sideways on the opposition Health critic. 
 
And so I would say, Mr. Speaker, let’s get some clear message 
from what they’re doing. We have a clear idea of what we’re 
going to do. We have the best health care system in Canada and 
we’re going to make it better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question again for the minister. It certainly is obvious that he 
doesn’t understand what the issues are in health care. It doesn’t 
matter if we get another dozen MRIs in this province, unless we 
have people to run them, they’ll just sit in mothballs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here’s another question for the Minister of Health. 
During the 1999 election, your Liberal coalition partner, the 
Education minister, promised to strengthen regional health 
services. Remember that, Mr. Minister? There’s at least one 
way to describe the government’s attempt to regional health 
care reform, and that’s been a massive failure. The people in 
every part of this province are paying the price. In Prince 
Albert, in Yorkton, and Swift Current, beds are closing, nurses 
are leaving, waiting lists are growing. 
 
Mr. Minister, what’s your plan for taking care of the regional 
health centres in this province, or are you going to continue to 
chase out professionals and ask the official opposition to solve 
it for you? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we do know in this 
health system in this province, is that we are trying to make the 
health care accessible. I would remind the member from 
Melfort that he now has renal dialysis in his community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s an important step forward as we 
move out services to where people are. We also want to make 
sure that we have quality care in this province. The other thing 
is that we know that people who have actually experienced our 
medical system have a very high rate of approval of what we 
do, because we do have a very good system. 
 
I would ask the member opposite to help us build a better 
system by getting rid of the doom and gloom kind of message 
that they’re sending, and working together with us as we build 
the best health system in Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskPower Rates 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in December SaskPower presented a proposal to the 
province’s utility rate review panel. They were requesting a 
3.25 per cent average increase across the province. In some 
communities, in Saskatoon and in my hometown of Swift 
Current, the increase would be 8 per cent. And we understand, 
Mr. Speaker, that the panel will be announcing this decision and 

recommendation to the cabinet later this morning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty well known, homeowners and 
businesses across the province are not looking forward to 
paying higher power bills as well as the exorbitant increases in 
the . . . in their energy bills that they’ve had to deal with over 
the winter months. 
 
My question is for the Minister Responsible for SaskPower. 
Has he received the final report from the panel; and if so, Mr. 
Speaker, what is the rate hike they are recommending that 
SaskPower receive? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve just 
received the report. We’ll be reviewing it and cabinet will be 
making a decision in due course. 
 
I do want to take the opportunity to thank the panels for the 
good work that they’ve done in speaking to Mr. Lacoursiere this 
morning. The issue of rate reviews is a very complex matter, 
much more complex than probably I or the public understand. 
And I want to again thank them and compliment them for the 
good work that they’ve done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
residents, farmers, and businesses in Alberta were told that the 
price of their power was going up, their government stepped in 
to provide some relief. Each month this year, Mr. Speaker, 
residential and farm consumers in that province will receive a 
$40 rebate. It’ll be knocked directly off their power bills, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
SaskPower last year rang up $114 million profit, and consumers 
in the province are asking why with profits this large are we 
being asked to pay more, when they look next door and see 
another government offering people a rebate instead of simply 
passing it on. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Members will allow the member 
to put his question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — To the minister, Mr. Speaker: will your 
government be offering a rebate on SaskPower rates to 
Saskatchewan consumers? Have you considered that option? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again, I want 
to thank the panel for the good work that they’ve done. 
 
But I do want to point out, Mr. Speaker, that SaskPower has had 
its rates frozen since 1996 — that’s five years, Mr. Speaker. 
What other private utility, I ask you, Mr. Speaker, and through 
you to the member, what other private utility has had their rates 
frozen for five years? None of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You look at Alberta, Mr. Speaker, you look at any other 
jurisdiction in Canada and for that matter across the world and, 
Mr. Speaker, it is only reasonable, I believe, that SaskPower 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

should ask for a rate increase. And, Mr. Speaker, we will be 
considering that proposal that the panel has presented to me this 
morning, in due course. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to read you this statement 
from a member of the NDP government on the issue of utility 
rates, and I’m quoting: 
 

These families have kids who need clothes, they have 
mortgages, they have car payments, and the financial 
question becomes a stress on the family. And in that kind of 
situation what is this government doing? Well it’s reaching 
deeper and deeper into the pocketbooks, the purses, the 
wallets, and the bank accounts of Saskatchewan families. 
 
Higher and higher utilities meaning and less and less and 
less for Saskatchewan families. 
 

Who said that, Mr. Speaker? Well it was a current Premier. The 
date was March 6, 1988. 
 
(10:30) 
 
My question to the Premier is this: was that statement just 
hollow politics or are you willing to walk your talk in response 
to the panel’s recommendations later this day? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you when that 
statement was made. It was made when these people across 
were in government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — That’s when it was made. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the solution of the Saskatchewan Party to 
public utilities? I’ll tell you what the solution is, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s to follow the path of their friends in Alberta — deregulation 
and privatization. 
 
They want to talk about energy price increases. They should 
look to their friends in Alberta whom we hear about on a daily 
basis in this House where, according to the Report on Business, 
March edition, some industry in Alberta, Mr. Speaker, has seen 
their rates increase 250 per cent — 250 per cent. That’s what 
we get with the kind of plans they bring to this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, right here, right here in the Saskatchewan Bulletin 
of the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers Federation), the Leader of 
the Opposition is quoted as saying he’ll be, quote, “selling some 
of the Crown corporations” . . . (inaudible) . . . Crowns . . . 
(inaudible) . . . for sale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier mentions Alberta. In 
our two provinces, two very different things have had a very 
negative effect on utility rates in our two provinces. In Alberta, 
it was arguably deregulation. In Saskatchewan, it’s the NDP 

government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is this. 
SaskPower rates have gone up a total of 26.7 per cent under the 
NDP without considering this latest request. This, from a 
government and a Premier who, as Minister of the Crowns in 
1994, said and I quote again, “rate increases in the future will 
be tied to the actual needs of the utilities, rather than any other 
consideration.” 
 
Well, Mr. Premier, with profits of $114 million consumers 
don’t believe SaskPower needs an increase. Will the Premier 
stand in his place today and justify an increase like that to 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the party opposite called 
for a rate review commission, which has been put in place. 
 
The rate review commission has done its work. I understand it’s 
reporting this morning. The minister responsible will be 
bringing this forward to cabinet and cabinet, in due course, will 
make its decision, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I tell you the decisions we’re not going to be making. 
We’re not going to the Alberta style of deregulation in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No matter how much it might be 
recommended by members opposite, we are not going to 
privatize our utilities, no matter how much it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’ll tell you what we’re not doing, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re not taking the advice of the Saskatchewan Party 
and going the route of deregulation. We’re not taking the advice 
of the Saskatchewan Party and going to privatizing our utilities. 
We are going to provide, as we have in past, solid utilities to the 
people of Saskatchewan at reasonable cost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I hear the recommendations of members of 
the Saskatchewan Party and others that we should be looking at 
the deregulation of Alberta, I again refer you and members of 
the House to the Report on Business report in March where, 
quote: 
 

A business person in Alberta says of that plan and that 
situation, I could have picked three monkeys from the 
Calgary Zoo and they could have done a better job with 
deregulation than this government (referring to the Alberta 
government). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re not about to 
put the monkeys in charge of the utilities of this province. 
 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian and Gaming Authority 
Political Contributions 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Gaming minister. Mr. Speaker, in the Fall 
2000 Report, the Provincial Auditor stated that SIGA 
(Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority) should not use any of 
its gaming revenue to make political contributions. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party revealed that the NDP had received 
nearly $10,000 in improper donations from SIGA, and the 
Liberals have received over $5,000. The NDP promptly 
returned this money but the Liberals did not. They said it wasn’t 
a priority and that they would deal with it sometime after the 
November 27 federal election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the election has been over for some time now. But 
we have heard nothing about the Liberals returning this money. 
Madam Minister, have you followed up on this matter? Has the 
Liberal Party returned this money to SIGA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, there is no doubt the issue with respect to the 
expenditures of SIGA was of some concern to the people of 
Saskatchewan, and it is. This government has been working 
very closely with the Provincial Auditor to ensure that new 
rules and new regulations and new administration will ensure 
that those funds are properly expended. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the policy of this government is to ensure that due 
diligence is done. Due diligence has been done. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my role today to speak to government policy. That 
is government policy with respect to SIGA and that issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Madam Minister, I 
would appreciate an answer from you this time. You’d think 
that after all the revelations about SIGA that came out last 
spring, you would be paying a little closer attention. 
 
Why don’t you ask your colleague, the Minister of Education? 
Why don’t you ask the member from Melville who used to rant 
and rave every day in this House about improper political 
donations? 
 
Madam Minister, what steps are you taking to ensure the 
Liberal Party repays the improper donations they received from 
SIGA? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this is quite clearly a 
Liberal Party issue. This government is here to answer policy 
with respect to government administration, and that’s what we 
intend to do. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, this opposition stands here 
today again, not focusing on the issues that the people of 

Saskatchewan are looking towards them for assistance and 
some leadership in. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I would want to ask those members, why 
aren’t they asking . . . or answering to what their position is 
with respect to CFIP (Canada Farm Income Program) — are 
they in or out? Are they going to privatize the Crowns or aren’t 
they going to privatize the Crowns? 
 
Doom and gloom with respect to a growing economy daily in 
this House. Dirty tricks. Campaigns that they lost soundly two 
by-elections in, because they wouldn’t focus on the issues. 
 
I say to you, Mr. Speaker, this government is focused on a 
number of things, and one of them is growing the Saskatchewan 
economy. And we’re going to continue to do it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before we proceed, I would just remind all 
members to put their questions to the Chair and through the 
Chair. 
 

Out-of-Province Investments by Crown Corporations 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, except 
for one ill-fated venture trying to sell insurance to Montana, the 
late Tommy Douglas used the Crown corporations of this 
province to build services and the economy in Saskatchewan. 
 
My question for the Minister of Crown Corporations is: how 
much do the CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) Crowns intend to invest external to 
Saskatchewan over the next five years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The member will well know, having 
served on this side of the House, that the Crown corporations 
are integral to Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s Crown utilities employ over 
10,000 people in our province, Mr. Speaker. They employ 
people across the province; they contribute to each and every 
economy in most small towns in all parts of Saskatchewan. Mr. 
Speaker, we value our Crowns. We intend to keep our Crowns 
here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, my question was not about 
Saskatchewan and the Crowns’ role in Saskatchewan. My 
question was about the Crowns’ role in the Philippines, Chile, 
Trinidad, Uruguay, Australia, and on and on. 
 
The NDP is fond of referring to Saskatchewan people as the 
shareholders of their Crown corporations. And it’s true that the 
only way the Crown corporations can make money is either 
through the utility rates they charge us — Saskatchewan 
consumers — or by floating debt. 
 
Does the Minister of CIC think that the shareholders of the 
Crown corporations have a right to know the investment plans 
of their Crown corporations? Do they have a right to a say as to 
whether their utility rates will be used for global capitalist 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

investment around the world or building this province? Do you 
think we should have CIC staff scoping out investment 
opportunities around the globe by flying around the world? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, in a poll recently 
conducted — I think it was through The Leader-Post — it said 
that over 80 per cent of the public of Saskatchewan want to 
keep our Crowns and they want them to flourish and survive, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member well knows that in a deregulated 
environment here in Saskatchewan, we now have many private 
companies here in Saskatchewan competing with our Crowns. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we were to employ the method that the member 
opposite suggests, that suggests that Saskatchewan utilities 
should not be allowed to receive any revenue from any 
investments outside of our borders, it’s a sure recipe and 
remedy for the demise of our Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I say the public of Saskatchewan wants to keep 
our Crowns. We will do whatever we can to ensure that the 
Crowns are maintained, that they are strong and viable, and if 
that means that we look for other opportunities outside of our 
borders, that’s what the Crown corporations will do, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Farm Safety Guidelines 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. National Farm 
Safety Week has come to a close for another year. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. National Farm 
Safety Week has come to a close for another year. Continued 
vigilance is essential if we are to reduce or even eliminate farm 
accidents. 
 
Every year, Mr. Speaker, too many Saskatchewan children are 
injured or killed in farm accidents, accidents that in most cases 
could have been prevented. Agriculture is one of our largest 
industries and unfortunately the one that experiences the most 
serious injuries. Increased awareness of the dangers that 
children may face on the farm and knowing how to avoid these 
dangers can help prevent these accidents and their tragic results. 
 
The North American Guidelines for Children’s Agricultural 
Tasks was developed by experts across North America. It can 
help prevent farm-related child injuries by providing parents 
with information about the ages at which children can most 
appropriately take on farm tasks, Mr. Speaker. The guidelines 
provide practical safety standards for 62 different jobs that farm 
children from ages 7 to 16 typically perform. 
 
Saskatchewan Labour will distribute the guidelines to more 
than 35,000 rural families across Saskatchewan. The first 
guideline, tractor fundamentals, will be included in this week’s 
Western Producer. The second, animal care, will be distributed 

through the Producer in April, Mr. Speaker. Copies of the 
guidelines will also be distributed through farm safety 
organizations, health districts, municipal governments, and 
agricultural representatives. 
 
Information on the guidelines are posted on the Saskatchewan 
Labour Web site at www.labour.gov.sk.ca and copies can be 
obtained through the farm safety program by calling toll free 
1-877-419-3510. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our hope that by helping parents match 
children’s chores with their abilities we can make farming safer. 
I ask all hon. members to join me in sharing this valuable 
information with their families, friends, and constituents. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to respond to 
the minister’s statement and thank the minister for the advance 
copy of his words. 
 
(10:45) 
 
As the minister mentioned, National Farm Safety Week has 
come to a conclusion and as we all know there are a number of 
Saskatchewan children injured and killed in farm accidents 
across this province every year. Agriculture is one of our largest 
industries in the province and unfortunately there’s a number of 
injuries and deaths experienced in that industry. 
 
Agriculture has changed dramatically in the last few decades 
and the skills and knowledge needed to operate advanced 
equipment has also increased as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important that parents and children are very 
aware of the dangers on the farm and take steps to avoid these 
dangers and prevent accidents and tragedies in the homes and 
the farms of Saskatchewan. 
 
I trust that the guidelines, tractor fundamentals, and animal care 
are well thought out and effective but also encourage all 
members to share this information with their families, friends, 
and constituents. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear. 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on a Point of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day I want to bring down 
a ruling on yesterday’s point of order. 
 
Yesterday the Government House Leader raised a point of order 
concerning the propriety of a line of questions directed to the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing by the member from 
Rosthern during question period. 
 
The minister was asked how he would vote on legislation 
presently on the notice paper. I can find no prohibition in either 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

 

precedent or parliamentary practice to say questions of this 
nature are out of order as long as they relate to government 
policy on a particular issue. It is clear questions related to 
matters of a purely personal nature or with respect to party 
responsibilities are out of order. 
 
With respect to this point of order, I find that the questions are 
within acceptable limits. To ask whether a minister will vote for 
or support legislation is a legitimate vehicle for seeking 
information on government policy. 
 
In response to the House Leader’s point I find that the issue 
enacting whistle-blower legislation can be viewed as relevant to 
the role and duties of any minister. 
 
But before concluding this, on this matter, I want to bring to the 
House another issue of concern that came to my attention upon 
review of yesterday’s question period. That is the tendency at 
times for members to personalize the debate by not directing 
comments through the Chair or referring to members by names 
other than their title, position, or constituency. 
 
Yesterday the Deputy-Premier referred to two of his colleagues 
as Mr. Flip and Mr. Flop. Just as ministers should not be 
referred to by their position titles, other members in this House 
should be referred to by their parliamentary position or 
constituency title. The reason for this is very simple. It guards 
against the tendency or temptation to personalize debate. 
 
Without being overly restrictive, I ask that all members be 
mindful of these rules. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall, 
and the proposed amendment moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to stand today on behalf 
of the people of the Humboldt constituency, and certainly all 
people in Saskatchewan that have an interest in what happens in 
this province and have a great interest in changing government 
soon. 
 
My first reflection in hearing the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, 
was, my goodness, more of the same, a lot of nothing. Mr. 
Speaker, unfortunately for the people of this province, this 
Throne Speech was anemic. It lacked in vitality and it is a 
reflection of the government’s performance in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, before I go on, I would like to 
certainly congratulate you on your appointment to the Speaker’s 
Chair and congratulate the Deputy Speaker. I’d also like to say 
thank you to the many people who staff the Legislative 
Assembly and thank you to them for all of their hard work and 

their efforts in accommodating us in our work here. I’d like to 
say also today a special thank you to my constituency assistant 
in Humboldt, Mary Anne Telfer, who does a tremendous job, as 
I know many other constituency assistants do for the members 
in this legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a lot of discussion and debate 
surrounding the agriculture issue in the province, and rightfully 
so. We have talked about a number of things that may be done 
and some of the things that should have been done by the 
federal government that were not done by the federal 
government, not followed up on. But we also need to 
understand that the Minister of Agriculture of the province of 
Saskatchewan has some responsibility that he has not lived up 
to also. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some time ago, Mr. Ralph Goodale, the Minister 
of Transportation, the Minister responsible for the Canadian 
Wheat Board, talked about a transportation strategy. This was 
after the Kroeger process. And he assured all farmers in 
Western Canada that if in fact there was a cap on the freight 
rates it would follow by a $5.79 per tonne return to the farmer 
in transportation savings. That would have translated, Mr. 
Speaker, into $375 million. 
 
Well we saw the cap put on, we saw the transportation strategy 
go though but we did not see one cent of that money. In fact, as 
all of us here in this Assembly know, there are many, many 
farmers who are paying exorbitant prices for transportation. 
 
Now there is an accountability that should come forward from 
the Minister of Agriculture federally and provincially. We do 
not need impediments to growth in this province. We have had 
impediments, we have had barriers put up, we had promises by 
the federal government, and if there’s one thing that I think our 
Minister of Agriculture could do on our behalf is to ask the 
minister, Mr. Ralph Goodale, our minister from Saskatchewan, 
where that money is that was promised to us. 
 
If in fact we had realized $375 million in transportation savings 
because of the cap, because of the transportation strategy, we 
would not be today looking at trying to get money again from 
the federal government in some way for our farmers. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, your responsibility and your accountability to 
the people of this province — which include the farmers of this 
province — means that you should address the minister asking 
him, where is that money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, there are a number of members on 
this side of the House who have made the point time and time 
again that if in fact we are going to thrive in Saskatchewan, and 
especially rural Saskatchewan, we need to understand the 
meaning of removing barriers to growth. That’s part of the 
Saskatchewan Party strategy. It means get rid of the excessive 
regulations, bureaucratic red tape and ensure that we’re not 
stopping growth, especially in rural Saskatchewan, where there 
is a great deal of suffering at this time. 
 
Now I want to point out some impediments to growth. Our 
farmers on our land in Saskatchewan have been encouraged to 



90 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

diversify time and time again. Well, Mr. Speaker, many of them 
have tried. Many of them are trying to get into cottage 
industries; many of them are trying to get into industries like 
bed and breakfast. They’re trying to get into the tourism 
industry. Mr. Speaker, there’s that segment of our population 
trying to diversify. 
 
There are also other farmers, that I know personally, that have 
gotten into seed-cleaning plants. 
 
Now, if this government wants to help rural people, to build 
rural Saskatchewan, to revitalize rural Saskatchewan, why for 
goodness sake, Mr. Speaker, would they put a $10,000 charge 
on a second phone line so that these businesses can have a 
second phone line? $10,000 is an exorbitant price. It’s a 
deterrent to growth. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are some of the very simple things that this 
government could look at. In the Throne Speech there are some 
comments about: my government will listen, my government 
will listen to the people of the province. Well please listen to 
this. Please make it more affordable for rural businesses to hook 
up to a second phone line. $10,000 per kilometre is 
unreasonable, unacceptable, and deterring business in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another example of deterring business, of creating 
an impediment to growth in rural Saskatchewan is simply this: 
three-phase power — to get three-phase power hooked up, 
again, costs about $10,000 a kilometre. How in goodness name 
can anybody move ahead in business like that? 
 
And yes the member opposite says $10,000. I’m really 
questioning whether or not members opposite have any idea of 
these exorbitant costs to rural business people, rural families 
that are trying to diversify, that are trying to build a business. 
 
Another issue that I take quite seriously, because there are 
many, many organic growers in the province now, much credit 
to a great number of people. A great number of producers out 
there, they have attempted to get into the organic grains 
business. Mr. Speaker, these people are running into major 
problems with the Canadian Wheat Board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, organic growers that want to . . . have secured a 
market in Europe, are being told by the Wheat Board that they 
must funnel that grain through the Wheat Board right now. The 
buyback is in place. They must buy their own grain back. And 
before they can end up selling it overseas they must secure a 
licence. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, by the time the buyback takes place and the 
licence cost factored in, many of these people are looking at 
$7,000 that they have to put upfront before they can even make 
their transaction. 
 
Now, I have a letter, Mr. Speaker, from a very frustrated 
organic grain grower. This person has indicated to the Minister 
responsible for the Wheat Board, and indicated to our Minister 
of Agriculture in the province, some of the difficulties that he is 
going through in order to try to sell his product. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you would just bear with me for a moment. Mr. 

Speaker, I’ll be accessing that letter in just a moment here. 
 
Before the letter, this organic grower has a bit of a preamble. 
Right at this time the Canadian Wheat Board is forcing organic 
growers to grade their grain. This must be done by the Canadian 
Grain Commission at a cost to the grower. But this is not 
required by organic producers or customers. The product is sold 
on its merit, and an agreement between the buyer and the seller. 
 
Also he states, the Canadian Wheat Board is hiring an organic 
coordinator paid for, of course, by the farmer. But the Canadian 
Wheat Board don’t handle organic grain. So what right, and to 
what avail is this? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have sort of explained what this organic grower 
has gone through, so I . . . I’m going to just mention again that 
by the time the buyback to organic growers happens, before 
organic growers happens, they end up paying about $7,000 out 
of their pocket which they cannot afford, of course. 
 
So the letter writer asked a few questions. And, of course, these 
questions that Mr. — not Mr., I can’t say his name — but our 
Minister of Agriculture knows have been submitted to him. 
 
Justify your position in compelling the certified organic 
producer to use the pooling system, when Canadian Wheat 
Board is not doing the marketing of the grain. Explain how the 
government classifies the organic industry is value added on 
one hand, but takes away any added benefits with the other 
hand. Explain where does this shortfall of moneys end up (and 
he’s referring to the difference between the initial price and the 
final price). 
 
(11:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are impediments to growth in this province 
and I think that the new Premier would do justice and certainly 
be doing his job if he looked at the impediments to growth, the 
barriers that we are looking at. 
 
Not only are farmers dealing with high utility rates, their taxes 
are increasing at every level — municipal, provincial, federal 
— these people are struggling to keep their families here and 
many of them, Mr. Speaker, are leaving the land as we speak. 
 
In my area, just east of Humboldt, we have had 10 farmers 
within a five square mile radius within the last year that have 
had to go out of business. That’s within a five square mile 
radius. This is serious. 
 
I’ve heard of farmers in other areas of the province who are 
telling me that they are leaving their farm because they cannot 
make it go under this system, under this regime, federal and 
provincial. And when asked where they were going to be 
moving, what they did indicate was they were not going to be 
moving to Regina or Saskatoon. And when I questioned them 
why not, they said because . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Exactly. They’re going to Alberta. 
 
And they’re going to Alberta, why? Because they’re in their 
senior years and they want to make sure that they can have 
accessible health care. So they are going to Alberta in order to 
have that accessible health care and timely health care when 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 91 

 

they need it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of other interesting items in the Throne 
Speech drew my attention. I couldn’t help but notice the way 
the Premier was weaseling credit for a federal initiative — $73 
million towards the early development programs for children. 
Now that is, in itself, a very good way to look at how to use this 
money. I certainly have no objections to that. But I do take 
exception to the fact that the Premier certainly should be very 
clear and giving credit where credit is due to where the money 
is coming from. 
 
Another item in the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker, that made me 
question a bit was the statement that the statistics on poverty 
had revealed that the poverty rate in Saskatchewan for children 
had been lowered. I’m wondering, Mr. Speaker, whether or not 
there has been consideration given for children on-reserve. I 
understand that children on-reserve are not taken into 
consideration when measuring the statistics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is increasing public apathy. There is 
increasing public despair. The people of Saskatchewan 
recognize, through this Throne Speech, that this government 
has no plans, they have no vision for the province. We have a 
government that is not giving direction, either to its farmers or 
the people in the province. This government has left us. It has 
neglected us. And this government is doing a disservice to the 
entire province with its policy of tax and spend, power and 
control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are people in this province with great 
innovative insights. People in this province that really have a 
great work ethic. There are people in this province, many of 
them, in fact just about all of them, who thrive on the spirit of 
volunteerism. And I think all of us thank our lucky stars for that 
kind of a spirit in the province. Because in spite of this 
government’s repressive policies, some of our communities are 
thriving and managing to hang on. 
 
And because, Mr. Speaker, there isn’t the kind of direction and 
vision in this Throne Speech that I think the people of the 
province were hoping for, and because it does not reflect the 
vision of the people, I cannot accept the Throne Speech, but, 
Mr. Speaker, I do concur with the amendments put forward by 
the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Thanks very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
congratulations on your election, you know, as Speaker of the 
House. 
 
I would like to, in my speech, cover some items, Mr. Speaker, 
which will deal with of course my strong support for this 
Throne Speech and the Premier. As well, I wanted to cover that 
in the context of the economic development and social 
development balance. I wanted to talk about it in the context of 
family, community, and students and as well as on Aboriginal 
people in the North. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I also wanted to cover an item that’s on the 
news, particularly as it relates to the Saskatchewan Party and 
the First Nations Party. I know that the member from Humboldt 

will be very interested in my comments in regards to the 
connection and the strong connection, continued connection 
between the Sask Party and the First Nations Party. 
 
And the person says I am worried, and he is dead wrong. I am 
not worried. I just want to show the connection between the 
Saskatchewan Party and the First Nations Party, which they 
denied and which they showed very strongly that it’s still there 
yesterday. 
 
So my speech, Mr. Speaker, is first of all to talk about the 
positive progress in this province on government and in relation 
to the people from the North, the rural area, and the urban 
population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see them squirming already on their seats trying 
to talk about legal cases and . . . (inaudible) . . . legal cases. I’ll 
talk about that as well but first of all I want to talk about the 
issues in relation to the people of the province and the positive 
growth and the positive partnerships that we’ve had throughout. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Now I noticed one thing as I congratulate 
the member from Elphinstone and the member from Riversdale. 
I noted one thing during the campaign. I noticed that all of a 
sudden over the past six months, as the Minister of Agriculture 
has pointed out, there was absolutely zero being talked about by 
Saskatchewan Party on agriculture. Not a word. They were 
silent. They were trying to play politics in regards to trying to 
get some city votes. 
 
And that’s exactly what it was. And I watched it, and nothing. 
Every day I was waiting for some commentary on it. Nothing 
happened except there was a debate, as I remember, from 
agriculture talked about — the flip-flop debate — on the 
difference between the leader and the member from Kindersley. 
 
So I know that they’re fighting over this issue in the same way 
that Canadian Alliance has fought on this issue in regards to 
trying to get votes from Western Canada and trying to get votes 
in Eastern Canada. And there’s a big split in the Canadian 
Alliance in Canada over this issue. And I know that they’re 
debating that within the Sask Party, and I know that they are 
arguing amongst themselves on this issue. 
 
So when I look at the issue, Mr. Speaker, and I look at the 
development of this province, I wanted to look at the good 
news. I wanted to look at the good news first of all, Mr. 
Speaker. Because all I hear from over there is a bit of sour 
notes, all the negativity, and some people . . . I heard a new 
word this week — trash talk — you know, that they’re not 
proud of this province. All they hear about is negative and 
terrible stuff. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you something. As a member of this 
NDP and Liberal coalition, that indeed I am proud of this 
province. I am proud of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — And I’ll tell you, I am proud of what’s 
happening in regards to people from the rural area, people from 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

the North, and people in regards to the cities. I am proud to be 
from this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — And I will tell you something. When I 
listen to the commentary and I listen to the negativity that I hear 
from the Sask Party, you would think that they are not proud of 
anything in this province. All they talk about is Alberta. But 
they don’t talk about the over $800 in regards to the health costs 
in regards to families in Alberta, although they have money 
that’s equal to our total budget in regards to a surplus. And yet 
they will not spend it properly in regards to that. 
 
But I’ll tell you something in that regard. And again they’re 
squirming on their seats, Mr. Speaker, and I know that I’ve hit a 
nerve in regards to their division and their politics of division. 
Because they want to divide rural and urban; they want to 
divide the North. And, Mr. Speaker, that’s the only politics that 
they know. It’s the same old Grant Devine politics that I fought 
against in this House during the ’80s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Now when I’ve got the issue on the floor 
in regards to economic development, I will tell you this as in 
regards to northern development because I heard the Leader of 
the Opposition say a couple of words in the House yesterday on 
regards to the North. 
 
And I will tell you something. For two years I have been 
waiting for a question. Last year I waited in the House for a 
question in regards to the North. I never heard any questions. 
All of a sudden they feel they can go into northern 
Saskatchewan and try to challenge my member from Athabasca 
who got 93 per cent of the vote. You know, when they trounced 
the Sask Party up north. 
 
And in that regard I thought that . . . I don’t know who their 
political adviser was, but I will tell you I must indeed, on the 
contrary, congratulate the leader at least mentioning two 
sentences about northern Saskatchewan since he’s become a 
leader. 
 
Now I will tell you this much. On the mining sector, for the 
leader’s information, when the Leader of the Opposition was 
around supporting the Grant Devine government, and when a 
lot of his friends over here were sitting with the Grant Devine 
Tories, that indeed the North went way down, the 
unemployment levels went high up in regards to the mining 
sector. We used to have half the workforce in the mining sector 
and they went down to about 20 per cent. And that was a record 
of the Tories. 
 
The amount of contracts that we had on the northern contractors 
went way down. For a comparative record, Mr. Speaker, I 
would say this. On the entrepreneurs who have built this 
province and this North, when we took over from the Grant 
Devine Tories, there was $20 million worth of contracts. Mr. 
Speaker, we have now come up to $200 million, a tenfold 
increase since 1991. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, that is through partnership, 
not simply too little commentary from the Leader of the 
Opposition. Now the member from Kindersley says, why I am 
so mad. I am not mad. I am absolutely, tremendously happy 
about the people of northern Saskatchewan and their 
partnership with the government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I may be a little 
frustrated with the negativity and also the terrible negative 
statements that the members opposite have about the North and 
in regards to Aboriginal people. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would say this. I am proud of, for instance 
in the mining sector, Kitsaki Development Corporation from La 
Ronge. Now note that they started out in the ’80s and during the 
Tory period they were struggling. Now, Mr. Speaker, I will 
report to you that their contracts and their businesses total about 
$50 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s what makes me 
not only happy, but proud of Kitsaki Development Corporation 
and other northern development corporations. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Now we read that the member from Kindersley may not know, 
because he wants me to now . . . he wants me now to quieten 
down. He wants me to stop. He doesn’t want to hear the good 
news about northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And so I will give him a little bit more good news, Mr. Speaker, 
because I think it hurts him very much. It makes him sad that 
we have good news. It makes him sour that we have good news. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would say this. That we have a . . . along 
with the Cree and the Metis in northern Saskatchewan, we have 
the Mudjatik Corporation from the people of Patuanak and the 
surrounding areas and they’re doing excellent work in the 
mining sector. We see the tremendous example put forth by 
Meadow Lake Tribal Council, leaders in forestry — not only in 
Saskatchewan but across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would say this. When you look at all those 
corporations they’re not only being involved in jobs, in doing 
partnerships on training, they’re doing ownership and 
entrepreneurial development in this province. Mr. Speaker, now 
they’re moving forward in forestry in regards to the issue of 
resource management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, in my commentary on forestry I 
would say this. As I look at Meadow Lake Tribal Council who 
set the stage in terms of leadership, we are now moving right 
across the North and we’re looking through the North in regards 
to the issue relating to Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation on the East 
and their industrial partner. We’re looking at the issue in 
relation to La Ronge Indian Band and Zelensky brothers, their 
partnership with a major partner in industrial development in 
forestry. We’re looking forward to that. 
 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

 

We’re also looking forward to the northwest communities. 
Many of the Metis communities felt that they wanted to be 
involved as strong players in forestry, and now they will be 
part, not only in the training, in the jobs, in the ownership, but 
in being part of forest management agreements. 
 
Now this is true on strong partnership for the people of the 
North. A lot of people may be listening in and looking at not 
only the balance of social development but we’ve also got a 
balanced view on economic development and the environment. 
 
We’re the only place in Canada — and this is a very important 
place — we’re the only place in Canada which has 
environmental quality committees. People from the local 
community level sitting together looking at environment policy 
in mining and dealing with the issues with Atomic Energy 
Board of Canada and being able to deal with those issues not 
only from a technical nature, but dealing with jobs, health and 
safety, and so on. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, that is progress and that is leadership, 
not only in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but across Canada. 
Many people come to our location in La Ronge and they’re 
saying, this is the model . . . one of the models that are 
important for development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in regards to my commentary vis-a-vis the social, 
health, and educational development, I would say this. I want to 
make my comments on some of the great challenges that we 
have in this province. One that I did pick up was the issue 
relating to both educational side on the youth, as well as on the 
. . . dealing with early childhood education. 
 
A lot of research . . . we’ve had the best child action plan. 
We’ve got people that have recognized us from across Canada. 
We have won awards. We’re the only place in Canada where in 
regards to child development, we are recognized, and we are 
being progressive and positive and moving upwards. Elsewhere, 
they’re going downwards. 
 
I would say that this type of approach where we have a child 
action plan, we now have in addition this new program that will 
deal with early childhood education and dealing with critical 
issues like fetal alcohol syndrome. There’ll be $73 million over 
the next five years in that regard. 
 
I might add that as we’re doing the health policy, we have done 
the partnerships in dealing with diabetes. I know how much it is 
a struggle for a lot of people on the issue of diabetes and that 
we have been moving forward with that. And that again is 
reflected in regards to our total policy objectives of this 
province. 
 
Now we’re looking at the health. And I noticed the member was 
saying that we have done nothing in health in the North, 
because I know that when the Tories were around they said it 
was Third World medicine. When there was a report by the 
Murray Commission, they said it was Third World medicine in 
northern Saskatchewan. I’ll tell you something. Since we’ve 
come in we have improved the budgets in northern 
Saskatchewan every year. We have been playing catch-up from 
what the Tories were before. They neglected the North and we 
have moved forward. 

We have, since that time, built health centres. We built health 
centres in La Ronge; we built health centre up in Stony Rapids. 
On Athabasca side, on Stony Rapids, is also included La Loche. 
These were sadly neglected by the right-wing approach of the 
Tories, which is now reflected by the same rhetoric that comes 
from the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I would say that . . . I wanted to deal as well with the issue on 
the Throne Speech on Aboriginal peoples. You’ve heard me 
make a lot of comments in the past on the progress of First 
Nations and on the issue relating to education and economic 
development. I would like to deal in this Throne Speech with 
the Metis Act. I know that those members from across may be 
fidgeting on their seat when I talk about the Metis Act. But I 
will tell you that indeed we are strong supporters in that regard. 
 
And I’ll tell you why we are supporters. Because in that Act, we 
will be dealing with not only the important contributions of 
Metis people in this province, what we will be dealing with is 
recognizing that Metis people went side by side with fellow 
Canadians to die for this country in the two world wars. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — We will be recognizing the Metis 
veterans in this province — in this province — in the legislative 
piece of Act. Mr. Speaker, I am proud to report that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I am proud to say that this 
government is indeed honouring the Metis people of this 
province and the Metis veterans. 
 
We would like to say that historically, too, we are doing the 
work in regards to the entrepreneurial level. Many people, when 
they read history, will recognize that during the early 
settlement, Metis people played a strong role not only in the 
transportation of a lot of the buffalo, dried meat, and pemmican 
across the North on the Red River carts, but also in regards to 
the settlement base of the Hudson Bay Company around 
Cumberland House, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and other areas throughout 
the province. And they played a key role in regards to the 
young, small-business development in this province. And I 
might say that in this Act we will be recognizing that. 
 
We are also recognizing, of course, the symbolic elements of 
the Red River cart, the Red River jig, as well as the fiddle, 
because you always need a little bit of humour. I know that the 
people from across may not know that from what they always 
say, but the Metis people and Aboriginal people know that 
humour is a strong part. The culture and the vitality is also 
required in regards to daily life. 
 
Now on the aspect of Aboriginal institutions, I would look at 
the Metis institutions and I would say this much, that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You keep that up, you’re going to lose 
your voice. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — The member from Kindersley says I’m 
going to lose my voice. I’ll be very, very . . . Well I’ll tell you, 
I’ll disappoint him. I don’t think I’ll lose my voice. 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

An Hon. Member: — He’d be too disappointed if that 
happened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes. Yes, I think so. I think he might be 
disappointed if I lost my voice. 
 
Now on the institutional side, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say 
this, that on the institutions that people build, people build 
agricultural institutions — you know the College of 
Agriculture. We build institutions on commerce, we build 
institutions in education. 
 
And I’m proud to say that as a Metis person that the institutions 
built by Metis people have been very strategic in terms of the 
progressive moves in this province. The Gabriel Dumont 
Institute, the SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban native teacher 
education program) program as well as the Dumont Technical 
Institute, the Gabriel Dumont College — these have been strong 
institutions in regards to the education of not only Metis people 
but First Nations people and other non-Aboriginal people who 
attend those courses. 
 
The aspect of that is this, Mr. Speaker, on the information as 
regards the institution, I would like to say that for teacher 
education now a lot of people may not know that SUNTEP has 
now graduated 500 teachers. They teach in our cities, they teach 
up in the rural areas, up in the North country. 
 
They are a very important addition because they have not only 
the skills of teaching mathematics, the skills of teaching 
science, but they also in addition have knowledge about the 
cultural history of this province — not only in regards to the 
new settlers, but in regards to Metis people as well. And I think 
that’s very important, as we look at our history, to do a policy 
of inclusion of our peoples in regards to our educational system. 
And that is what Gabriel Dumont Institute, SUNTEP, DTI 
(Dumont Technical Institute), and GDC (Gabriel Dumont 
College) does. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to also say that for this year, there 
is about 200 and . . . this past year there is about over 200 
students in teacher education. I might add that on Dumont 
Technical Institute, the technical institute arm, there was 362. 
And of that there was people doing computer specialist 
programs, they had licensed practical nurses, they had 
upgrading on ABE (Adult Basic Education) and GED (General 
Educational Development), they had carpentry, they had 
tourism, and they’ve had business administration and other 
courses in the past. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a sign of the vitality of the 
Metis people and it’s a recognition of Metis people, not only in 
the historic sense of the Red River cart period but in the 
modern-day sense of building and being part of mining 
development and forestry development in the North, and also in 
the cities in the workforces and the establishment of businesses. 
And I think it bodes well in regards to the future. 
 
When I look at the courses in the North, as the Minister of 
Northern Affairs, we had about 2,400, last year, students who 
went to school. And I’m going to remind people that when I 
went there was only a handful of us — you could count all of 
the people on one hand — who went to school in the ’60s. And 

now we have 2,400. I would say roughly about a thousand of 
the people would be Metis people. So they present a strong part 
of the education just within in northern Saskatchewan alone, not 
counting the institutions that I mentioned before. 
 
On the Metis side we will be negotiating. And I’m pretty sure 
that the Metis people will be presenting a pragmatic, clear plan 
in regards to the issues relating to capacity building, on the 
issue of land, on the issue of harvesting, and governance. And 
we know that we’ve had a lot of good discussions initially on 
that. 
 
So those are the types of issues that will be discussed. And like 
I said, coming back to the issue, it’s a recognition of people. 
Not only are Metis people builders in terms of Western Canada 
and this province, but of this course. Metis people are part of 
the fabric not only in historical terms, but in the modern-day 
sense. People want to be part of the system being a strong 
partner in whatever role that we play, be it political, economic, 
cultural, social, or in regards to the health and educational 
systems. So, Mr. Speaker, that is the essence of our strong 
support on the Metis Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Now I mentioned that I would say a few 
words in regards to the connection between the Saskatchewan 
Party and the First Nations Party. I notice that there was an 
article in the paper which I will make some comments by one of 
the writers on the Saskatoon StarPhoenix today as well. 
 
Now on the First Nations Party and on the Saskatchewan Party 
connection, I looked yesterday with interest because it was not 
the First Nations Party doing their own separate event outside 
the legislature and going to the press on it. They had a pipeline 
in this House and the pipeline was the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party may have decided to let them speak on 
their own — on their own independent level outside the House 
— but no, they joined with the First Nations Party, the member 
from Humboldt, to make a commentary in this House. And I 
will tell you this . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What? Where did you get that from? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — That is exactly what you did. Now that is 
. . . Whether or not you agree or disagree what you do in the 
backrooms, the fact is that you made a statement yesterday and 
I will tell you when you made that statement in the House . . . 
 
(11:30) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I’d just like to remind the hon. 
member to direct his comments through the Chair, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I’m sorry about that, Mr. Speaker. I’ll be 
speaking through you as the Deputy Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say this. That when I saw 
the . . . (inaudible) . . . I made a charge earlier on last year that 
there was a connection between the Saskatchewan Party and the 
First Nations Party because everybody knows about the 
Manitoba story. 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

 

There was a big scam in regards to Manitoba where the Tories 
over there, knowing that they get very few votes from 
Aboriginal people, so they funded an Aboriginal people’s party 
in Manitoba. And the idea behind it was to try and get votes 
away from us, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And it was then found out that they had money that was 
channelled through the Tory Party and into the Aboriginal 
people’s party in Manitoba. And a lot of the people knew that in 
the news last year. 
 
But the creation of a First Nations party, the Aboriginal 
People’s Party, a Native people’s party, is not a new one. We 
knew that there was one in the ’70s, we knew that there was one 
in the 1980s. 
 
And I recall in the early ’80s, we were suspicious that the 
Tories may have been funding the Aboriginal People’s Party. 
So I confronted the leader of the Aboriginal People’s Party at 
that time. 
 
The Tories are the same as the Sask Party or the same as 
Canadian Alliance. That is what us Aboriginal people know. 
And he was a former Tory, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a point of 
privilege. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Will the member please state his 
point of privilege. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member 
opposite, the member from Cumberland, is iterating that the 
members of the Saskatchewan Party are guilty of a breach of 
law that happened in Manitoba, the example of one party 
funding a second party. He clearly stated that just minutes ago 
in his speech and I ask that this be brought before the rules and 
privileges committee. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order please. Order. Mr. House 
Leader, I will have to take a close look at the verbatim and we 
will get back and make a report on this at the next sitting, upon 
careful review of the verbatim regarding your point of privilege. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, on the 
Tories in Manitoba, that’s what they did. And it’s a very 
important point. And then I was suspicious and I asked the 
question earlier on last year. I didn’t say that’s exactly what 
they were doing, the Tories in the province, the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
What I did was, I asked the question. And the question was, is 
there a connection between the Sask Party and the First Nations 
Party? Because I knew that the leader, Brendan Cross, was a 
member of the Saskatchewan Party. A member of the 
Saskatchewan Party. But I’ll tell you something, he’s not a 
member of the NDP. 
 
He was a member of the Saskatchewan Party but not only 
simply a member, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he was a fundraiser for 

the Saskatchewan Party. He had even a dance for the 
Saskatchewan Party, and that is what they did. 
 
So when I raise that connection, obviously there was a 
connection between the leader, Brendan Cross, and the 
Saskatchewan Party because he was a member of the 
Saskatchewan Party. That is clear on the record. 
 
That is what is known, that he was a fundraiser also for the 
Saskatchewan Party, and that is what is known. Because he had 
a dance and it was in the paper, it was printed up in the paper 
that he had a dance on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party for the 
youth of the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
You should read your own history. That is exactly what he did 
last year. But now they’re rumbling around there, they’re 
getting fidgety and getting worried and all of that, Mr. Speaker, 
because the key point is this, that indeed there is a connection 
yesterday when the Sask Party person is the one who raises on 
behalf of the First Nations Party a question in the House. 
Whoops, whoops. 
 
And I think that it raises that question and I still raise that 
question in the House. What is the connection? They may deny 
a connection, but why is it that they get together and join forces 
together and raise a question in the House, the member for 
Humboldt picked up. 
 
Because the point is this. The member from Humboldt could 
have chosen not to raise the question. The member from 
Humboldt could have chosen to get the First Nations Party to do 
their own questioning in their own . . . outside the House. But 
they didn’t do it. She didn’t do it. She raised it in the House on 
behalf of the First Nations Party, and that is very curious. And 
when you talk about a lot of these issues, that is the question. 
 
So that is the question. Because I remember the other story, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. When I raised it back in 1982 and there was 
this story going on and I asked one of the leaders of the 
Aboriginal People’s Party that I thought that he was supporting 
the Tories indirectly by creating the Aboriginal People’s Party, 
because I said a lot of our people support the NDP and they 
support the Liberals at the federal level but that very few of 
them support the Saskatchewan Party or the Canadian Alliance 
because of the right-wing nature that they do have. 
 
And I will just read a commentary in regards to The 
StarPhoenix today on that point, because Doug Cuthand is a 
well-known reporter in this province. A lot of people read Doug 
Cuthand in relation to Aboriginal issues, and Doug Cuthand 
simply says on Friday, the 23rd, 2001, he says: 
 

The opposition Saskatchewan Party has a Reform/Alliance 
agenda that is anti-First Nations, redneck and based on fear 
and division. 
 

Now that is a statement by Doug Cuthand and I knew the 
politics of division, Mr. Speaker. There is a politics of division 
that these people support. Stockwell Day does the same thing 
and I will tell you that when you look at that type of politics, 
that is the reason why, when you look at the margins on 
Aboriginal vote, when it comes down to Sask Party, it’s way, 
way low. Same with the Canadian Alliance, they’re way, way 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

low. 
 
People know that you’re the same as Canadian Alliance, the 
same as Sask Party, and same as the old Tories in this province. 
 
So I would say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would say this in 
closing. I would say this in closing, Mr. Deputy . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, please. Hon. members, I’m 
having a little difficulty hearing the Minister of Northern 
Affairs carry on the debate with the debate that’s going back 
and forth. I just ask if we could . . . Everybody will have a 
chance, all hon. members, will have a chance to debate during 
this debate for the Speech from the Throne and I’d just like to 
ask you to be a little quieter in your exchanges across the floor. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — It’s an interesting point, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because when I raised this in the House last year and 
when I raised this connection in the House, you know what 
happened? The Sask Party tried to muzzle me. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Why? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — They tried to muzzle me because they 
sent me a letter saying, you ought to cease and to desist, from 
their lawyer. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Really? 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, that’s what they did. Here they’re 
the great champions of freedom of speech. But they sent a 
Saskatchewan Party lawyer to say, cease and desist from 
making any connections between the Sask Party and the First 
Nations Party. 
 
And I would say this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, now they’re trying 
to muzzle me by yelling out there again. But I will tell you 
something, I will not keep quiet when I stand up for the people 
of northern Saskatchewan and for Aboriginal people in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they may 
deny it, they may do it, they may say this, they might say that, 
but, hey, the record shows that indeed the question was raised 
by the Sask Party in this House yesterday on behalf of the First 
Nations Party. And I rest my case on that. 
 
Now as I look at . . . I wanted to make my concluding 
comments this way, Mr. Speaker. I would like to make my 
concluding comments in this way. And I say this with due 
respect, of course, to all the languages of the House, whether 
it’s German, Ukrainian, or French, and so on. 
 
But I would say this, that I’ve always listened to the veterans 
that may be out in the hospital who are speaking and 
understanding things in Cree. And I see a lot of the elders out 
there listening into the House, and seeing from the hospitals and 
also from the North as they watch. They are proud of our 
language which is Cree. So I will say a few words in Cree 
outlining the basic points that I have made. 
 

(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
(11:45) 
 
I guess in closing . . . I did a quick summary in Cree in regards 
to the overview that I made. But I would like to say this in 
closing: I am proud to be a Saskatchewan person, as a Metis 
person doing the Metis Act and then moving forward to dealing 
with the positive issues on economic development. 
 
You know, the family and committee working with students, it 
makes me feel good. It makes me feel good that we can work 
with people. 
 
It makes me feel good that we can work on a step by step with 
people whether it’s fetal alcohol syndrome or whether you get a 
few million dollar contract, you know, at the mining sector. 
 
It makes me feel good when I see a lot of our people getting 
trained. It makes me feel good when I see the partners between 
Aboriginal people and non-Aboriginal peoples in this province. 
 
It makes me feel good when I see the changes that I saw when I 
was growing up, because I knew I felt the hardship of racism in 
my heart and in the practice that I saw. I’m seeing 
improvements in those areas. It still lingers around, but I’ll tell 
you something. When I see it, I will expose it and I will fight 
against racism in this province. I saw people from Little Pine 
yesterday and also from, I guess, Onion Lake and it made me 
feel proud to see them come here dealing with that issue. 
 
Because deep down, all of us are the same. We are all people. 
Deep down, whether our cultures and our languages are 
different, we are people with feelings. We are people that 
should have the rights, the responsibilities, that indeed that we 
need to be working together. 
 
Yes, we can work with autonomy from time to time. But in my 
dreams, as I work with the new Premier . . . as I work with the 
new Premier with compassion and with a certain great degree of 
strength and conviction on the Saskatchewan people, as I work 
with this great party, and as I work with the people from the 
opposition, the coalition government — but I work with the 
people in this province — I still feel proud. 
 
I still feel proud because although there is a ways to go in this 
century, although there is still a ways to go in this century, we 
have made a dent. We have made improvements and we will 
continue to make improvements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — This Throne Speech is a sign of this 
modern century. A sign of balancing social and economic 
development; a sign of respecting rural, urban, and the North; a 
sign of respecting all peoples — and that is the symbolism of 
this Throne Speech. 
 
Some people may have negativity about that. But me, it makes 
me feel good. It makes me feel good to support this Throne 
Speech in 2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
I had a number of remarks I wanted to go over in my . . . when I 
join in with the debate on the Throne Speech. After listening to 
the member opposite, I felt like I should erase all these notes 
and start again. 
 
Some of the things that he was talking about . . . but I’m going 
to try and make this a little bit more pleasing to the ears and 
even the truth, I think, because some of the statements made 
were quite a stretch I think. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate . . . 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to congratulate you and also the 
Speaker on your recent election to the Chair. It’s great to see the 
process work — the democratic process work — which was put 
into place a few years ago. 
 
This is our second opportunity to see an election. The first time 
unfortunately it wasn’t put that way. There was an appointment, 
I would say, for the Speaker’s Chair. And I think the intent to 
be an appointment to the Speaker’s Chair was in the works this 
time, and I really want to give the Speaker, and yourself, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, a lot of credit for standing up and going . . . 
letting the system work the way it’s supposed to. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I admire someone when they believe in 
something and they feel they can do the job, that will take the 
challenge and put their name forward, which you two did and 
unfortunately some others didn’t. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a great pleasure to join into the debate, as I 
said, on the Throne Speech . . . Speech from the Throne. It’s 
been 15 months, I believe, since the last one, since I had my 
opportunity to join into the debate. And it has been a long time. 
And I must admit that, standing here, I feel much more 
comfortable than the first time I stood here 15 months ago. It 
was a bit of a nerve-racking experience but I got through it. 
 
And you know we had a lot of first-time members speaking in 
the House, doing their maiden speeches. Of course most of us 
now have had experience, and there’s only one, I guess, maiden 
speech from the opposite side. And I think after listening to that 
speech, I was really . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Two. Two, I 
guess. I stand corrected. Our member from Wood River is yet to 
give his maiden speech. 
 
But I was quite interested in seeing that a young member, very 
young in age, first-time speech, and going through some of the 
language that he used. You know when I was talking in my first 
Throne Speech, I wanted to talk about my constituents and get 
through that. And when I look at how aggressive that member 
was, it was just absolutely amazing. I was astonished. And I 
think each and every one of us was astonished on what he was 
saying, you know using language like you’re enthusiastic to roll 
in the gutter. 
 
You know, perhaps that’s parliamentary. But I really question, 
on a maiden speech, that’s what you want to address. It was 
really astonishing to me. But nevertheless, we’ll keep that in the 

back of our minds and, as he stands to speak in the House and 
express his views in the future, we’ll certainly keep in mind 
what was said in his maiden speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I had the opportunity, 
in between sessions, intersessionally, to travel my constituency 
quite extensively. And I really enjoyed the time that I had going 
to the number of different communities that I have in Indian 
Head . . . that I represent in Indian Head-Milestone. And there 
are a number of communities. 
 
The constituency of Indian Head-Milestone is really not made 
up of any real large community. I guess Indian Head and Fort 
Qu’Appelle would be the two largest. But there are a number of 
smaller communities. And what I did to try and get a grasp and 
to keep in touch with the constituents in my area, I decided to 
go to every town and advertise it through the paper and rent 
space, in whether it was a senior hall or the Elks hall or the 
town hall or wherever it would be, and spend three hours in 
every town; put a formal invitation in the paper and every 
mailbox, and invite people to come in and have a coffee with 
their MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
I was in towns . . . I think we had about 20 or 22 towns that we 
visited in the month of January and February, and had very 
good response. Some higher in towns, some lower in other 
towns, but ended up with probably two to three hundred 
constituents that had come by and wanted to express their 
views. 
 
They wanted to express their views on the government; they 
wanted to express their views on a lot of things. Now I have a 
constituency office, as every member probably does, but I 
thought what we would do is take our constituency office to that 
community and invite them in to come and share their views. 
 
And it was really quite interesting, some of the views that a lot 
of the constituents had. Although, after touring and ending up in 
20 to 22 towns — I’m not exactly sure how many in total; I 
believe it was 22 towns — I found that a lot of the concerns 
were the same. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was very interested, how when the 
House reconvened and we’d be hearing the Speech from the 
Throne, to see had they really hit the mark on what was going 
on, for example, in Indian Head-Milestone, in my rural 
constituency. 
 
And I’m going to start listing off some of the concerns and 
addressing some of those concerns that were raised from my 
constituency and then I’m going to try and relate it back to what 
was said in the Throne Speech and see if there is any connect 
there, you know. And I think as we draw to a close on that 
process, we’ll find that, when you look at the Speech from 
Throne, it was really lack of any new ideas. It really didn’t 
address the situations that the people of Indian Head-Milestone 
raised, every town that I went to. 
 
Some of the concerns were highways. Highways are a major 
concern. The one thing that I will applaud the government for in 
the Speech from the Throne is they say they’re going to 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

accelerate the twinning or completing the twinning of the No. 1 
Highway west by 2004, and I applaud them for that. 
 
You know our member from Cypress Hills brought that forward 
a year or two ago, a year ago, after a very tragic accident. And I 
mean some of those accidents are still continuing. But he raised 
it and I’m glad that the government picked up on that and is 
going forward with it. 
 
But there are a lot of other highways in our province, Mr. 
Speaker. I think of one main highway that runs north and south 
through my constituency, No. 35 Highway. It goes from 
Weyburn all the way up . . . actually it goes from the US 
(United States) border all the way up to Nipawin and past. And 
it’s a major artery, north/south, through our province. And I 
think if you were to drive up and down that highway you would 
be absolutely amazed at the condition that highway was in this 
past summer. 
 
In fact a constituent of mine, whose daughter was driving on 
that highway late at night, was travelling approximately the 
speed limit, potholes all over, nighttime, couldn’t see them, and 
lost control over her vehicle, rolled the vehicle — thank 
heavens she wasn’t injured — but totalled a vehicle off. 
 
So about a day later, this mother who was quite concerned on 
the condition of that 35 Highway — which is a major 
north/south route through our province, bringing tourism in 
from the south, taking them up through the whole province, 
through the heart of the province, up into the Nipawin country 
where there’s fishing and everything else — she wanted to go 
see where this rollover took place. 
 
On her way there — of course this was July/August; the ditches 
hadn’t been mowed yet — and on the way there she runs into a 
deer and totals off another vehicle. It’s two vehicles out of one 
family in two days on 35 Highway. 
 
Concerns like that are raised over and over and over again when 
you talk to constituents, and this is just one highway of many in 
the constituency that we feel needs work. 
 
Ag was an issue that was raised at every one of the coffee 
parties that we had, even in the community of Fort Qu’Appelle. 
And Fort Qu’Appelle, as some members will know, is more of a 
resort-type community. It’s not as reliant on agriculture as 
every other community in my constituency is. But agriculture 
was raised there because people in Fort Qu’Appelle realize that 
when the farmers don’t have money, it filters into town. Their 
businesses suffer also. 
 
I’m going to go into agriculture quite a bit more in depth a little 
bit later on in the speech, but that was something that was 
raised. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Health care was raised over and over again. At almost every 
community there was concern over the way the health care 
system is run. Our member from Melfort-Tisdale went through, 
really, a great plan of what we see for health care. We keep 
hearing from the members opposite, what is your plan, what is 
your plan? We lay it out. One of the members opposite said, 

well table it. It’s on our Web site. These aren’t secrets. This is 
good stuff — take it. And the member from Melfort-Tisdale 
went through that. 
 
But you know, I’ve got case after case after case of people that, 
until they access the health care system, they don’t think it’s 
that bad. You know, I really have . . . honestly have to say that 
I’ve been very lucky; between myself, my wife, and my kids 
have never really had direct access as far as needing the system 
to be fixed up. My wife works in the health care system as a 
registered nurse but we’ve never accessed it. 
 
But go to these communities and invite people in and ask them 
to tell you their stories of accessing the health care system, and 
then you get a real grasp on how the system is falling down. 
 
It’s falling down in Montmartre where they had a hospital 
which was closed to a health care centre. It’s falling down in 
Indian Head where they’re fighting to keep their hospital. 
They’ve got a support group going because they’re scared of 
losing it. It’s falling down in most every community because 
the health care system, until they access it, until they need it, 
they think it’s fine. They need it, and it’s just not there. 
 
I’ve got people . . . It was mentioned today during question 
period some of the concerns regarding MRIs, for example. And 
they throw a whole bunch of accusations over on our side that 
we’re into having people pay for MRIs. Well I want the 
members opposite to know people today are paying for MRIs 
from Saskatchewan in Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — They’re doing it today. I had a fellow who 
helped . . . I saw during the election campaign. And about eight 
to nine months later he phoned me and wondered if I could 
come by his farm. And he’s really had some back problems. He 
had a disc that was out and he just was in pain continually. He 
was in so much pain that in the last six months he had lost 55 
pounds because he couldn’t eat and he couldn’t sleep. 
 
He had seen a specialist and the specialist said well, you’re 
going to have to have an MRI. He goes on a three-month 
waiting list. And then after that it was going to be three months 
before he could get back in to see the specialist. 
 
This person could not stand it any longer. This person was not 
full of cash, but he thought I can not live this way any longer. I 
have to wait three months before I get an MRI and then another 
three months before I get in to see the specialist. 
 
And we sent letters and we tried to speed up the process, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But I have a problem with that — speeding up 
the process. Because you know when I speed up the process, 
that means somebody else gets pushed further back down the 
line. Is that fair? I don’t think it is, although I felt so sorry for 
this fellow. 
 
He ended up pooling as much money as he could, went to 
Alberta, and within two days had the MRI. Came back; then he 
had to wait three months before he could get in to see the 
specialist. But at least in his own mind he’s not sitting there, 
laying in bed, not being able to eat, hardly able to move, losing 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

 

weight because he can’t get an MRI. He’s cut the time in half at 
least. And it drives you nuts when you hear of stories like that. 
 
And then you hear the members opposite yelling at us and 
heckling at us because we have no idea. We are the ones that 
have the idea, I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker. We are the ones that see 
what this health care system is doing and they’re not . . . 
 
Mr. Speaker, to think that people aren’t spending money outside 
of the health care system is like sticking your head in the sand, 
and no wonder they are unable to address the system. Because 
people are spending money every day outside this system 
because they can’t get the services right here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, we could go on for the rest of 
my time and for the rest of the clock talking about health care, 
but those are a couple of situations that I had people come to 
my office, or in this case, come to a community and say, this is 
what’s happening to us. They’ve accessed the system and it 
hasn’t worked. 
 
And I could go on and on and on about different anecdotal 
situations, but that’s not why I’m here. There’s many other 
issues that I want to touch on. 
 
Energy rate increases. Energy rate increases are affecting all of 
us, you know. And they’re going up and I realize world prices 
are driving that. And I realize that after attending a rate review 
committee meeting here in Regina — and the member from 
Swift Current and I were the only elected officials there — here 
in Regina, that a lot of the energy being produced in 
Saskatchewan is due to natural gas. Natural gas turbines. And I 
realize that there is going to be some increase in prices. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t know 
if they realize how it’s affecting the people in Fillmore, 
Saskatchewan; the people in Indian Head, Saskatchewan who 
are on fixed incomes and they’re not seeing the same rate of 
increase in their fixed income — their pensions, their wages — 
as they are in the increase in energy rates. 
 
And they’re getting squeezed. And they’re getting squeezed 
very much that they’re seeing property tax increases, they’re 
seeing SaskPower probably increases, SaskEnergy increases, 
and their fixed income is not increasing accordingly. And 
there’s less disposable income then. And they’re really being 
squeezed. 
 
I had a phone call just the other day from a lady in the 
community of Fillmore, who was saying, you know, I don’t 
think I can keep my house any more. It’s impossible to keep my 
house with the increase in taxes, property taxes, because of the 
downloading of this government and the increase in energy 
rates. And they’re getting squeezed and they’re having to make 
very, very difficult situations. So that’s another issue that I 
heard as I travelled from community to community in my 
constituency. 
 
Property taxes is another one. And I look at property taxes and I 
look at, again, the Speech from the Throne and what they had to 
say on restructure . . . on infrastructure and money that was 

going to go to infrastructure. And it does address it. But with 
further research we find that every cent that was talked about in 
the Throne Speech was talked about before — in the last budget 
in the year before. There is no new money there. And property 
taxes are increasing. Because what is happening is, first of all, I 
guess some of the municipal rates are increasing but education 
especially is driving property taxes up. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the last time I spoke in the House, I spoke 
quite a bit about tax revolt meetings. Last session I spoke a 
number of times on the tax revolt meetings that were happening 
within my constituency. And those tax revolt meetings have 
quietened down a little bit but, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t mean 
that the problem has gone away. The problem is still there. 
People’s property taxes are increasing because this government 
is relying more on the property base to fund education than it 
ever has before. 
 
It’s relying more . . . this government has forced municipalities 
into relying more on property tax to supply their services than it 
ever has before. You talk to SUMA in their last position and 
they were showing the discrepancy of the government’s 
payments towards municipal governments. And it’s just 
shrinking and shrinking and shrinking and shrinking. 
 
The mayor of Regina, Mr. Pat Fiacco, had mentioned the same 
thing. Now you see in SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), the organization for all urban 
communities, say the same thing. And I heard exactly the same 
thing when I visited every urban community in my 
constituency. Property taxes are killing them and it’s driving 
them out. 
 
I also heard a lot of talk on the coalition. It’s interesting when 
you go and you sit around and you have coffee with a number 
of the people in my constituency, is how you know they talk the 
issues. They want to talk about property taxes. They want to 
talk about health care. But they also start . . . You see a smile 
come across their face and they start shaking their head: they 
want to talk about this coalition government and how long do 
they have to endure it. It’s not how long it’s going to last — it’s 
how long do they have to endure it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And the coalition government is a very, very interesting topic 
because it’s forever changing . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
We’re going to get into ag here in a little bit, and I’ll certainly 
be reminded of that and mention about whether that’s the 
lowest expense you’ve got. 
 
I was talking a little bit about the coalition government and how 
things are always changing. We now have a member from the 
Liberal Party sitting on our side of the House, and we have two 
on that side of the House, and now we have the Liberal leader 
suing the Liberal Party. And we have the minister that was in 
the Chair step down from the Chair and now sit on that side. 
And we’ve asked a couple of questions of that minister over 
there and they’ve failed to answer. And so you know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, people are always wondering what’s going to 
happen with the coalition government. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one of the reasons why they’re very 
interested in the coalition government is because they really felt 
that we had a minority government going in the province until 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

of course the Liberals joined along. But probably more 
importantly is a lot of people remember in the last provincial 
election, there was one party that garnered the most votes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — There was one party that garnered the most 
votes, and it was neither party on that side of the House. And 
people wonder why either one of those parties should have any 
right in governing this province when they had the least . . . 
they didn’t get the most votes as our party did over here on this 
side of the House. 
 
We had the . . . we won the vote total; unfortunately we didn’t 
win the bidding war. Or maybe I should say, fortunately 
enough, we didn’t win the bidding war but we won the vote 
total. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, one other topic that they talked about and 
came up almost at every community was the issue of taxes. 
Taxes was an issue that came up at every, every, every 
community that I visited. And you know, I think there was not a 
person in any of those coffee parties that didn’t think that we 
need to grow our province. And one way we’re going to grow 
our province is going to be by reducing the taxes and inviting 
more people back. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I found it very interesting 
when the Premier stood up and answered a question today in the 
House, and the Premier was talking about energy rates, Sask 
Energy, SaskPower, and he read from an article there on how 
terrible it was in Alberta. And it’s gone up 250 per cent, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Or 150 or 
whatever number . . . Well, you know, we might as well use 
250 compared to the way they talk over there. 
 
And you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to ask that Premier 
then, how many of those companies that are complaining are 
jumping back into Saskatchewan? None are jumping back into 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Taxes, taxes, taxes, taxes 
in this province are driving them out. Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
whole issue last year of broadening the PST, it hit this province 
and it hit it hard. 
 
You talk to municipalities, and I talked about it earlier, where 
they’re seeing their grant money go down and they’re seeing 
their expenses go up by 6 per cent, as any professional 
consulting service they use charges them an extra 6 per cent. 
You know, it’s the government downloading its responsibilities 
onto municipal governments because they don’t put the transfer 
payments in, and then it’s raising their expenses on the other 
hand. 
 
And so what does the municipality have to do — raise property 
taxes. And as I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s driving people out 
of this province. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Very good speech. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, those are the issues that I have seen 
and I heard from the constituencies of Milestone or Montmartre 

or Creelman and Odessa and every community up and down the 
number of highway miles that I have in my constituency, 
whether it’s Edenwold or Qu’Appelle. 
 
And sometimes, you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’d only 
leave an hour to go the 30 miles from one community to the 
other. And after that 30-mile ride, we needed to sit still for a 
while and not worry about potholes and not worry about all the 
hazards that we had to face on the highway from community to 
community. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to talk . . . see how that 
relates to this — the Speech from the Throne. And I’ve gone 
through this Speech from the Throne and I’ve looked at it, 
whether it’s tax reform or whether it’s Aboriginal people or 
whether it’s connecting to youth and things like that, and I find 
very little from the communities that I visited that is brought out 
in this Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The one I mentioned was increasing the funding to increase the 
acceleration of the four-lane highway. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I go through it and I look at an issue 
in here where it talks about fetal alcohol syndrome. $170 
million, I believe this government was promising to address the 
problem . . . $73 million, over $73 million to address the fetal 
alcohol syndrome. And I thought when I heard that in the 
Speech from the Throne, I thought great. That’s a great idea. 
Because you know the youth that that is affecting have no 
options, it’s done to them. 
 
(12:15) 
 
And you know we’ve heard of stories throughout the province, 
whether it was the issue in North Battleford, different stories 
where crimes have been committed and after, you know . . . I 
mean, the major contributing factor was that this person had 
fetal alcohol syndrome and it had absolutely no choice. 
 
So then we find out, not less than — what? — half an hour 
later, the Premier made a mistake. Whoops, that’s not quite 
right. So finally I found, okay, something that was good, and it 
wasn’t good. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I looked at the municipal renewal money 
and they were promising, I believe, let me just leaf through it 
here . . . $170 million is what this government — my 
government — is putting into municipal affairs. My 
government is putting $170 million into municipal affairs. I 
would like to ask the Minister of Municipal Affairs, is his 
budget going up $170 million this year? Not a chance. Not a 
chance. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, he forgot to mention that this 
is for an infrastructure program that was tripartite, that was 
shared by the municipal government, the federal government, 
and this provincial government. He failed to mention that but he 
did take credit for the $170 million. There was another topic I 
was going to say great, until we did further research and it just 
wasn’t there. They missed it by that much. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I looked at the line, here is 
their plan is to set out a partnership for prosperity and I thought 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

 

great idea. Great idea. Until I picked up the Speech from the 
Throne from 1999 and I read exactly the same line. That’s their 
view for the future. It is exactly the same line. It had no . . . I 
think there might have been one or two letter . . . words 
changed but that was about it. It was really, really tough to 
grasp anything that I could go on. 
 
The other area that I thought I was going to be able to speak 
about today in my reply to the Speech from the Throne was the 
issue of Conservation Cover Program — the CCP, Conservation 
Cover Program. 
 
And you know, to the Minister of Agriculture, if I could have 
spoke a couple of days earlier, I would have given you a lot of 
credit for that program. Because you know, you mention it in 
the Speech from the Throne last year. You said there was going 
to be a grassing program and it mentioned it again here, in this 
Speech from the Throne. And I was going to applaud you and I 
was going to give you all the credit in the world because I’ve 
had a number of farmers say we need something like that. 
 
But I haven’t had a farmer yet that came to me and said, I only 
need 5 acres of it or 50 acres of it. I haven’t had one farmer that 
says, now that I can seed that 50 acres, I guess I can crop the 
other 110. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I realize that the Speech from the Throne 
doesn’t give all the plans of the provincial government, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And when I spoke last year I made a point that 
when there is something good, I want to say it’s good. But 
when I can’t find anything good and after hearing of all the 
concerns and the issues that could have been addressed that 
weren’t, I find it very frustrating, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I find that when I go through this there 
really isn’t a plan. And you know this government, ever since 
the election of the government’s new leader and now that he’s 
in the House, the Premier of this province, I was thinking that 
he was going to put his stamp on this government. And I was 
looking forward to the future of this government because he 
would be putting his stamp on this document here. 
 
But when I talk about the CCP — the cover crop program or 
whatever it is . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, the LCP, the 
lawn covering program. And I look at the prosperity for . . . the 
economic development plan, when it’s words from the last 
Throne Speech, how is that a stamp of the new leader? I can’t 
see anything that the new leader has put in. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I followed the election of the member 
from Riversdale. I followed the election and I also followed 
quite closely the leadership race. And as there is a number of 
members from that side opposite that were in the leadership 
race, including the Minister of Environment who was quite 
comical through a number of speeches I heard and gave some 
very good speeches — a little short on substance but pretty 
good on the comedy end of it. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker and Speaker, I did notice that there 
were the two front-runners which really scared me after finding 
out who the third front-runner was. I found that the minister 
from Saskatoon Fairview, I believe, and now the elected 
member from Riversdale . . . and I looked at their plans and 

what they had to offer. And with all due respect to the new 
Premier, I would have gone with the Saskatoon Fairview guy. 
He had a plan; he had some really good stuff there that I 
thought made a lot of sense. And I thought, you know, had that 
minister . . . had that member won the leadership race, would 
this Speech from the Throne be the same? I don’t think so. 
 
I think there would have been . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, I think there would have been some . . . I think there would 
have been some content, and I think there would have been a 
direction and a view for where this province has to go. But 
unfortunately, I haven’t seen it. 
 
Agriculture, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to get to the agriculture part 
of my speech. That was just my introduction part. I do want to 
get to the agriculture portion of my speech, and I realize that the 
time is slowly ticking by for some members. 
 
The agriculture in our province was by far the major topic that 
was addressed from community to community to community. 
And it’s not surprising because my constituency, the 
constituency that I represent, Indian Head-Milestone, is an 
agricultural-based community . . . is an agricultural-based 
constituency. 
 
I, myself, farm; my father farms; my brother farms; my 
grandfather farmed. My great-grandfather came to this country 
in about 1901, 1902 and were in the Indian Head area, and they 
ended up settling in the Lewvan area, where I was born and 
raised. 
 
I still farm. My neighbours are farmers; my best friends are 
farmers. And it’s a crisis. You don’t have to have an ag debate 
or anything else. You’ve got to go out to the country and see. It 
is a crisis. 
 
People all over this province are suffering, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and I don’t think, I don’t think there was a community that I 
went to — and I talked to people in those communities — that 
didn’t say that we needed some sort of a long-term safety net. A 
long-term safety net has been talked about and mentioned 
many, many, many times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, or Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have some safety nets in place. And I want to review 
the three that are in place right now, and the one that we’re 
talking about — CFIP. But I want to just touch on the three that 
are in place right now. 
 
We have AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance), we 
have NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account), and we have 
our crop insurance program. The provincial-federal crop 
insurance program. 
 
As far as NISA is concerned, it’s a great program. As long as 
you’re making some money, you can put money into it. But one 
of the concerns that I heard over and over again with the NISA 
program — and this is to the Minister of Agriculture because I 
think some of these views you may know, but a lot of them I 
don’t know if you’ve not heard, or you refuse to react on them 
— the NISA program is there to, when times are good, to put 
money in, and when times are poor to take money out. And it’s 
a stabilization program. 
 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

But the problem is the regulations on when you can draw out 
and how much you can draw out are so difficult that . . . I’ve 
got people in my constituency that finally said the heck with it, 
I’m going to take all my money out. Then he gets into a tax 
problem. Get out; then they don’t allow you to get back in. 
There’s so many guidelines that the program . . . the concept is 
good but . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — The concept is good but they need to do a 
little work on the regulations and the guidelines of when you 
can receive the money and things like that. 
 
The AIDA program . . . and what are the results? I’ll be very 
interested to find out what the results are . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s what we’re working on, all of us 
are. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Good. The minister’s saying that it’s 
already been reviewed, and I’m sure there’s going to be some 
changes and I hope the changes are in the right direction. 
 
As far as the AIDA program is concerned, we talk all the time 
in this House that it’s flawed. And you know, I’ve listened to a 
number of the members opposite say yes, we know it’s flawed. 
And I talk to the people on our side of the House and yes, it’s 
flawed. The AIDA program is flawed and we all know it’s 
flawed, but do we know why it’s flawed and do we know how 
it’s flawed? 
 
I want to talk to the members opposite and some of their talk 
when they say yes, we know it’s flawed and we know it’s got to 
be fixed. Do you know how that affects . . . how it’s flawed and 
how it’s affecting the actual producer? Do you know how it’s 
affecting it? 
 
Some of the issues. You know, I want to give you an example 
of why this program doesn’t work. An example of a person that 
got back to me and showed me exactly why he was not able . . . 
eligible to get an AIDA payment and his next door neighbour 
was. And it was over a simple thing like how he rented the land. 
 
If I’ve got a half section of land here and a half section of land 
here, I grow 30 bushels on each half section. Let’s say I get 
10,000 bushels, okay. On this side I got 10,000 bushels. I sell it 
for $3 a bushel; I got $30,000. 
 
If I cash rent it, over those two quarters, 5,000 a quarter; if I 
cash rent it, I take $10,000 off the top. As a producer I’ve only 
got $20,000 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There’ll be numbers 
in the mail. 
 
On the other side, if I crop share. I grow 30,000 bushels; I give 
a third of it away. So I only have 20,000 bushels now . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . You guys are . . . (inaudible) . . . I 
have $20,000, the point being. 
 
The problem is, is when I cash rent I get $30,000 and the 
$10,000 I use for renting that land is not deductible. So I show a 
$30,000 income. Whereas if I crop shared, I only show a 
$20,000 income. I don’t have 30,000 over here, I gave 10,000 

away for rent. Simple things like that that don’t allow the 
program to work. 
 
People don’t understand why the AIDA program doesn’t work. 
They just think it doesn’t work. Well it doesn’t work and it 
affects guys. It picks winners and losers — the guy that cash 
rents compared to the guy that crop shares — it makes a huge, 
huge difference. 
 
There are a number of . . . and the whole point of a program, 
AIDA, that our province bites into it and signs onto has to have 
some leadership from the government. And where was the 
government when this program was designed? Was the Minister 
of Agriculture at that time aware of what crop share was, what 
cash rent was? 
 
Some of the other areas that aren’t allowed: if I was to lease a 
combine or lease a tractor, those are legitimate expenses that are 
not allowed in AIDA. I’ve got a list of expenses here that aren’t 
allowed in AIDA. And it’s absolutely ridiculous. 
 
Let me read them for you. There’s machinery lease or rental, 
okay. In other words if I lease a combine, as I mentioned. 
 
There’s land clearing and draining. If you want to increase the 
production, if you want to increase the acres and the production 
of your land and you clear some land or you do some ditching, 
it’s not deductible. It’s not allowed in AIDA. 
 
Interest on real estate, mortgage or whatever. You know interest 
rates, the interest that we’re charged in . . . through the tax 
system, that is a huge deduction. But it’s not a deduction for 
AIDA. And why is that? Where was the Minister of Agriculture 
when they were drawing up these rules? Perhaps his interest — 
talking about interest — was in Mexico and not in Ottawa 
where it should have been. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — There are a number of other items that are 
not allowed in AIDA. And I guess what I . . . the whole point of 
this is, is that if we’re going to have a Minister of Agriculture 
going down to Ottawa to negotiate on CFIP, I sure hope he 
understands what the issues are. Because we don’t need another 
AIDA program. 
 
(12:30) 
 
And if your money, as I heard speak in Saskatoon, if your 
money is on the table, you better know what you’re talking 
about. Because we cannot stand another AIDA program and we 
cannot stand another CFIP program in this province until you 
get those fixed. But you’re not going to fix them, if you’re like 
the last minister, in Mexico. 
 
One of the other areas that was addressed a number of times — 
and it’s an area that I just can’t understand why the government 
is so slow moving on — is crop insurance. Crop insurance in 
our province has really deteriorated, although they’re saying 
that the coverage is up and the premiums are down this year. 
And that’s what they’re trying to sell people on as far as crop 
insurance. 
 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

 

My crop insurance, the coverages, if they went up, they went up 
about .01 per cent of a bushel and the price went down 2 cents. 
That’s not enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
Crop insurance is a program that hasn’t changed with farming 
practices. In my area where I farm right now, when I get my 
basic coverage and I look at how much I’m guaranteed for 
stubble and how much I’m guaranteed for summerfallow, every 
time the summerfallow outweighs and out yields my stubble. 
 
Well I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Agriculture, that 
is not the way the farming is done in our area right now. There 
is very few people that would . . . There’s many, many people 
that could prove and show the record that they’ll produce just as 
much, if not more, on stubble than they do on summerfallow 
but it’s not reflected in the crop insurance premiums and the 
crop insurance coverages. 
 
I look at the coverage that I’m guaranteed on certain crops like 
lentils. And every year at the end of the year, I have to do my 
crop production report and I send in exactly how much I grew 
on each quarter and which . . . on each commodity. And have I 
seen the increases of the yield go up? Right now I believe my 
lentil production is guaranteed for 12 or 13 bushel an acre and I 
haven’t been even close to 12 or 13 bushel an acre. 
 
I had a crop insurance fellow come out the other day . . . or last 
fall after I combined, straight cut my flax crop, and he said, well 
you know, it’s only for a disaster. My flax crop last year was a 
disaster and it was still above the coverage of what crop 
insurance was guaranteeing. 
 
You need to take a serious look at crop insurance, bring it up to 
the farming practices of today, increase the yield coverage. 
Because the program right now . . . And, you know, you could 
argue that in our area very, very few people take crop insurance. 
And, you know, the problem is, is you talk to some people from 
. . . whether it’s from the city and they say, well, you know 
what if they can’t cover themselves, then why should we be 
covering them. 
 
If they had to cover them with the insurance program that we’re 
offered, they wouldn’t buy into it either. People don’t buy into 
the crop insurance program because it’s just not working right, 
it’s dysfunctional, and it needs to be addressed — it needs to be 
addressed. 
 
So those are the three main areas in the safety net program that 
we need to look at. And we need to look at those in a total 
package. Because in 1992 we had a GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) program, and yes, you’ve heard us talk 
about the government ripped it up. But the thing is, is that 
nothing has ever backfilled that. Nothing has ever replaced that. 
 
And as a consequence, when we rode through some highs in the 
’90s — and we did have some highs through the mid-’90s when 
grain prices were up — there was nothing in place to help 
stabilize the lows of the year 2000 and the year 2001. 
 
And this government had nine years to put something in place, 
had nine years to work on it, and it has failed. And it failed not 
only in the long-term safety net program, but it failed in the last 
provincial election when it lost every rural seat because of those 

identical things, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess in closing, Mr. Speaker, the Throne 
Speech after 15 months of really kind of looking forward to it 
and knowing . . . seeing what the issues are and hoping the 
issues would be addressed is that they just weren’t addressed. I 
have a hard time, I would have a very, very hard time sitting on 
that side of the floor voting for something that has as little 
substance as this Throne Speech does, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And you know, I was talking to some of my constituents last 
night. And they happened to be watching the legislature channel 
the other day because it’s real good viewing and they heard the 
minister talking about flip and flop. And you know what they 
said to me, Mr. Speaker, is that this Throne Speech is a flop and 
it’s about time we flipped the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So, Mr. Speaker, I will be glad to support 
the amendment by the Leader of the Opposition. I will not be 
supporting a document that has as little substance as this Throne 
Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
begin my statement in support of the Throne Speech by 
congratulating you on your election as Speaker. I’m sure that 
you’ll do a tremendous job. I’ve appreciated serving on the 
Tobacco Control Committee with you and seeing the work that 
you did there. And I’m sure that you’ll do a good job of helping 
both sides of the House be able to work as effectively as we 
need to throughout this session. 
 
I would also like to thank my colleague . . . or congratulate my 
colleague from Regina Sherwood and wish him the best in his 
role as Deputy Speaker. I’m sure he will also do an excellent 
job, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very happy to be able to stand here and speak 
in support of this Throne Speech. It is a Throne Speech that I 
see as full of possibilities. 
 
We have heard many criticisms. We have heard a negative 
image from the people across the way as they look at this 
Throne Speech. The last speaker was unable to see anything 
positive in it. And I understand that, Mr. Speaker. I understand 
that there are people who simply cannot see the positives. 
 
This Throne Speech outlined and gave us a glimpse of an 
agenda that will enable our government and the people of this 
province to develop and use this province’s resources for the 
good of all. Our government has hope for the future — hope 
that is based on experience; hope that is based on vision. 
 
Because of our experience, we know that we can weather hard 
times and prevail. We know that there are hard times for some 
in this province, and we know that working together with those 
people, we are going to be able to make a difference. We are 
going to be able to prevail and we are going to make a 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

difference in this province. We’ll thrive and prosper and grow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, our government has had 
experience, tremendous experience. Experience that helps us to 
know what is necessary to govern effectively. 
 
When we inherited this government, this province was on the 
brink of disaster. Saskatchewan was almost bankrupt when our 
New Democrat government took over in 1991. 
 
The right-wing predecessors of the SPs (Saskatchewan Party) 
had robbed, mismanaged this province, and put it in dire straits. 
The future did look bleak. They had stolen, wasted, and given 
away money as if it grew on trees. With their goofy ideas, Mr. 
Speaker, ideas that were almost as goofy and maybe even more 
goofy than the idea of flying this whole Assembly down to 
Ottawa, these people had wasted the resources of the province. 
 
These pre-SPs were driving people out of the province in record 
numbers. You look at the statistics and you see clearly that this 
province was being depopulated at unprecedented rates because 
of the actions of that right-wing government. 
 
But enough about those depressing days when the province 
suffered under such right-wingers. 
 
In 1991, the Romanow government won the confidence of the 
people. They had the wisdom and the courage that was 
necessary to rebuild the foundations of this province. With very 
careful planning, with fiscal prudence, they rebuilt, and they 
helped diversify the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
Building these foundations is essential, Mr. Speaker. We cannot 
be frivolous about the development of this province. We must 
make sure that the development we have is well-grounded. And 
that’s what the government of Romanow did, built a solid 
foundation and developed throughout the years, an economy 
that is diversified, an economy that is able to weather the 
vagaries of an agriculture system that sometimes works against 
the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has a history of sound financial 
management. We will continue to manage in that sound and 
fiscally responsible way. We are very clear that in order to have 
good social programs, in order to care for this province and help 
this province develop, we must have good, sound economic 
development. And this government is committed to that sound 
economic development. 
 
Monday’s Throne Speech provides a glimpse of this 
government’s priorities for the months ahead. We have a new 
Premier who loves this province, who is committed to 
developing an even more accessible, an even more responsible 
and responsive government. 
 
One day, during the leadership campaign, somebody asked our 
Premier if he was tough enough to be Premier. Mr. Speaker, he 
responded by saying well, the Lord didn’t bless me with a body 
like Jesse Ventura, but he blessed me with a mighty fine set of 
ears, and I can listen very well. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, that listening is absolutely 
vital to successful government — to hear the concerns of the 
people of this province; to understand where the pain is; to 
understand where the opportunity is and to be able to respond to 
that opportunity; to be able to respond to that pain, in 
responsible ways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our new Premier has a tremendous vision for this 
province. As he made clear in his leadership campaign, his 
government will be grounded on the best of the spirit of 
Saskatchewan. And we know what that spirit is. It is 
community pulling together. It is people who look at incredible 
odds, and continue to build and develop. 
 
I think of the very beginnings of this province. I think of our 
ancestors who came to this land; who came to a land that was 
flat and barren, and they looked around, and they saw a future. 
They built their houses from the very soil of this land — sod 
houses. They built those houses and they looked out and they 
saw crops in the future. And they built farms and they built 
communities that we have inherited. And they gained much 
from the people who were already here in this land at the time. 
 
They gained an understanding of how to survive through 
difficult seasons. They gained some insight into what it means 
to care for one another, to give away. I was taking Cree classes 
at university and our teacher, Ida McLeod, taught us some 
tremendous history of the Cree people as well as the language. 
 
She taught us that when the missionaries first came to this land, 
they came and they were treated with grace, with compassion, 
with care. And they looked at the people who were so generous 
to one another, who had seasons where they gave away from 
their wealth so that others would have more — a generosity that 
was unprecedented to these missionaries. 
 
They looked at these people and they said they were so 
Christ-like — or in French, Christ — that they called them the 
Cree. This story indicates some of what our ancestors, our 
European and other ancestors gained when they came in contact 
with the Aboriginal peoples of this land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been blessed by a heritage that 
sometimes we have not accepted. We have gained much. And, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the indications in this Throne Speech is that 
we will be more respectful and more responsive to the people 
from whom we have inherited so much. The Metis Act will help 
in that process. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there are many other things that we are doing 
so that we can work in partnership with First Nations as we help 
develop this province. There are steps that are taken in 
education, in post-secondary education that will help develop 
partnerships, that will help bring people into the workforce who 
might not otherwise be able. Tremendous partnerships that have 
been developed with business, with government, with First 
Nations and with Metis groups, and they will continue to be 
developed. 
 
Working together in a spirit of Saskatchewan we will build a 
future that will benefit all the people of this province, not just 



March 23, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

 

some select group. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me quote from the Throne Speech: 
 

The success that we enjoy rests on the dedication and the 
courage of the people who dreamed of creating a society 
where the future would be as limitless as the very skies. 
 

(12:45) 
 
Today we dream of such a society — limitless, tremendous 
possibility, tremendous future for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we, my colleagues, have talked about the thriving 
economy of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Saskatoon Sutherland the other day referred to an article from 
The Globe and Mail. That article stated emphatically that 
Saskatchewan has led the nation in economic growth in much 
of the past decade. Do we hear that from the members opposite? 
No. They don’t acknowledge the breadth and the depth of 
economic growth in this province. They can’t see it. Why don’t 
they see it? Why won’t they see it? 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, we even led oil-rich Alberta through much of 
the past decade in economic growth. Yes, despite the struggles 
in agriculture, we led this country in economic growth. 
 
The Throne Speech makes clear that this growth will continue. 
Exports of potash, oil and gas, other products and manufactured 
goods, will continue to increase. 
 
One of the things, Mr. Speaker, that has amazed me over this 
past decade of financial challenge and determined economic 
development has been the continued commitment of this 
government to develop programs which care for the poor of our 
society. Given the harsh realities that many still face in this 
province, it’s inappropriate to brag, but I must say that I am 
thankful that this province has continued to care for the weak 
and the poor throughout these years of hardship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was amazed when I heard that we were the only 
province that had reduced child poverty in a decade when every 
province in this country said that they were going to reduce 
child poverty. I am thankful that we have continued to develop 
programs which help reduce poverty and will continue to help 
reduce poverty and will help people get a hand up, not a back of 
the hand that so many would give. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, we will not penalize people 
who are on welfare. We will help them find a way to work their 
way off of welfare for all those who are able. For the disabled, 
Mr. Speaker, we will work with them and we will make sure 
that they have every opportunity, every possibility of 
developing the fullest potential possible for themselves; that 
they will be able to participate as fully as possible in the life of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s vision, in contrast to those in 
opposition, our government’s vision is not negative. Our vision 
is not the gloomy and unrealistic vision articulated by the 
Alberta-envy party opposite. 

Mr. Speaker, we have a vision of hope. We are committed to 
building a society, indeed a world, where all who are . . . all will 
be enabled to share the resources, the privileges, and the 
responsibilities. They will help all those things which help 
make life meaningful and enjoyable. 
 
We do not believe, Mr. Speaker, that these goods and 
opportunities and responsibilities should be only the rights of 
the lucky, the rich, the aggressive, the powerful, or the greedy. 
Our vision of Saskatchewan is a vision of courage, innovation, 
and co-operation. It is a vision of individuals and groups and 
organizations and communities pulling together to make good 
things happen, which will bring benefit to all people, not just a 
few. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, I remind the House that this vision is 
well-grounded in experience. It is a vision built on the very 
spirit of Saskatchewan. It is a vision that has been articulated by 
this government through the past decade. 
 
There are so many facets of our economy, Mr. Speaker, which 
are poised on the edge of growth, some which have been 
growing steadily and others which are ready to move ahead. 
 
There are exciting plans to expand the information highway so 
that more and more people and communities will be able to 
participate in the global economy. Over $70 million will be 
invested in the next six years. 
 
Now I could hardly believe my ears the other day when I heard 
members opposite panning and mocking the government’s 
plans to expand access to the Internet. All I need is a cellphone, 
said one of them. All I need is a cellphone? What century is he 
living in? 
 
They talk about freer markets for farmers. They talk about more 
access to open markets. The farmers I know who are engaged in 
more open markets, those farmers find themselves dependent on 
the Internet to help market the products that they are growing. 
Mocking it out, panning it, doesn’t make sense from people 
who claim they are supporting the future of agriculture. 
 
The farmers I know who are dealing in these open market 
commodities successfully use the Internet to access information 
that is absolutely essential to marketing those commodities. 
They use it for all kinds of information. 
 
I think of somebody this morning from the other side that was 
giving some message that I found very positive and hopeful. It 
was about some of the work that’s being done in ag tourism. 
And I think there’s tremendous possibility there. 
 
But some of the, some of the people that have brought 
information about ag tourism to this province have made very, 
very clear that in order to market those possibilities, you need 
access to the Internet. It’s one thing that can help in the 
development of agriculture. It’s not the whole picture, but to 
mock it and pan it doesn’t make sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps the Throne Speech should have spelled 
things out in more detail because there are some tremendous 
plans and possibilities which are opened up for us through 
Internet access. 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 23, 2001 

 

I find it tremendously exciting to think about the possibilities 
for distance education. I think about the potential for getting the 
best of education into remote communities. I think about the 
possibilities for health care as that information is there instantly. 
What potential we have by this tool that is being made more 
and more available in this province. 
 
No, Mr. Speaker, Internet access alone will not solve all the 
needs of farmers or of rural Saskatchewan. But combined with 
many other things, including cellphones, it may be a part of the 
solution. 
 
Mr. Speaker, rural economic development is absolutely 
necessary. Much is being done in this province; much has been 
done for the last few years. I have met with some of the REDAs 
(regional economic development authority) and I have seen that 
they have been doing a tremendous job of developing the rural 
economy in this province. They have tremendous ideas. 
 
I think about the Action Committee on the Rural Economy — 
ACRE — and I think of some of the tremendous ideas that they 
have generated. And that, my friends, is one body which has 
said very clearly that access to the Internet is essential as we 
develop our rural economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we look at the work that ACRE is doing, we look 
at the work of the REDAs, and we see tremendous possibility 
for rural Saskatchewan, and we are committed to developing 
that potential. Combining the aspects of economic development, 
of agriculture, and highways and transportation, our new 
ministry of Rural Revitalization shows our commitment to rural 
economic development, Mr. Speaker. We will do whatever we 
can to help develop this whole province, both urban and rural. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I mention the urban and rural components 
that we are committed to developing, I do so out of a 
constituency which is both urban and rural. Regina Qu’Appelle 
Valley is a tremendous constituency that combines the best of 
urban. We have good residential, we have some of the best 
manufacturing in this province, Mr. Speaker. We have rural . . . 
we have tremendous farming out around the edges of this city 
and we have small communities — all this in one constituency, 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley. 
 
The people of this constituency speak to me regularly about 
what their needs are, Mr. Speaker. And I tell you that our 
government is responsive to those needs and we will continue 
to be responsive to them. We will develop our rural economy 
and we will develop our urban economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is the whole province, every aspect that we care 
about. We do not agree with the divide and conquer, that 
politics of division that we have seen so often from the other 
side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have, looking at the needs of this province, 
committed tremendous amount of dollars to the development of 
our transportation system. Our highways will get all-time high 
amounts of money in 2001 to help rebuild and develop those 
highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those with a positive attitude, for those who 
look at the future with hope, for those with eyes to see and a 

will to understand, this province holds limitless possibilities. 
Our government has shown and will continue to show that it is 
committed to help turn those tremendous possibilities into 
realities so that this province will thrive and develop. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan, our Minister for Northern 
Saskatchewan has made clear that many new jobs have been 
developed. That there are tremendous partnerships that have 
been developed with mining and manufacturing, with the 
development of a rice industry out of La Ronge. Mr. Speaker, 
there have been tremendous developments in forestry that will 
provide over 10,000 new jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, northern Saskatchewan is a full part of this 
province and we will not divide that one from the rest either. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, given the time . . . I’ve heard a 
very, very positive comment from one of the members opposite. 
I appreciate the wisdom that this member has as he points to the 
fact that it’s close to the weekend and it’s time for us to move 
adjournment on this . . . move adjournment of debate for this 
day. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
move that this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, this House will stand adjourned 
until 1:30 p.m. In the meantime, I would like to wish each and 
every one of the members, indeed everybody in this building, a 
wonderful, sunny but brisk weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:58. 
 
 


