















































Hansard: July 04, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2309 
 July 4, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I again have a 
petition today from people in my constituency that are opposed 
to the Fyke Commission. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health care 
centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services for users in our 
district and beyond. 
 

The people that have signed these petitions are from Wadena, 
Rose Valley, and Fosston. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, as I have done every other chance 
I’ve had the opportunity, I rise to present more petitions from 
people concerned about the hospital in the city of Swift Current. 
The prayer of these petitions reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the people that have signed these petitions today 
from literally all over the southwest, from the city of Swift 
Current, and from all the surrounding communities. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present petitions on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the proposals in the Fyke 
report. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
levels at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre and Pangman 
Health Centre in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 
 

And these petitions, which there’s 10 of, are signed by residents 
of Bengough and Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have 
petitions to present today dealing with health care. The prayer 

reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the good people of 
Storthoaks, Carnduff, Fertile, Alida, Fairlight, Bellegarde, 
Redvers, and Melita, Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the high cost of 
power and energy. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide more 
substantial power and energy relief to Saskatchewan 
customers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of North Battleford and Battleford. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present today to do with the lack of funding to 
non-profit personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 
 

The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Moosomin, Pelly, Bangor, Dubuc, Stockholm, Waldron and 
Melville and Kamsack and Pelly. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here with 
citizens concerned about significant rate increases: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the citizens from Elbow. 
 
I so present. 



2310 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present on behalf of concerned citizens. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And signators to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from 
Wynyard and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition opposing the 
possible reduction of health care services in the 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
abandon any plans to reduce current levels of available 
acute care, emergency, and doctor services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Chitek Lake, from Leoville, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the province that are tabled as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Special Committee on Rules and Procedures 

 
Deputy Clerk: — Hon. Myron Kowalsky, Chair of the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures hereby presents the second 
report of the said committee which is tabled. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with a great 
deal of pleasure today that I rise in the Assembly to speak to the 
report that you’ve laid on the table concerning Rules and 
Procedures. 
 
It was 18 months ago now that members on this side of the 
House started thinking about how we could start opening up our 
process; how we could start making this Assembly more 
relevant; how we could make sure that this institution continues 

to play an important role in the lives of, the political life of this 
province as we move into this 21st century. 
 
I can tell you that the work that was done by your committee, as 
we looked at jurisdictions throughout the Commonwealth, I 
think really did drive home one single, recurring message to us: 
that the democratic institutions that we work in, that we’re part 
of, are every bit as relevant today as they were when they were 
established. 
 
The work that we have to do is to figure out now how we make 
additional contact points with the people we represent. 
 
The report of your committee — this second report — will lay a 
foundation for us to make some very dramatic changes. 
Probably the most significant set of changes this Assembly’s 
gone through since it was set up. It will open up the Assembly’s 
processes to allow greater public participation; direct citizen 
input into discussion on our Bills and our agenda. It’ll allow for 
better public scrutiny. It’ll allow for more collegial and, 
hopefully, less partisan approach to politics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that as we’re at the . . . nearing the end of 
our session on day 69, that it’s hard for us in many ways to sit 
here today and think about how we would work in a less 
partisan environment. It’s difficult for us to figure out how we 
can move forward to carry on the agenda that I think each of us 
have in terms of wanting to serve our constituents. We need to 
figure that out, and I think that this report moves us forward in 
an important set of directions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this report, while it is relatively brief, contains 
nine important recommendations. The recommendations will 
allow the Clerk to start preparing the standing orders so that we 
can look at the start of our next legislative session on opening 
up our Assembly, and opening up our process. 
 
I believe strongly that Saskatchewan people still believe in our 
democratic institution and in this legislature. And I think that 
they want to have more contact and more input. I can tell you 
that, as I have had the opportunity over the last several weeks to 
sit in the Standing Committee on Health Care and listen to 
groups and delegations appear before us from throughout 
Saskatchewan, each of those groups starts out their presentation 
with one very simple message and that is, thank you for asking 
us to appear today. 
 
There are a lot of people in this Assembly who believe that it is 
our right, and solely our right, to control the agenda as 
legislators. I want to say to people we have nothing to fear by 
opening up our process and opening up our system to greater 
public scrutiny and greater public input. 
 
These changes will change the way that we work. It’ll hopefully 
take out some of the acrimony out of our system. It’ll allow us 
to work in smaller groups to provide a more useful input for 
ordinary members. It’ll allow ministers to make better use of 
their time. It’ll promote a better dialogue between ministers, 
and backbenchers, and opposition members, in terms of making 
sure that we are steering the province in the direction that our 
citizens and our constituents want us to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are I think very important changes. I 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2311 

 

wouldn’t say they’re revolutionary because indeed what we’ve 
been able to see as we’ve looked around, that there are many 
other jurisdictions that have very positive working models. 
From Ontario to our friends and our other . . . people in the 
Commonwealth in New Zealand and Australia, we’ve seen that 
many places they have working models that allow this kind of 
input today. 
 
I want to also tell the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, that part of what 
we found as we looked at other jurisdictions . . . there are some 
things that we do very right here. I was particularly impressed 
as we looked at other models to see that we are one of the very 
few jurisdictions that almost never invokes closure on debate; 
that the members regulate the debate themselves, that we work 
out our own timetables, and we find a natural conclusion to our 
debate without forcing it through on the rules, as we’ve seen in 
other places. In Ontario we were told it’s almost routine now 
that when a motion is brought in, the day afterwards is a closure 
motion. 
 
We saw in other jurisdictions like New Zealand where routine 
timed debate was the way it worked. Every debate was timed. 
Every debate was limited. 
 
We have to find the compromise as we work through so that we 
can maintain that degree of freedom that individual members 
have here to represent and present the views of their 
constituents and yet, at the same time, allow us to move on into 
new areas that we have not in the past been able to dedicate our 
time to. 
 
One of the most important changes in this set of reports will be 
moving more of our work into substantive policy committees. 
These committees will enable ministers and ordinary members 
to have more of a dialogue on the policy aspects of government. 
It will allow us to invite citizens in to comment on the 
legislative agenda. It will allow us to have members specialize 
and dedicate more of their time to areas that they have both 
interest and knowledge. 
 
As we’ve seen throughout the last several months, and I think 
particularly this week as we are dealing with legislation that 
comes out of other work by other committees, there is some 
very positive things that can be done where we work in a 
non-partisan fashion, where we come together and we put our 
minds to it. 
 
And I think of the work done by my colleague from Saskatoon 
Greystone and the others on the sexual exploitation of children. 
Those pieces of work that they’ve done, those reports, I think 
are testament to what we can do when we find the right 
mechanisms to work together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the nine recommendations that are contained in 
this report will set us on a path to reform our standing orders, to 
open up our legislature, to find a more meaningful role for all 
members. 
 
And I want to ask members over the next several months, as 
they have a chance to think about this, to read the report, to ask 
questions, to be very . . . we’re still very open in this as we 
move forward. And I want to encourage them to bring forward 
the new ideas on how we can make this Assembly more 

relevant and a better place to represent our constituents. 
 
With that, I will move seconded by the member for Cannington: 
 

That the second report of the Special Committee on Rule 
and Procedures be now concurred in. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the members on this side of the House also believe that it’s time 
to make a change in some of the rules that we operate this 
Assembly under; and in fact, we talked with the previous 
deputy premier before the last session, or just as the last session 
started, to indeed to make some of those changes, make it 
possible to consider what kind of changes we would like to 
make, to take a look at what is available across the 
Commonwealth in those jurisdictions that have a similar style 
of parliament to our own. 
 
(13:45) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we came down with two main conclusions: 
that any rule changes need to allow for public input; that our 
Assembly up until today has allowed public input prior to the 
sitting of the Assembly when government and opposition would 
take their ideas to the public and perhaps even have public 
hearings and that was one avenue for public input. 
 
After the legislative process took place it was possible for 
issues to be related to the public such as a number of select 
committees that we have that are performing their duties today. 
But in general, on most pieces of legislation, the public had no 
opportunities for direct input once it came to the floor of the 
Assembly and there were quite a number of people around this 
province who believe that they should have an opportunity to be 
able to provide their ideas and their input on to what was 
happening with public legislation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We believe some of the ideas that we have put forward in this 
report will allow for that to happen, for the public to have direct 
input into ideas that are not necessarily put forward by the 
whole House but rather provided for by committees or to have 
input directly into some of the Bills, the Bills that are before the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. And we think that is extremely 
important. 
 
The second item in this report, Mr. Speaker, I think that is 
critical is the role of the member in the Assembly, that there 
was a need to enhance the role of all members in the Assembly 
to make their role as legislators more meaningful, to give them 
more participation in all of the functions of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. And again the recommendations of this report I 
believe provide that opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
For democracy to function, for democracy in the legislature to 
function, Mr. Speaker, it’s critical that all members feel they 
have a stake in the democracy and to do that, Mr. Speaker, they 
need to be full participants. And any changes that take place, 
Mr. Speaker, have to be fair for both government and 
opposition and fairness in democracy must be the keystone and 
the corner with which this legislature operates, Mr. Speaker. 
And I believe this report represents that kind of fairness, Mr. 



2312 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

Speaker. 
 
These are not radical new ideas. They’re not ideas that haven’t 
been tried in other locations. They’re not all being used in each 
location. What we have taken is what we believe is the best of 
the ideas and incorporated some of our own into them, into 
what we believe will be a unique Saskatchewan style of 
legislative operation. 
 
We are modernizing some of the things that we do in this 
House, Mr. Speaker, and I believe overall it’s worthy of the 
members’ consideration over the next period of time. That we 
need, the members need time to look at this, to understand it, to 
try it, and to gauge whether or not it suits the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to other 
members of the Assembly, a very special young woman in my 
life. I have with me today, to spend the day to see how the 
parliamentary process works, my young niece from Saskatoon, 
Ms. Ashley Metz. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it isn’t 
often that I have the honour of having guests in the Assembly, 
but today I have the very special pleasure of having five of 
them. 
 
And I want to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, seated in your gallery, and if you start from 
your left, someone who’s very special in my life, my soulmate 
and partner who has stood beside me and supported me through 
all of my career choices — hired, appointed, and elected — Mr. 
Robert Hackett. And beside Robert is his brother John, and 
John is visiting us from New Westminster, BC (British 
Columbia). And beside John is his daughter, Brittany, who 
actually hails from Mission. And then comes very special 
people, Robert’s mother, Gladys Hackett, and his dad, Goeff 
Hackett. 
 
Now Mom and Dad Hackett were originally both from 
Saskatchewan, but a very long time ago so you can’t blame that 
on us. And Mom was actually born in Weyburn and provided 
babysitting services to Tommy and Mrs. Douglas in her 
younger years. And Dad was telling me at noon today that his 
brother, George, was actually a page to this Assembly probably 
in the early 1920s. 
 
So they’re visiting us from BC, and I’m very glad to have them 
and I ask all members to give them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to introduce to you and through you to the 
members of this place, a very good friend of mine from 
Gatineau, I guess it is these days, a gentleman by the name of 
Steve Moran seated in the west gallery. Steven is the legislative 
assistant to the NDP (New Democratic Party) MP (Member of 
Parliament) for Burnaby-Douglas, Svend Robinson. 
 
He’s out on a road trip with his fellow traveller, Nathalie 
LaBonté. Mr. Speaker, you may be interested in catching up 
with Nathalie later as she worked in Mr. Robinson’s office as a 
parliamentary intern, one of the parliamentary internship 
program people. The pre-eminent internship in Canadian 
politics. 
 
And I would just invite all members to welcome them to this 
place today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Deer Valley Golf and Estates 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
transformation of a picturesque valley setting into one of 
Saskatchewan’s most scenic golf courses is virtually complete. 
The Deer Valley Golf and Estates near Lumsden officially 
opened yesterday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been talk about the beauty of this course 
since the public caught wind of the rumour of a valley golf 
course near Regina. Well, Mr. Speaker, what they will see upon 
arrival with their clubs is a well-designed course with 
breathtaking views. 
 

(Deer Valley) is one of the few golf courses that I have 
been on where you think the next hole can’t be better than 
the last one, but it is . . . 

 
Joanne Goulet, a Regina golf legend said, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Deer Valley plays 6,711 yards from the black tees and a more 
forgiving 5,337 yards from the reds. There are also many 
unique features to this golf course, Mr. Speaker. The individual 
hole pictures are painted on huge boulders beside each tee box. 
Each green looks like it is framed by a valley setting. Most of 
the tee boxes are elevated, but the fairways are spacious with 
large landing areas — just what the average golfer wants. 
 
This golf course is sure to offer great and challenging golf 
experience to both the low and high handicap players. I 
encourage all the golfing members of this Assembly and the 
general public to get out to, as Joanne Goulet called it, the most 
beautiful golf course I have ever played. 
 
And do not worry, Mr. Speaker. My sources tell me that you 
have the chance of finishing the round with the same ball hit off 
the first tee — but bring a few extra balls just in case. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2313 

 

Canadian Millennium Scholarship 
Foundation Excellence Award 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the 
legislature, a Canada Millennium Scholarship Foundation 
Excellence Award was recently presented to a graduate of the 
Kinistino high school. This award is presented to only 36 
laureates in the whole nation. 
 
Kimberley Holmgren was awarded this honour on the basis of 
her academic excellence, commitment to the community, 
proven leadership qualities, and interest in innovation. Her 
volunteer involvements include helping at the seniors’ Jubilee 
Lodge in Kinistino, teaching bible school, and being part of the 
student representative council. She was actively involved in 
sports, school music programs, and drama. Her spare time 
activity is tinkering with machinery. 
 
Along with this $4,000 award, Kimberley is the recipient of a 
University of Saskatchewan entrance scholarship of $4,200 and 
the University of Saskatchewan Greystone scholarship of 
$2,000. 
 
On the basis of her past accomplishments, I have no doubt that 
this young lady will realize any goal she sets for herself in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker and members, please join me in congratulating 
Kimberley on her achievements and wishing her the very best 
in the future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cobalt-60 Beam Cancer Therapy Invention Recognized 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, medical research has yielded some 
truly remarkable treatments and innovations over the years. 
 
One such project was developed at the University of 
Saskatchewan 50 years ago, and this new treatment opened the 
door for a better, more effective way to treat cancer. The 
Cobalt-60 Beam Therapy Unit used nuclear power to treat and 
cure cancer, and since its inception in 1951, more than 2,500 of 
the units have been in use all over the world. 
 
Parks Canada and the Historic Sites and Monuments Board of 
Canada have designated the development of the Cobalt Bomb a 
national historic event. And last Thursday, a plaque was 
unveiled to commemorate this event. 
 
On hand for the plaque’s unveiling were four of the original 
members of the team that worked on the project: Edward Epp, 
Douglas McCormack, Cheryl Penny, and Sylvia Fedoruk were 
all in attendance. 
 
The plaque will be on display at the Saskatoon Cancer Clinic. It 
will be displayed next to Saskatoon’s original Cobalt Bomb, 
which was used until 1972. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Cobalt Bomb enabled those suffering from 
cancer around the world to access timely and effective 
treatment. 
 

It is with a great deal of pride and respect that I congratulate 
and thank the scientists and researchers who collaborated to 
bring about this advance in the treatment of cancer. We are 
proud of your achievement and we are proud that this 
innovation, developed in Saskatchewan, went on to help so 
many people across the country and around the world. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Student Thanks Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to read a thank 
you note to members of this Assembly from one Kristy 
Ridgway who is a student at Thom Collegiate in this city. And 
she writes: 
 

I would like to thank all of the people who helped me along 
with my school project. I chose the topic of the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan. Because of all the help I 
received, I was able to receive 100 per cent on my project. 
 
Thank you to the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy who 
was my mentor, the member from Thunder Creek who 
introduced me in the House, and to the following people 
who took time out of their busy schedules to answer my 
questions: the Speaker of the House; the Minister of 
Finance; the Leader of the Opposition; the member from 
Cannington; Mr. Reg Downs, Chief of Staff of the 
Saskatchewan Party; and also the independent member 
from the Battlefords. 
 
Thank you to all of these people involved, it was very much 
appreciated. 
 
Signed, Kristy Ridgway. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Committee on Exploitation of Children 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was a pleasure for 
me to serve along with my six colleagues on the Special 
Committee to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children 
Through the Sex Trade. 
 
I believe our work was thorough and necessary, and I’m proud 
of the report we submitted to the Assembly for its 
consideration. I can modestly state that our collegial effort is an 
example of parliamentary democracy at its best. 
 
And I also want to say, Mr. Speaker, that serving on the 
committee was as much of an education as it was an 
assignment. We all learned things we didn’t know, and things 
that we wished we did not have to know about the sordid 
underbelly of our society. And our forced lesson on the factors 
that contribute to children being exploited by the sex trade 
made us all the more determined to eliminate them one by one. 
 
Some of the factors we already knew, although their reality was 
brought home to us. For instance, we knew that poverty in 
families can lead to children being put out on the street. Perhaps 



2314 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

though, we did not realize the role that self-esteem plays among 
the children involved. 
 
We knew of the connection between drug addiction and abuse, 
but I for one did not fully realize that more often than not it is 
the addiction of the pimp, or worse the parent, that leads the 
child onto the street and then into their own addiction to lessen 
the pain and dull the realities of their situation. 
 
As I say, lessons I would have preferred not to have had to 
learn. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they’re valuable lessons, ones we pass on to 
the Assembly and the public. Lessons we trust will be relegated 
to the history books in the very near future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Volunteers Dedicated to a New Hospital 
for Swift Current 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last year and through 
the early part of 2001, a group of dedicated volunteers in 
southwest Saskatchewan struck out on a mission to collect the 
names of so many petitions on an issue of such great import that 
they could not be ignored by any government anywhere. 
 
The issue at stake was nothing less than a reasoned solicitation 
for the provincial government to carefully consider their request 
for a new hospital in Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, each and every day I’ve had the opportunity, I’ve 
stood in my place in the legislature and presented petitions on 
behalf of residents of my constituency, as well as people from 
across the southwest, and from across the entire province. 
 
Over six thousand people have signed these petitions, Mr. 
Speaker; six thousand people have expressed their support for 
this government to carefully consider our request for a new 
hospital. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Swift Current hospital was built in the late 1940s and has 
had no meaningful capital improvements since the early 1970s. 
The only question that remains is what will the response of the 
government to this earnest and Herculean effort of those who 
distributed these petitions be, those who posted them in their 
businesses and those who signed them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a final thank you to the volunteers who did work 
so hard in this effort including Gerald and Deanna Thorson, 
Roy Burnay, and Doreen Kern. Thank you to them and their 
efforts and to all of the people who’ve signed the petitions. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, indeed I’d encourage the government to 
listen to the prayer of that petition, it’s a reasonable one, that 
they carefully consider Swift Current’s request for a new 
hospital. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sommerfest in Humboldt 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased today to talk about the 11th German Sommerfest which 
will take place in Humboldt during the first weekend of August. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with the encouragement of my friends in the 
Saskatchewan German Council I would like to add a few words 
in German: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in German.) 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I hope everyone has a chance to 
go to Sommerfest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Surgical Waiting Lists 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
today is for the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 there were 9,300 people on surgical 
waiting lists in Saskatoon. That was too many and the NDP 
made an election promise to cut waiting lists by 30 per cent. 
Well how are they doing with that promise? 
 
Today the waiting list in Saskatoon has ballooned to over 
15,400 patients. That’s an increase of over 65 per cent since 
1999. Mr. Speaker, this is the government’s health care record. 
What happened to the NDP’s election promise to cut waiting 
lists? Why is the waiting list in Saskatoon up by over 65 per 
cent? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think all of the 
people in Saskatchewan are just thanking their lucky stars that 
they didn’t elect the member opposite with a zero increase in 
the budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Or we would be talking about waiting lists 
in the 40s and 50,000 range because of their lack of money. 
 
But I would say about what’s happening in Saskatoon is that in 
January there were four anesthetists that left and that’s set out in 
the information that’s provided. And they have now recruited 
four members, four new anesthetists to come back starting in 
August and so they hope to then work at this list. 
 
What we are looking at is a major problem across the country in 
obtaining the medical personnel and the other health care 
providers to provide services across the country. We are 
working hard on that particular task and we will . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2315 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask all members to respect the 
members who are speaking at the time so that we can hear the 
responses as well as the questions. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this is a very serious issue and I would call on the Premier to 
answer. 
 
Doctors come and go but overall doctors are leaving, nurses are 
leaving, record waiting lists are getting longer. That is the NDP 
record. And it’s a direct result of health reforms brought in by 
this Premier back in 1993. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back then the NDP promised its health reforms 
would make the health care system in Saskatchewan better; 
instead it got worse. The NDP promised shorter waiting lists; 
they got longer. The NDP promised to hire health care workers; 
they have fired health care workers. 
 
And this Premier, Mr. Speaker — the Premier sitting across the 
floor — is responsible. This Premier is the one who brought in 
health care reforms back in 1993. This Premier was the NDP 
campaign manager in 1999. So will this Premier stand up and 
take responsibility for the disaster that his health care system 
has become? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I will repeat that the people 
of Saskatchewan every day thank themselves that the members 
opposite are not running our health system with the kinds of 
proposals that they’ve had to set up this particular system. 
 
What we as the people of Saskatchewan want is that we all 
work together to solve these particular problems. We’re doing 
that by making sure that we resolve the issues around medical 
personnel, around health care providers, in a co-operative way. 
And we’re going to continue to do that. In Saskatoon we now 
have the health district and the College of Medicine and all of 
the various surgical specialties starting to work together to 
address this problem as a group. 
 
What we know is that there are many challenges, and we are 
going to continue to meet those challenges. We’re going to 
meet them with the kinds of resources that people on this side 
of the House will put towards health, not the cutting that will go 
across from the other people on the other side. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would remind 
the Health minister that while his government watches the 
waiting lists get longer and longer, the Saskatchewan Party 
actually made the only submission of a political party to the 
Fyke Commission in the entire province of Saskatchewan. 
We’ve been positive and we’ve been proactive. 
 
The Premier will not even stand up in this House and take 
responsibility for his dismal record. Well, Mr. Speaker, they are 
responsible. The Saskatoon District Medical Association 
president, Dr. Marc Baltzan, says that they are responsible. He 
says doctors have been warning of staff shortages for years but 
the government has ignored them. He says the government has 

been making lame excuses. And I quote: 
 

They are the people who created this. How did the shortage 
get here? You guys made it. God didn’t cut the number of 
seats in the medical school and the nursing college. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this government is responsible and this Premier is 
responsible for the current crisis in our health care system. Will 
the Premier stand up and take responsibility for the health crisis 
that he has created? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosthern 
sits in his chair hollering on a daily basis, which does not 
contribute to the debate in this House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition has heard the 
Minister of Health explain the circumstance in Saskatoon, the 
recruitment of four new anesthetists, to tackle the issue in 
Saskatoon. That’s the approach of this government — when 
there’s a problem, we tackle the issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, he’s touched on a variety of things. He talks 
about the state of health care in Saskatchewan. I ask, Mr. 
Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition, according to the 
Maclean’s magazine, which community in Canada is number 
two of communities that have a medical college. Which 
community in Canada is number two? The community of 
Saskatoon, Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. That’s the result of 
health care in this province. 
 
He wants to criticize that community. He talks about the Fyke 
Commission. Well isn’t this an interesting observation. The 
Leader of the Opposition and the party who we had to drag 
kicking and screaming into the legislative committee to listen to 
the people of Saskatchewan on the Fyke Commission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I repeat, this is a government that believes in 
publicly funded health care, that will stand behind publicly 
funded, publicly administered health care. We’re not varying 
from that and we are going to work with the people of 
Saskatchewan to deliver the best possible health care in all of 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when people finally get health care in Saskatoon, the 
professional health caregivers there do give them good health 
care. The problem is they have to wait months and months and 
months for that health care to be given. The NDP promised . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
promised to cut taxes; they raised taxes. They promised to 
create jobs; they killed jobs. They promised to hire health care 
workers; they fired health care workers. They promised to cut 
wait . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Order. Let’s try it again. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP don’t 



2316 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

like hearing the truth, but waiting lists are now longer than 
they’ve ever been in Saskatchewan. Will the NDP stop making 
these kind of promises before they entirely ruin our province? 
Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Now let’s just keep it this way 
for a little while. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. The NDP 
has been in office for 10 years. They brought in health reforms. 
They promised to cut waiting lists. They have no one else but 
themselves to blame. 
 
When is the Premier going to take responsibility for the 
complete mismanagement of the health care system in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’m happy, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of 
the Opposition wants to talk about 10-year records. They had 10 
years in government; we’ve got $15 billion in debt as a result of 
that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Ten years in government, Mr. Speaker 
— Saskatoon, Saskatchewan rated second-best in all the 
country for health care delivery. 
 
The last two years, Mr. Speaker, of this government — $400 
million more for health care in this province. Mr. Speaker, I ask 
you and I ask the people of Saskatchewan to consider just the 
record of the last two years — $400 million, new dollars, for 
health care in this province as a result of this government. 
 
What was their commitment, Mr. Speaker? What was their 
commitment in the last election? Zero. The rate of inflation, 
they said. Well I’ll tell you, that doesn’t equate $400 million 
and that would not equate to good health care. As the Minister 
of Health has just said, thank goodness they were not re-elected 
. . . or elected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, it will be really good and 
important for the 15,000 people on waiting lists in Saskatoon to 
thank the NDP. It will be really good for the people that are 
waiting in operating rooms and emergency rooms more than the 
15 minutes they promised, to thank the NDP. And it’ll also be 
good for the people who know that we’re 500 nurses short, to 
thank the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of any of these promises that the NDP 
made in the last election, what we have indeed is a problem in 
our health care system and it’s time that these people 
acknowledge that they’ve made a mess of the health care 
system, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while they’re now embarking on a plan to try to 
justify closing 50 more hospitals in Saskatchewan, how does 
the minister think in the world that we’re going to reduce 

surgical waiting lists if he’s going to go ahead and close more 
hospitals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as I indicated earlier, we — 
the ministry of Health, this government — is concerned about 
the circumstance of waiting lists in Saskatoon and we’re doing 
something about it. We’re working with the Saskatoon district 
to recruit anesthetists. Now that member from Melfort knows 
that every province, every state for that matter, is being 
challenged by the provision of finding the appropriate health 
care professionals to deliver. 
 
But I ask you, Mr. Speaker, is it sufficient that they should just 
stand in this House day after day, criticizing without a plan, 
without a suggestion? Now I’ll tell you their plan. We saw it all 
in the last election. What was their plan? To . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The Premier, 25 
seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it won’t take me 
longer than 25 seconds to talk about their plan. What was it? 
Have an independent study and freeze funding. That was it. 
Would that have changed the circumstance to the better? I think 
not, Mr. Speaker, and I look forward to further opportunity to 
talk about improvements in the health care system that are 
happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier talks about a plan. We had a plan presented to the Fyke 
Commission in February of this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we’ve been calling all along 
that there has to be commitments made to the College of 
Medicine. We’ve had a plan that said we had to make a 
commitment to the integrated health sciences project at the 
University of Saskatchewan. And all the time we’ve been doing 
that, the Minister of Health says he’s monitoring the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the minister’s been monitoring things, the 
waiting lists have gone from 9,000 to 15,000, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we can’t afford any more of 
this monitoring. 
 
At plain English, Mr. Speaker, now the health districts in 
Saskatoon and Regina are calling on the rural districts to be able 
to accept patients after they’ve received major therapy. How in 
the world is this government’s plan for closing 50 more 
hospitals going to make that possible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2317 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You see right here, Mr. Speaker, right 
here, Mr. Speaker, in this debate, we see the truth of the tale. He 
stands up and he talks about a government plan to close 50 
hospitals. He knows, he knows — that member of all members 
should know — that what Mr. Fyke has proposed is under 
debate. We’re having the hearings that we had to kick  them, 
dragging and screaming, to be a part of, Mr. Speaker. He knows 
that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to work with the people of 
Saskatchewan. We, the province who pioneered publicly funded 
health care, we are the people who will develop a health care 
system for the 21st century and again lead the nation. There is 
no doubt about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
These are not easy challenges. They are not. And they are not 
served when members opposite, the member from Melfort, the 
Leader of the Opposition, the leader . . . member from 
Cannington, want to turn the debate totally into a partisan 
political debate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are going to build a health care system in this 
province that will serve the people of this province and will 
serve as a model for all of Canada. That, Mr. Speaker, is our 
plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s no wonder we’re reluctant 
to get into a whitewashing process that this government is 
trying to distance themselves from their plan. 
 
In 1993, Mr. Speaker, this Premier was the associate minister of 
Health who was part of the orchestration of closing 50 hospitals 
in this province . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, this Premier has a record and 
the people of this province simply do not trust it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how in the world is this government going to be 
trusted, given the absolute fact that they’ve already closed 50 
hospitals in the name of their health plan? How do they going to 
trust people to not expect that they’re going to close more 
hospitals with even worse waiting times in the future, Mr. 
Speaker? How can these people be trusted? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, there is a political 
movement in this province of long standing that occupies the 
government benches today in coalition with their Liberal 
partners, who have been trusted to preserve publicly funded 
medicare in this province. And that does not change, Mr. 
Speaker. That does not change. 
 
And I’ll tell you. He wants to talk about trust, Mr. Speaker. 
Nobody trusts that group of men and women when it comes to 
health care and their plans to privatize health care, both in this 
province and across the country. We see it in the province. We 
see it on a national basis, Mr. Speaker. We’re not interested in 
that, Mr. Speaker. We’re not interested in that nor are the 

people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have in the course of this past decade taken on 
challenges. We have built the model for home care. We have 
built the model for community involvement. We have built the 
model for holistic health care in this province. 
 
There is much work to do, Mr. Speaker, there’s no doubt about 
that. And it’s work that we see as a challenge that we will take 
on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Health. The surgical waiting list situation in the province is very 
serious and it is affecting people of all ages. 
 
I have received a letter from a constituent whose seven-year-old 
son was born with a congenital birth defect. He has had many, 
many surgeries since birth — several of which were performed 
outside of the province. 
 
Laurie Beaulieu says her son’s latest surgery was done in 
March in Saskatoon where he underwent a temporary 
colostomy. His condition has now improved to the point where 
this surgery could be reversed but the pediatric surgeon’s urgent 
waiting list is four months long. 
 
The surgeon has only been allowed two operating days in July 
and may not get any time in August. Mr. Speaker, how — how 
— does the minister expect waiting lists to shrink when 
operating times are continually reduced? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows that if 
she would raise these issues with me outside the House then I 
would take a look at them. 
 
But what she also knows is that our system in Saskatchewan is 
designed so that those particular surgeries that are required on 
an emergency or urgent basis, according to the medical 
professionals, are done when they need to be done. 
 
We know, for example, that the standard for cancer surgeries is 
less than 21 days and we meet that one consistently because 
those are the kinds of things that the medical professionals 
identify. 
 
So what I would say is that we are going to continue to work 
with the health district, with the medical profession, with the 
health providers, to make sure that all of the people of 
Saskatchewan get the required treatment or surgery that they 
need. 
 
And I would ask that member if she has specific questions that 
she raise them with me in my office. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Laurie 
Beaulieu’s seven-year-old son spent a month in the University 
Hospital in March. She says the nurses are understaffed and 



2318 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

their morale is poor because of their tremendous workload. She 
expresses support for the nurses and the doctors who have cared 
for her son but she is very dismayed at the staff shortages which 
regularly affect patient care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, even a simple procedure such as inserting an IV 
(intravenous) pick line could not be done for her son because 
radiology was short staffed. Her son spent four days in pain 
until the procedure could go ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very difficult for a parent to watch their child 
suffer while waiting for treatment, no matter how serious. But it 
is even harder for those parents when they know the provincial 
government is not making an effort to seriously address the 
problems in the system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister’s plan to deal with the serious 
shortages of health care professionals in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we are doing is we are 
working with the medical professionals. We are working with 
the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association). We 
are working with the LPNs (licensed practical nurse). We’re 
working with all of the people involved in the system to train 
more people where we can, recruit more people where we can. 
And we also provide bursaries for people who go back and 
retrain. 
 
But what we have to do is work with the professionals in this 
field. And that is what we are doing. And what it’s . . . Part of 
the role that we in this legislature can play — and especially the 
members opposite and especially that member who’s raised the 
questions — is to be part of the positive messaging about our 
particular province as a good place to work and live. 
 
And what we hear consistently from the members opposite — 
and I guess it’s day 69 and they’re still having trouble with sour 
fruit of various kinds — and what we know is that they 
continue to put this negative spin on everything that happens 
here. It does not help in recruiting people or training people 
here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, Laurie Beaulieu writes, and I quote: 
 

I had to tell my little boy, who still needs another big 
bladder reconstruction after he’s healed up from this 
colostomy, that he’s going to have to live with this all 
summer because the hospital won’t give out enough 
operating time. 

 
She says: 
 

We have been in Winnipeg Children’s Hospital and Ottawa 
Children’s Hospital and can say that our Saskatchewan 
health care system for kids is in very bad shape. We have 
good people; just not enough of them. I don’t think I can 
express fully in words how hard it is to have a child suffer 
more than he should have to due to cutbacks in health care. 

 

Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to Laurie Beaulieu and 
other parents like her what he intends to do to deal with the 
waiting list situation in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the member opposite knows, 
because we’ve worked together over many years, that when she 
raises issues with me personally I look into them. I do not like 
the fact that she’s raised this issue here in the House. 
 
Now what I would say is, I have a great deal of empathy for 
parents, for patients who have to wait for surgery. And what I 
would like to say to her and to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what I would suggest to that 
member is that these kinds of cases are not the ones that she 
needs to make the front page of the paper about. What she 
needs to do is, she needs to work together with the people 
involved. We know that we have district quality care 
coordinators who will address concerns like this. We have 
people within the Department of Health that work on this; we 
have people within my office that answer questions. 
 
All of those particular kinds of responses are more appropriate 
than the kind of question that’s raised here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Employment Insurance Maternity Benefits 
for Self-Employed Women 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Labour. 
 
Last week during the estimates of the Women’s Secretariat, the 
minister indicated that there was some inclination from the 
provincial government to discuss how women entrepreneurs 
who own and operate their own businesses might access 
benefits similar to those allowed under the Employment 
Insurance such as paid maternity leave. The minister stated that 
this issue would be discussed at the upcoming 
federal-provincial-territorial ministers’ meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister tell us here today if this NDP 
government is taking any proposals of their own, dealing with 
this issue, to the first ministers’ meeting and when this meeting 
is going to take place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Speaking on behalf of the Minister of 
Labour, and certainly the minister responsible for the Women’s 
Secretariat may have more to add on this. 
 
But from the perspective of the Unemployment Insurance 
program and its relationship to maternity leave benefits, it 
would have to be a decision of the federal government to allow 
entrepreneurs, individual entrepreneurs to pay their own share 
in order to be eligible for benefits. And certainly in the past we 
have suggested to them that we think this is something they 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2319 

 

should look at because women entrepreneurs would like to have 
the same benefits as other women in society who want to access 
maternity leave. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I do 
agree with the minister, and in May I attended the 2001 Pan 
Western Conference for Women Entrepreneurs which was held 
in Saskatoon. 
 
And this was a very . . . or this was a very interesting and 
informative conference, and one of the topics that was 
discussed there was this specific issue. Women entrepreneurs 
sometimes face a lot of difficulties when they’re having a 
family and are also trying to maintain their business operations. 
 
There is interest from many women entrepreneurs investing into 
some kind of program that would allow them to draw support if 
they need to take time away from their business. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, is this minister planning to actively lobby the 
federal government for changes to existing employment 
insurance regulations to allow business owners to contribute to 
this program and access benefits? We both agree that it’s very 
important. Is this government going to lobby the federal 
government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, the short answer to that 
question is yes. But on top of that I would like to say I’m 
pleased to hear the member support this, seeing as during our 
recent discussion of extending maternity benefits under the new 
federal law, many of the members opposite spoke against this. 
So I’m pleased to see they’ve had a change of heart and that 
they want to go even further and include women entrepreneurs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, Order. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 209 —The Fire-fighter Protection 
from Liability Act 

 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 209, The 
Fire-fighter Protection from Liability Act, be now read a first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 
(14:30) 
 

Bill No. 211 — The Health Care Commissioner Act 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 211, The Health Care Commissioner Act be now 
introduced and read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 

read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 214 — The Direct Sellers 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 214, The Direct 
Sellers Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a first time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — When shall this Bill be considered a second 
time? 
 
Mr. Wall: — With leave, later this day. 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

Bill No. 225 — The Crown Corporations 
Amendment Act, 2001 (Foreign Investments) 

 
Ms. Harpauer: — I move that Bill No. 225, The Crown 
Corporations Amendment Act, 2001 (Foreign Investments) be 
now read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 226 — The Trade Union Amendment Act, 2001 
(Freedom of Speech in the Workplace) 

 
Mr. Weekes: — I move Bill No. 226, The Trade Union 
Amendment Act, 2001 (Freedom of Speech in the Workplace) 
be read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 227 — The Four-year Taxation Plan Act 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move first 
reading of Bill No. 227, The Four-year Taxation Plan Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
The Deputy Chair: — I ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to 
introduce the officials with me today. First of all on my left is 
Larry Fogg, president of SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance); to my right is Elizabeth Flynn, she’s SGI legal 
counsel. And behind me with the Department of Justice is Laura 
Bourassa. 



2320 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And good afternoon to the 
minister and his officials today. It’s a grand day in 
Saskatchewan no doubt with the amendment to The Highway 
Traffic Act coming in that would provide for the seizure of 
vehicles upon being charged with an offence against children on 
the streets. 
 
Mr. Minister, just for the record, what I would ask you to 
provide today is a description of the proscribed offence under 
the Criminal Code to which this legislation is pertaining when 
we’re talking about what offences a person can be charged with. 
In the amendment Act it’s referred to under part VII.2, 90.11, 
and it states: 
 

(1) If a peace officer has reasonable grounds to believe that 
a motor vehicle is being driven in the course of committing 
a proscribed offence, the peace officer shall: 
 
(a) seize the motor vehicle; (etc., etc.) 

 
So I would just for the record like you to outline what the 
proscribed offences are under section 211, 212, and 213 of the 
Criminal Code of Canada. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Chair, I want to thank the member 
for her patience. She will appreciate that I don’t have a legal 
background. Let me try and summarize as best I can the 
information that I have been provided with. 
 
First of all, under 211 the issue is the transporting of an 
individual to a common bawdy house. Under 212 — there are 
several sections here — there is procuring prostitutes; and then 
secondly, under a subsection with respect to child prostitutes, 
212(2.1), there is the aggravated offence of living off the avails 
of a person under the age of 18; 212(4), there is the issue of 
obtaining or communicating with an individual under the age of 
18 for the purpose of securing sexual services. And under 
section 213, the offence is with respect to the communication 
— communicating, I should say — for the purpose of securing 
the services of a prostitute. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And certainly those very 
facts that you bring forward have been discussed prior to this 
time by the committee that was responsible to bring forward 
these recommendations. However, I did want to make sure it 
was on public record because as the amendment stands right 
here, there hasn’t been an explanation of those sections of the 
Criminal Code. And I just wanted to have it on public record. 
So thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to just refer you to The Highway 
Traffic Act where you’re making amendments as described 
under Part VII.3, referring to the drinking and driving section. 
You talk about section 119 being amended by repealing clause 
(d) and then substituting, of course, a clause in here that would 
refer to the seizure of vehicles and any acts that would result 
because of the seizure of vehicles. 
 
So I’m wondering what you did repeal in that existing Highway 
Traffic Act. You repealed clause (d). What was contained 
within that clause prior to it being repealed? 

The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — With leave, Mr. Chair, to introduce a 
guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
(14:45) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it’s my pleasure to see in the 
Speaker’s gallery a visitor from the city of Saskatoon, the 
university of Saskatoon, who has also done work for the 
Department of Education, Dr. John Conway. I want to be very 
clear, as John always is, this is the Saskatoon Dr. John Conway 
and is well known to myself and our family; his spouse, Dr. 
Linda McMullan, another good friend of our family. And I’ve 
very much appreciated John’s good counsel in the past and look 
forward to his good counsel in future. 
 
I’d ask all members in the Chamber and committee this 
afternoon to welcome John Conway to the Chamber. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2001 

(continued) 
 

Clause 1 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. In response to 
the member’s question, we have . . . what we’ve done really is 
developed, I guess, what we would describe as a cleaner 
process. We’ve repealed the entire section and replaced it with 
section VII.1 that deals with the impoundment of vehicles. 
 
But in terms of policy change, there is no policy change at all. 
There’s just a cleaner way to deal with the whole section, and 
so there isn’t . . . be clear there’s no change in policy 
specifically. 
 
I’m advised as well that the one section that was added deals 
with the requiring . . . the payment of fees which I suspect you 
will have noticed. But that doesn’t change in any way the policy 
at all. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, once again 
for the record, could you clarify under what circumstances 
would there be a licence suspension in addition to a seizure of a 
vehicle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The issue of licence suspension, only 
where there’s a conviction under one of the sections that I listed 
above for an offence under section 211, 212, or 213. Also a 
licence can be suspended where an individual, who has agreed 
to attend a designated educational program in the prescribed 
time, does not complete the course within that prescribed time. 
That person’s licence can also be suspended. 
 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2321 

 

Ms. Julé: — So I would take it then, again for the clarification 
in respect to the public who are listening to this, that licence 
suspension would take place only upon conviction. Or would it 
be upon charging? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It would be only on conviction, for 
clarification. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I recognize very clearly, as I’m sure do all members of this 
Assembly, that in fact it is wonderful to have pieces of 
legislation put forward that really do enhance the protection of 
people in our society, particularly our children in this case. 
 
But to have a law passed and given third reading doesn’t 
necessarily mean that it’s law until it’s proclaimed. And I know 
that in looking at this piece of legislation, there is a little 
ambiguity as to when this particular piece of legislation will be 
proclaimed. 
 
I’m wondering whether or not you could clarify for me, for 
instance, under the section where it says “Coming into force,” 
here is what it reads right now, “Subject to subsections (2) and 
(3), this Act comes into force on proclamation.” There is no 
date here in reference to date of proclamation, but it does say, 
 

Section 8 of this Act comes into force on the day on which 
section 1 of The Commercial Liens Act comes into force. 

 
So this is really not giving very much information, and I would 
like to know exactly how long your government has determined 
that it is going to take before all of these other Acts are cleared 
up, I guess, and making sure that every other Act that comes 
into force is into force. And I want to know, I guess in quite 
plain language right now, when you can see the proclamation of 
this particular piece of legislation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The short answer to your question, to 
the hon. member, is first of all, as soon as is practically 
possible. I can’t give you a categoric answer. But in reference to 
your concerns with respect to the other Acts of reference in this 
proposed legislation to those amendments, those amendments to 
the other Acts will in no way delay or in any way affect when 
this legislation will be proclaimed. 
 
I can repeat that if you want. The only reason there’s reference 
to those other Acts is because they will have . . . there will be 
consequential amendments to those Acts as a result of the 
changes that we’re proposing here. But there will be absolutely 
no delay as a result of having to amend those . . . make those 
consequential amendments. And we’ll move this ahead as soon 
as we practically can. 
 
There will be things such as the development of different forms 
and stuff like that that has to happen, first of all. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes, I’m having a hard time accepting that as 
good reasoning, in all due respect, Mr. Minister, because 
consequential amendments, to my understanding, have to come 
before the House. Those consequential amendments would have 
to be in fact before the House to be made. And if that is the way 
it goes, and that’s my understanding, is it would have to be 
before the House in the next session in order for them to be 

made. So that would mean then that there would be a delay in 
proclaiming this Act. 
 
You have just stated, sort of a bit contrary to what I’m saying, 
that there is no reason this Act would not be proclaimed 
because of those consequential amendments. But you’ve also 
reversed that view and said the opposite also. So I’m really 
quite at a loss now as to understand exactly what the procedure 
is here. Could you explain it for me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m advised after much discussion — 
we wanted to be absolutely certain of this — that any changes 
to ensure that this legislation goes ahead, even though there is 
reference to other pieces of legislation, this does not have to 
come back before the legislature in order for this new 
legislation to be proclaimed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, in all of the discussion that must 
have taken place between your officials and yourself, and I’m 
sure the Co-Chair of our special committee regarding this Act, 
I’m sure there must have been some discussion about the 
necessity to proclaim this Act as soon as possible so it can 
become effective law. 
 
It’s just a piece of paper and it isn’t . . . it’s not going to affect 
the help that we want out there to deter offenders unless it is 
law. So I hope you can understand my concern about ensuring 
that this Act is made into . . . proclaimed in law so that it can be 
acted upon as soon as possible. 
 
Now I would like if you could possibly give me an idea of the 
discussions that you have had surrounding this Act pertaining to 
when this could be proclaimed into law. Can you give me a 
ballpark figure? Will it be one month? Six months? Seven 
months? A year? I really want to know exactly when in all 
likelihood this can be proclaimed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again the short answer is just simply 
that we’ll try and do this as soon as possible, and we obviously 
would not have introduced this legislation if we didn’t want it to 
move forward. 
 
There will be issues that I referred to earlier, the development of 
forms. We will need to determine where we can impound 
vehicles. 
 
(15:00) 
 
There will be issues that I referred to earlier, the development of 
forms. We will need to determine where we can impound 
vehicles. There will be implementation issues with the police. 
We will need to inform justices of the peace and work with 
justices of the peace around this new legislation. 
 
There will be a whole host of things that we have to work 
through. But I give you and I give the public of Saskatchewan 
the assurance that we will proclaim this as soon as we possibly 
can. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well I thank you for that reassurance and I’ll hold 
your feet to the fire on it. 
 
It’s important to the people of Saskatchewan, to the children of 



2322 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan, and to justice in Saskatchewan. And it’s also 
very important to all of the committee members who feel an 
obligation to ensure that as many recommendations as possible 
are enacted into legislation or that there is policy set for those 
recommendations to be able to bring the effect about in the 
province that we want to, to help our children. 
 
In regards to that, Mr. Minister, this specific Act is very, very 
important. It is but one piece though of the whole 
comprehensive package that was put forward by the committee. 
And it’s not your responsibility as minister to, you know, know 
and understand the comprehensive package at this time. But I 
will tell you that it is very, very important that the 
recommendations that came through our committee that pertain 
to new offences that were created — actually in 
recommendation, new offences to charge johns with — there is 
a link between that and the confiscation of vehicles. 
 
So it has to be easier for police to gather evidence, easier than it 
has been, and we have had some recommendations to allow that 
to happen. So those kind of things need to be in play and should 
have been I guess or it would have been wonderful if they could 
have been concurrently with this particular piece of legislation 
on the seizure of vehicles. 
 
So I would like to just ensure that, as you’re speaking with your 
cabinet and with your government, you bring that to mind every 
cabinet meeting so that those particular recommendations on 
allowing police to gather evidence more effectively and 
efficiently and easier would be considered to be brought into 
another legislative package possibly that could address more 
comprehensively what needs to be done. Okay? 
 
So thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I want to assure the member that if at 
any cabinet meeting I am remiss in bringing forward those 
concerns, I know that there are a number of other cabinet 
colleagues who will surely do that on my behalf. 
 
And again I give you the assurance that there is the commitment 
on government’s side, and I know there is from you as well, to 
move this ahead as quickly as we possibly can. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I thank your 
officials for coming in today. I must say it’s been a pleasure to 
have had the opportunity to have some discussion with Laura 
Bourassa in the past. And I thank you very much for your 
knowledge and your wisdom and certainly your efforts in 
addressing this issue with this piece of legislation. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 11 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I will move that 
we report the Bill without amendment. And again I want to take 
the opportunity to thank the hon. member for the questions and 
for her participation in helping to develop this and certainly all 
of the members of the committee as well on our side of the 
House who were also very instrumental in helping develop this. 

So thank you very much. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Métis Act 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I recognize the minister and ask her to 
introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I would 
like to introduce my officials. I have with me today, Mr. Brent 
Cotter, deputy minister of Intergovernmental and Aboriginal 
Affairs; Mr. Donovan Young, acting assistant deputy minister 
of Aboriginal Affairs; and Mr. Tony Koschinsky from the 
Justice department. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. And I 
welcome the minister and her officials. 
 
Madam Minister, the first question that I have in regards to this 
Act and just in regards to your, your views, I’m wanting to 
know whether you consider the Métis of Saskatchewan a nation 
the Métis of Saskatchewan, are the Métis a nation of people? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to thank the member from 
Humboldt for the question. And I would point out that Métis 
residents of Saskatchewan do consider themselves to be a 
nation. They are, of course, one group within the fabric of 
Canada and as such do consider themselves to be a nation. 
 
I would point out that a political science definition of nation 
would be a group that has a common identity, common culture, 
common history. And so in that sense, of course, yes I would 
say the Métis are a nation. 
 
But I will also add that we the government do not consider the 
Métis people of Saskatchewan to be a sovereign nation nor do I 
believe do the Métis people of Saskatchewan consider 
themselves to be a sovereign nation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Madam Minister. Madam 
Minister, I’d like some clarification regarding the first few 
sections of the Bill that’s before the House. Is it your belief that 
the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan represents the majority of 
Saskatchewan Métis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would point out to the member that, quite 
frankly, that question is not for us as a government to say and 
the Bill does not speak to that, nor should it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well, Madam Minister, this Bill speaks of a 
number of things that are going to be under the purview of a 
secretariat that will be providing programs and policies, etc., for 
the Métis of Saskatchewan, so it’s important that you 
understand just who that group of people are. After all, you’re 
the minister that has brought forward this Bill on behalf of . . . 
who? I guess that’s what I’m asking. 
 
I’m wondering how you might have arrived, you know, at the 
fact that there are 30,000 Métis people in the province — 
perhaps as many as 70,000, that’s what I have been told. Yet 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2323 

 

only 4,000 voted in the last Métis election. 
 
But the Bill is not clear as to who the Métis people are. Are they 
as defined by the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan constitution? Is 
that who the Métis people that you refer to in this Bill are? Are 
they the people defined by the Métis Nation’s constitution? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise the member that we do not 
define who the Métis are. That’s a socio-political question. 
That’s not within the scope of this Bill. 
 
I would also point out to the member that the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan Secretariat exists already under The Non-profit 
Corporations Act. What this Bill will be doing is continuing that 
existing body, only now when we pass this Bill, it will have its 
own stand-alone legislation and it will be out from under the not 
for profit corporations Act. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, in the last year and farther 
beyond that there has been a number of very hurt Métis people 
in this province because of the elections and the way the 
elections were being handled. 
 
What is happening is that there are locals that are being 
basically disenfranchised. They’re suspending individual rights 
of Métis people. All of these things that are happening. 
 
So when we talk about a Bill that is coming before the House 
representing Métis people, it’s important that we understand 
who it is that this Bill is representing. So I ask you, I’m 
wondering exactly: does the Act extend to all Métis of the 
province or just members of the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan? 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well, Madam Member, I want to point out 
to you what this Bill does. 
 
This Bill recognizes and celebrates the contributions of Métis 
people to the development and prosperity of our province and 
our country. This Bill is about the Métis and about good 
corporate Métis governance. The Bill commits the province to 
work out, in mutually satisfactory ways, issues of importance to 
Métis people. And the Bill, as I believe you do know, creates a 
corporate entity to serve as the administrative arm of the Métis 
Nation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the Bill is not about the last Métis election. And this Bill 
does not interfere with Métis electoral processes, either by 
endorsing or qualifying any particular electoral result. This Bill 
is not about Métis elections, past or present. 
 
And I would finally say, this Bill does nothing to entrench the 
current Métis MNS (Métis Nation of Saskatchewan) political 
leadership. That is a matter for Métis people to decide on their 
own through their own electoral process. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. I would welcome the guests 
in the gallery, but I ask the guests not to participate in the 
debate in any manner, shape, or form. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, this Bill has got implications for 
the Métis people of Saskatchewan who believe at this time that 

there are programs and policies that they have had a part in 
developing. This Act extends the authority to the secretariat, not 
only for administration but for programs and policies and their 
development. So that in turn will affect the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan, the Métis people of Saskatchewan, whether 
they’re disenfranchised or not. 
 
They need to have some understanding of just what kind of 
relationship they are going to have in order to be able to access 
the programs and policies that they feel they should have and 
whereby, prior to this Act, they were able to have a voice in. 
There’s no guarantee for them that they have a voice any more. 
And that is one of the issues that a number of the Métis people 
have brought to me. And I simply put it to you on their behalf. 
 
Madam Minister, if the Act applies equally to all Métis in the 
province — I’m not too sure if you feel that it does or it doesn’t, 
but I think that that’s something that you should have known or 
established — if the Act applies equally to all Métis in the 
province, who consulted the Métis in Saskatchewan that are not 
affiliated with the MNS? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — If I understand the member opposite 
correctly, she’s asking two questions. First of all, she’s asking 
whether or not The Métis Act grants additional powers to the 
MNS Secretariat Inc. with respect to the administration of 
policies and programs. And secondly she’s asking what the 
consultation process was with respect to The Métis Act. I’d like 
to answer both those questions. 
 
First of all, with respect to the question of whether or not The 
Métis Act grants additional powers to the MNS Secretariat Inc., 
which certainly is a charge that I have heard and I have heard 
people say that they believe that this creates a virtual 
dictatorship. I want to say to you, Madam Member, and I 
believe you know this, if you would read the Bill with a good 
mind and using good faith, you would see that absolutely not. 
 
The Métis Act does not grant additional powers to the MNS 
Secretariat Inc. The MNS Secretariat Inc. under this legislation 
will not have expanded powers with respect to the 
administration of MNS policies and programs. 
 
Article 7(11) and 7(12) of the MNS constitution permit the 
incorporation of Métis locals and also permit locals to seek the 
necessary finances and resources to carry out their programs, 
services, and objectives. The Métis Act does not undermine the 
ability or the freedom of locals to incorporate, to seek financial 
assistance, or to administer their own programs and services. So 
it is important, Madam Member, to distinguish between MNS 
Secretariat programs and programs of locals. 
 
Now with respect to your question about consultation, it’s 
important to keep in mind that there have been two streams of 
consultation. 
 
First of all, as you may know, this is a long-standing election 
promise by the New Democratic Party. I believe the promise 
was first made some 10 years ago, to introduce a Métis Act. 
And I’m very pleased now that our coalition government, NDP 
and Liberal, are introducing and will be passing this Act. 
 
So we’ve had two streams of consultation, one directly 



2324 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

involving the government and one led by the MNS. With 
respect to the government’s consultation, staff in 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs visited every MNS 
region twice in 1997 on the former proposed Bill, although the 
government did decide in the end at the request of the MNS not 
to proceed. 
 
This Bill that is before us today — Bill 42 — has not changed 
significantly since 1997. In fact what we did hear in the 
consultations was that the Act should extend a little further and 
address issues of governance, harvesting issues, and land issues, 
which the former Act did not address but the current Act does. 
 
The government has not had direct consultations with Métis 
people on the Act in this past year, but the MNS has had 
significant formal consultations with its membership in the year 
2000, I’m advised. In September there was a leaders’ forum 
attended by approximately 100 people involving all elected 
leaders and heads of Métis institutions, and the Act was 
unanimously passed there. One of my staff members who was 
here in the House today with me was personally there 
witnessing this. 
 
As well, in the fall of last year there was a Métis Nation 
legislative assembly at which the Act was passed by about 90 
per cent of the delegates, and there were roughly 250 people in 
attendance. Former minister, the former minister responsible for 
this portfolio, the member for North Battleford; Mr. Ernie 
Lawton, a now retired official in Intergovernmental and 
Aboriginal Affairs; and Giselle Marcotte, an official with IGAA 
(Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs) were present at that 
assembly. 
 
Two hundred and fifty people as I say were there; 98 per cent of 
the delegates passed it. Indeed some of the people who oppose 
the legislation today were the ones who spoke in favour and 
made motions passing the endorsement for this Act. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, in 
reference to the first part of your comments to me just now, it is 
my understanding that under the Métis constitution that 
presently exists, that the secretariat has administrative authority 
but they do not have authority for programs and policies. Under 
this existing Act that is before the House today, it will grant 
further powers to the secretariat than is stated under . . . in the 
Métis constitution. 
 
So that is just something that I wanted to bring to your attention 
because it has been brought to my attention by grassroots Métis 
people that have spoken to me about that concern of theirs. 
 
Madam Minister, the other thing I’d like to mention to you in 
reference to your comments about having the majority of Métis 
people at their Assembly have unanimous support of this Bill. It 
was also brought to my attention that at the Assembly there 
wasn’t a vote that took place. So they’re concerned about that 
because they feel if there had been an opportunity for a vote to 
take place, that it may have shown that there are a number of 
Métis people have some concerns about specific parts of this 
Act. 
 
So I will just make those comments and I see that you’re 
looking through some papers there, so I’ll give you a moment to 

do your research and be waiting for your comments. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well I suppose we can go back and 
reconstruct history, but I can only go by what I am advised by 
my officials, and I believe that they are people of good faith, 
and I do not believe that they are going to give me deliberately 
erroneous information. 
 
My officials were present at that meeting. The former minister 
of the Crown was present at that meeting. And they all say that 
there was a vote taken and that approximately 98 per cent of the 
delegates approved this Act. 
 
Now with respect to your question about this Act extending 
powers to the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan Secretariat Inc., 
extending powers beyond what is currently in the Métis 
constitution, I think what we’re into is a debate about how 
many angels are dancing on the head of a pin, and perhaps 
duelling lawyers. 
 
But quite frankly, I know that article 14(1) of the Métis 
constitution says: 
 

A secretariat shall be retained under The Non-profit 
Corporations Act for the sole purpose of carrying out the 
administrative duties of the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan. 

 
And the Act that we have says, section 5(2): 
 

The corporation is the administrative body by which the 
policies and programs of the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan 
may be carried out and administered. 
 

I would point out to you, Madam Member, that we currently 
have both a tripartite process with the federal government and 
the MNS, and a bilateral process with the provincial 
government and the MNS. I would call that a process or a 
program. They’re administering it right now, the MNS 
secretariat. So nothing is changing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — If nothing is changing, Madam Minister, what is 
the need for a law? What part of this law is necessary to be a 
law? 
 
Certainly I agree, and I honour and respect the fact that Métis 
people of Saskatchewan need to have discussions to ensure that 
there is possibly some work towards land use and so on but, 
Madam Minister . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. A couple of points. There’s usually 
quite a bit of . . .Order, please order. A couple of points. 
 
The first point. I would advise all of the people that are in the 
gallery that they’re observers only; they’re not to participate in 
the debate either, clapping either. 
 
Second point; there’s generally a great deal of latitude in the 
conversation back and forth, but I would ask that the hon. 
minister and the hon. member please direct their comments to 
the Chair. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, to 
the minister. Regarding the part of section 3(1) that says to: 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2325 

 

. . . work together through a bilateral process to address 
issues that are important to the Métis people . . . 

 
Now rather than having legislation, which is a law to discuss 
issues with the Métis people, Madam Minister, is very, very 
important, and I agree with that fully. But why do we need to 
have a piece of legislation in order to do discussions? Wouldn’t 
it be much more sensible or wouldn’t it be better to have a 
memorandum of understanding? That would have been just as 
effective in stating this — in fact more effective rather than 
using statements that are rather vague and open to 
interpretation. I mean a law is a law for a reason. 
 
If this, for instance, your bilateral process that you refer to here 
is for discussion, why would you need a law? Why would it 
have to be enshrined in law? It just doesn’t make . . . it’s very 
unclear to me as to why this is necessary. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would say, Mr. Chair, that the member 
opposite has asked several questions and I want to attempt to 
answer them. 
 
I do believe that sections 3(1) and 3(2) of The Métis Act 
referring to a bilateral process between the province and the 
MNS to address issues that are important to Métis people 
including: capacity building, land, harvesting, and governance. 
Very clearly these sections show the seriousness of the province 
to deal with these issues. And we are by virtue of passing this 
legislation showing that the honour of the Crown is behind our 
commitment to address these issues seriously. And I guess I 
would question why the member opposite is questioning the 
honour of the Crown. 
 
Now with respect to the vision or why would we indeed be 
bothered passing a Bill. I noted yesterday in the House that one 
of the members did challenge me to indicate what my vision of 
what this Act is and what it is going to do for the Métis people 
of Saskatchewan. I’ve also consulted extensively with many 
grassroots Métis people and they have asked me the same 
question. I think it’s a perfectly legitimate question and one that 
I welcome. 
 
And I would say, Mr. Chair, that for a very long time in our 
province, perhaps from the time of European settlement, there 
have been two solitudes in this province — Aboriginal and 
non-Aboriginal. And we all agree that such a divide, such a 
division in our society is not healthy. At the same time we, on 
this side of the House, have no interest in a simulationist 
approaches to Aboriginal people. Those are approaches that 
would compromise or erode their history, their culture, and their 
identity. 
 
Our vision, Mr. Chair, is to enable Aboriginal people to have 
the opportunity to participate fully in the social and economic 
life of Saskatchewan, but in ways that enable Aboriginal people 
to preserve, strengthen, and celebrate their cultural values and 
their cultural identities. 
 
The Métis, Mr. Chair, are a significant part of this cultural 
community. And we have a wide variety of strategies to achieve 
this full participation objective. We have for instance a 13 

government department-wide Métis and off-reserve First Nation 
strategy, Métis specific initiatives in our Aboriginal economic 
development strategy, our northern strategy, our Aboriginal 
employment development strategy, and so on and so on. 
 
Now on the legislative front, The Métis Act before us today will 
assist in this vision. Meaningful recognition of the Métis 
people, their history, their culture, their identity, is long 
overdue. This Bill celebrates their culture, creates a 
Métis-specific entity to conduct administrative affairs, and at 
the same time the Bill signals commitments to work with Métis 
people on issues of concern to them. This will advance Métis 
people’s opportunities to participate in the social and economic 
life of the province. 
 
I will say, Mr. Chair, in closing that The Métis Act will not, on 
its own, change history, but it is our collective way of 
celebrating Métis people as an important component of our 
society and our desire to see Métis people be full participants in 
this society. 
 
Ms. Julé: — That is a very good political speech, there’s no 
doubt about it. You’ve done very well with that but I think it’s 
really important that we address . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
exactly, we need to be very, very relevant to what questions 
we’re asking specifically and we’d like to have some specific 
answers. 
 
So that would, I think, help Métis people in this province, all 
Métis people, much more than giving a long dissertation. 
 
Madam Minister, when we talk about in the Bill there is the 
phrase, working together through a bilateral process, and 
you’ve gone into some of that. But the language of the 
preamble is misleading, Madam Minister, as it claims that this 
Act does not affect the government’s position that Canada has 
legislative authority for the Métis pursuant to section 91(24) of 
the Constitution Act. It’s misleading, Madam Minister, because 
in effect you are giving force to law, through this law, to a 
commitment to address . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . what’s 
the matter? 
 
In effect you are giving force of law to a commitment to 
address issues as fundamental as land and governance. This is 
an issue, a nation-to-nation issue, between the federal 
government and the Métis people. 
 
The law that you have before the House today in effect gives 
the provincial government . . . or it’s presuming that the 
provincial government has jurisdiction over things like land and 
government, when clearly we know it does not. 
 
Obviously the legislation can’t alter the Constitution. We 
recognize that also and I think you should have. But this Bill 
certainly has constitutional meaning, not only for the Métis but 
also for the province itself. 
 
Where is Canada in all of this, Madam Minister? Certainly the 
Métis people want the very best for themselves and they 
recognize that their agreement is with the country of Canada, 
with the Crown. So I ask you, are you honouring the Crown by 
having consent to a Bill that is basically under the jurisdiction 
of the federal Crown? 



2326 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

Where is Canada in all of this? Since the federal government 
has a very distinct authority regarding the Métis people, why 
would you want to commit to a bilateral process as opposed to a 
trilateral process to ensure that the federal government is in on 
this so finally land, hunting, fishing, trapping issues, can be 
cleared up and granted to the Métis people? 
 
We need to make sure that that is done, and without the federal 
government at the table it doesn’t matter if you talk till you’re 
blue in the face. It’s not going to grant any . . . anything to the 
Métis people because the federal government have authority in 
this area. They have an agreement with the Métis people. It is 
not the province that has an agreement with the Métis people in 
respect to land and governance. 
 
So, Madam Minister, could you please comment on this and 
give me your rationale as to why Canada was not sitting down 
and formulating this Act with the Métis people, and possibly 
with the province, encouraging things. That would have been 
great. 
 
But the federal government clearly needs to be in on this before 
anything is going to be granted to the Métis people. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I thank the member opposite for her series 
of questions. I think there were a couple of questions in her 
statements and so, with the indulgence of the House, I will take 
some time to answer them. 
 
I would first of all like to point out she talked extensively about 
this Act dealing with land and governance. Now the members 
opposite have been very fond of pointing to their supposed land 
of milk and honey being the province to the west of us, Alberta, 
and saying that if only we were more like Alberta, everything 
would be wonderful. 
 
Well quite frankly, I have with me today the Metis Settlements 
Act, 1990 of the province of Alberta and it is extremely thick. 
And what this Act does, in summary — in summary, Mr. Chair 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. I’m having difficulty hearing the 
minister, so would the House please come to order. If there’s 
other conversations that want to occur, please take them behind 
the bar. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. This 
130-page Act as compared to the 6-page Act that the member 
opposite is so concerned about today, the 130-page Metis 
Settlements Act of Alberta establishes a series of tracts of lands 
that are historic Métis settlements and creates the equivalent of 
local governments for these settlements — creates these local 
governments not under the municipalities Act, but under the 
Metis Settlements Act. 
 
So in essence, in Alberta, what they have done is created Métis 
local government with a land base. That legislation, that Alberta 
legislation, has not been struck down as unconstitutional. 
 
Now what are we doing? Under what authority are we 
legislating The Métis Act? I want to say that we are exercising 
provincial authority pursuant to section 92(13) of the 
Constitution Act, 1867 of Canada, dealing with property and 

civil rights, and we are creating a corporation to enable Métis 
people to carry on business in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now dealing specifically with the constitutional question that 
the member raises, it is not possible to inherit or diminish a 
province’s constitutional jurisdiction as a result of provincial 
legislation such as The Métis Act. 
 
In other words, provincial legislation cannot alter 
federal-provincial division of powers. And if we are 
overstepping our bounds, as the member opposite seems to be 
suggesting, comparable legislation in Alberta that goes a lot 
further than this six-page Métis Act would surely be more 
problematic, and for the last 11 years this has not proven to be 
the case there. 
 
The legal explanation, in summary, Mr. Chair, is that we are not 
legislating in relation to Métis people any more than by 
providing services to Métis people under, for example, the 
Aboriginal court work program, we are violating the 
constitution. 
 
Now the member opposite has also asked me about the bilateral 
process between the province and the Métis Nation, and why 
we are establishing a bilateral process and not a tripartite 
process which would involve Canada. 
 
I have to tell the member opposite that the province is currently 
involved — and I believe she knows this — the province is 
currently involved in both a bilateral and a tripartite process 
with the MNS. The province cannot write things into legislation 
that would bind the federal government to act in relation to 
Métis people. 
 
Nevertheless on certain key issues such as capacity building and 
governance, we intend to continue our practice of involving the 
federal government at our tripartite table, that is the province, 
the federal government, and the MNS. 
 
We intend to use the existing bilateral process to address those 
issues within provincial authority and jurisdiction, and then to 
shift the appropriate issues to the tripartite table for negotiation. 
 
Mr. Chair, I expect that the province and the MNS will develop 
a joint strategy that will engage the federal government on 
significant issues relating to land and to governance. I need also 
to remind the member opposite that The Métis Act is about 
practical, non-rights-based initiatives that the province will 
discuss with the MNS, and as I had already said during second 
reading of this Bill. 
 
Furthermore, with respect to certain issues, we do have a 
constitutional obligation to respect the existing Aboriginal 
rights of Métis people provided for in section 35 of the 
constitution — in the case of harvesting, for example — 
regardless of the involvement of the federal government. And 
surely the member opposite is not suggesting that if the federal 
government is not at the table that we can ignore our own 
constitutional commitments to Métis people. Thank you, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, in 
your speech just a moment ago you mentioned that the Bill is 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2327 

 

going to address those areas where the province does have 
responsibility for Métis people. So clearly my understanding is 
that yes, you can care about land and governance; you can 
discuss with the Métis people; you can encourage the federal 
government to deal with issues pertaining to land, hunting, 
fishing, trapping, governance; but clearly the provincial 
government does not have the jurisdictional authority in order 
to effect changes that would benefit the Métis people in that 
way. 
 
So, Madam Minister, what in fact are the things that the 
provincial government does do in relationship with the Métis 
people that is for their advancement and their benefit? What is 
it, then — if you can explain to myself and the House just what 
it is. What is the relationship — legislative relationship — with 
the Métis people of this province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Through the Chair, I would advise the 
member opposite that her concerns are clearly unfounded as has 
been more than amply demonstrated over the last 11 years by 
the unchallenged passage of the Metis Settlement Act of 
Alberta. 
 
And we are dealing clearly — very clearly — with property and 
civil rights and those are well within our jurisdiction. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Could you explain to me further just what you 
mean by property, Madam Minister? If it’s land that the Métis 
people have a right to — as they feel they have a right to, I can 
understand that — but that is clearly the jurisdiction of the 
federal government. What properties are you referring to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise the member opposite that 
property is a large category, obviously, and we’ve had many 
debates in this House about property. I would refer the member 
opposite to some of the debates that occurred in this legislature 
regarding Bill C-68. 
 
Property is a large category. It includes land and land is clearly 
within the jurisdiction of the province to address. We can 
address it with any citizens of this province, including Métis. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Yes, Madam Minister, you can address it; you can 
discuss it. But you do not as a provincial government have the 
jurisdictional or legislative authority to really do anything about 
it. 
 
So in section 32, Madam Minister — I would refer you to that 
section — will the memorandum of understanding that you 
refer to be legally binding? Will this legislation effectively give 
you, as the minister, the power to enforce agreements relating to 
issues as fundamental as land and governance as discussed and 
agreed upon through a bilateral process — the process that 
seeks to exclude the federal government? 
 
So again, I do have three or four questions, one after the other 
there, Madam Minister, and I apologize for that. Maybe what I 
will do is just ask you to answer the first one in reference to 
section 32: will the memorandum of understanding that you 
refer to in that section be legally binding? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would thank the member opposite for that 
question and for the other question too. And I just want to 

advise her that clearly this province, which will be 100 years 
old in 2005, was given the authority to deal with land by the 
Government of Canada under the NRTA, the Natural Resources 
Transfer Act. 
 
We deal right now with pasture land, parkland, farmland — I 
could go on and on, on that, with respect — and also obviously 
another area clearly within my portfolio, treaty land entitlement. 
 
Now with respect to your question about will the MOU, the 
memorandum of understanding, be legally binding — the 
answer is no. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, this is news to me. I always 
thought treaty land entitlement certainly involved land within 
Saskatchewan but that the negotiations for that were clearly 
between First Nations people and the federal government. I 
really never realized that what you’ve just said was the case in 
Saskatchewan, where the provincial government actually gets 
right into the deliberations and the discussions of handing land, 
or determining, determining . . . you know, or having the 
authority to deal with land entitlements. I honestly did not even 
know that that happened. 
 
So this is a day for me that is very, very different than any other 
day I’ve had, Madam Minister, because if what you’re saying is 
true, all the information that I’ve had brought to me about treaty 
land entitlements in the past from a number of legal sources as 
well as a number of First Nations people, that is all untrue I 
guess at this time based on what you were saying. 
 
So I don’t know what to say. I’m quite at awe of all of this, 
Madam Minister. Would you like to make a comment? It’s 
quite interesting. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Chair, I just have to wonder where the 
member opposite has been for the last nine years. We signed the 
Treaty Land Entitlement Framework Agreement in 1992. The 
province has been involved in TLE (treaty land entitlement) 
discussions and negotiations since 1992. Indeed, we will be 
formalizing a TLE agreement tomorrow with the Flying Dust 
First Nation. 
 
I just . . . I’m frankly dumbfounded that the member opposite 
was so unaware that she did not realize that the province has 
been involved in the TLE Framework Agreement all these 
many years. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, certainly you have been 
involved, and I know that there’s treaty land entitlement 
agreements that include the provincial government in 
discussion. You had some discussion, involvement in that way, 
Madam Minister. Certainly you have. 
 
Madam Minister, we could go on forever. I think we both 
understand that it is under the purview of the federal 
government and the First Nations of Saskatchewan to determine 
treaty land entitlements — whether or not there’s going to be 
land, whether or not there’s going to be money associated with 
this and so on. 
 
So if the province has a determination to make in as far as 
coming to that agreement, my information up till this point is 



2328 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

that it has been simply to discuss things and to talk, but 
certainly not having any authority on determining the lands and 
so on, and how much of the land the First Nations people would 
be entitled to. 
 
So anyway, Madam Minister, I have a couple more questions 
regarding the corporate provisions of the Bill, specifically Part 
IV. There is some concerns that this section has far less 
protection for the members of the corporation than what is 
contained in The Non-profit Corporations Act and similar 
legislation. 
 
Section 8 of this Bill says bylaws can be made for governance 
and administration of the corporation, yet the section doesn’t 
say who can make those bylaws. 
 
By comparison, section 90 of The Non-profit Corporations Act 
provides that any amendments to a bylaw must be submitted to 
the members at the next meeting of members, and that the 
members may reject the change by ordinary resolution. 
 
With all the controversy surrounding the recent Métis elections, 
Madam Minister, I find this part of the Bill does not address 
some very crucial issues. Are we to assume that the directors, as 
indicated in the Bill, have the authority to make bylaws as they 
see fit? In other words, could they change the number of 
directors, how they are elected, what matters go to the 
membership, who can vote at meetings and so on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’m going to try to answer the question and 
if I’m leaving out anything I’m sure that the member opposite 
will remind me. 
 
First of all, she is glossing over the Treaty Land Entitlement 
Framework Agreement. So I do want to point out to members 
of this House — and again quite frankly I’m stunned to realize 
that this was not something the member opposite, as the critic 
for Aboriginal Affairs, was aware of — but she should now 
know very clearly that the province sells and transfers land to 
First Nations almost every week or indeed every month. 
 
Millions of dollars each year are set aside for our commitments 
and our responsibilities under the Treaty Land Entitlement 
Framework Agreement that was signed by former Prime 
Minister Mulroney, and former Premier Romanow was also 
involved with this. So it is amazing to me that she was not 
aware that the province was involved in treaty land entitlement. 
 
Now with respect to her questions about . . . with respect to her 
questions about The Non-Profit Corporations Act and the 
difference that there is with The Métis Act, I do want to advise 
members of this House, and I have earlier this day advised the 
member opposite, of my intention to be introducing three 
amendments in relation to the Bill. 
 
I will be amending clause 8 to change the word “may” to 
“shall” so that the clause will read, “Bylaws shall be made.” 
This will tighten up the Bill. I was earlier advised that the word 
may was simply the passive tense in lawyer’s language of the 
word shall, but because people were concerned about it I will be 
introducing the amendment so that we will be changing it to 
read that bylaws shall be made. 
 

I will also be introducing an amendment to clause 9, sub (1), to 
add the words, “within 60 days,” so that the clause would read, 
“the board of directors shall within 60 days hold a special 
meeting.” Because people that I met with from several Métis 
locals pointed out to me that there was no timeline with respect 
to when a special meeting must be held, so I will be introducing 
that amendment. 
 
I will also be introducing an amendment to clause 18, the 
coming into force section, because right now the Bill would 
come into force upon assent. And I will be changing that so that 
it comes into force upon proclamation. 
 
I would also advise the member opposite that directors make 
the bylaws, directors make the bylaws, and they cannot 
therefore . . . the directors cannot be removed; they can’t change 
the membership of the board at these special meetings because 
it’s set out in the Act. 
 
And it seems to me that some of the issues that the member 
opposite is raising are really red herrings. Because, quite 
frankly, what we are doing here is taking the existing MNS 
secretariat that is . . . has been enabled to be established by 
virtue of the MNS constitution, we are taking that existing body 
that is under The Non-Profit Corporations Act and we are 
establishing under its own stand-alone Act, The Métis Act. 
 
This is in accord with the wish of this government to respect the 
dignity of Métis people and to listen to their wishes to be out 
from under The Non-Profit Corporations Act and to have a 
separate stand-alone Act. But the provisions of The Non-profit 
Corporations Act are, in the main, being transferred over into 
The Métis Act. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, are we to assume that the 
directors, as indicated in this Bill, have the authority to make 
bylaws as they see fit? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’d advise the member opposite that the 
directors make bylaws, that is very clear. But the bylaws have 
to be in accordance with the purposes of the legislation. The 
bylaws have to be in accordance, therefore, with the notion that 
the MNS Secretariat Inc. is the administrative body by which 
the policies and programs of the MNS are carried out and 
administered. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan constitution has a section that is to ensure all 
ministers give reports to the Métis Nation legislative assembly, 
yet a lot of grassroots people, Métis people, have told us 
examples where Métis ministers have not reported to their 
constituents. 
 
Grassroots Métis people say then an accountability framework 
needs to be outlined through bylaws enacted by the Métis 
people who are affiliated with the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan. What are your comments in this area? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise the member opposite that it 
is not for me to dictate to the MNS what they can and cannot 
do. That is an issue for Métis people to sort out themselves 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2329 

 

under their own constitution of the Métis Nation of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Madam Minister, grassroots Métis people have 
asked for an accountability framework to be outlined through 
their bylaws. 
 
And it has been stated by you, in this House previously, it’s 
your belief that accountability already exists. If that’s the case, 
why weren’t there any provisions for the current bylaws to be 
continued or why weren’t the same provisions as outlined in 
The Non-Profit Corporations Act simply transferred over to this 
Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well it seems to me, madam member that 
— or I would advise the member opposite through the Chair — 
that perhaps there’s some confusion between the MNS as a 
political body and the MNS Secretariat Inc. 
 
The MNS as a political body has, continues to have, and will 
have hence forward, I’m sure, a constitution. The accountability 
that people . . . that she is talking about, seem to be asking for, 
is political accountability. That is most properly addressed 
through the MNS’s political framework and through the 
constitution. 
 
This Act deals with an administrative body that has been 
established in the past under The Non-profit Corporations Act 
and will now be established under its own, stand alone Act. It 
will now become a statutory corporation. And all that bylaws do 
is set out internal processes for the operation of a corporation’s 
governance. But because we’re moving it from a non-profit . . . 
from under the structure of The Non-profit Corporations Act 
into the structure of The Métis Act, it is important to designate 
that bylaws shall be made. 
 
And I would point out further, subsection 10, under records, of 
The Métis Act, clearly refers to the bylaws of the corporation 
and all amendments to them. 
 
Now because the Act had originally said that the Act would 
come into force upon assent, in order to give the MNS, as a 
political body, an opportunity to discuss this with their 
membership at the their upcoming legislative assembly, and in 
order to give the MNS Secretariat Inc., as an administrative 
body, the opportunity to tailor their bylaws to this new Act as 
opposed to the provisions that there would have been under The 
Non-profit Corporations Act, I am introducing an amendment 
so that we will not proclaim The Métis Act until the MNS does 
two things. 
 
First of all, to develop bylaws related to governance and proper 
administration of the MNS Secretariat Inc., with respect to 
corporation activities, affairs, properties, property and interest. 
 
And secondly, we will hold off proclaiming of this Act until the 
MNS holds a Métis Nation legislative assembly to provide 
Métis people with a further opportunity to discuss and endorse 
this Bill. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Pertaining to section 
9 clause (1), of the Bill, that section provides for a meeting to 
be called by the board to discuss matters with the Métis people. 

Yet nowhere in this piece of legislation is there an obligation 
for the board to take direction . . . to take direction from those 
who attend or for resolutions to be tabled and voted upon. In 
fact, there isn’t any indication at all that this meeting is a 
meeting of members at all. 
 
By comparison, when you look at The Non-profit Corporations 
Act, and the way it would have been before this Act is passed, 
section 133 clause (1) of The Non-profit Corporations Act 
provides that members with 5 per cent of the votes — which 
could certainly be less than 250 people, by the way — have the 
right to call a meeting at any time stating the business to be 
transacted at the meeting. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, how will there be any measure of 
accountability for that board, as outlined in this Bill, regarding 
such fundamental issues as meetings, members, and 
resolutions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Again I would advise the member 
opposite, through the Chair, that I think she’s seeing bogeymen 
where there are none and reading far more into this Act than is 
the intent. The clause 9, dealing with special meetings, very 
clearly says: 
 

. . . the board of directors shall hold a special meeting with 
the Métis people of Saskatchewan to discuss any matter 
stated in the petition respecting the operation of the 
corporation. 

 
I have already indicated to the member that I will be 
introducing an amendment to that section 9, to trigger that 
special meeting within 60 days. 
 
But clearly, in answer to her question about whether or not this 
is going to involve the Métis people, it’s written right in the 
legislation, that they “shall hold a special meeting with the 
Métis people of Saskatchewan.” And we believe that by saying 
that the petition to trigger that is 250 Métis individuals of 
Saskatchewan that we are accommodating the grassroots. 
Rather than cutting out the grassroots, we think that we are 
significantly lowering the bar by which a meeting should be 
triggered. 
 
So we do believe that this Bill is both accountable and does 
create an opportunity for grassroots individuals to hold 
meetings with the board of directors of the MNS Secretariat Inc. 
 
Now having said all that, I do want to say that I recognize very 
clearly that there are concerns amongst Métis people, there are 
concerns with Métis locals in this province. Those are issues I 
would suggest to the member opposite that are political matters 
and are most properly dealt with not through holding a bunch of 
special meetings with the administrative body, the MNS 
Secretariat Inc., but dealing with it through the Métis political 
process as is outlined under the constitution of the MNS. 
 
And very clearly there are legislative assemblies that the MNS 
holds. I believe it’s twice a year. There is also a general 
assembly that’s held. And the issues that are being raised with 
both the member opposite and with myself are political matters 
that most properly ought to dealt with through the political 
process rather than worrying or setting up a bogeyman about 



2330 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

the administrative process. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: Section 96 
of The Non-Profit Corporations Act provides that members of a 
corporation may remove any director by ordinary resolution at a 
special meeting. This Bill contains no such provisions. Why 
was this not included? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Because, Madam Member, the board of 
directors are people who are elected through the election 
process of the MNS, and just as you cannot be removed by a 
petition of 250 individuals, so neither will a Métis director who 
is duly elected be removed. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, to the minister: section 107 of The 
Non-Profit Corporations Act provides for the disclosure of 
material contracts by directors and contains voting and fairness 
rules designated, or rather, designed to prevent the directors 
from taking advantage of their ability to self-deal. Again there 
are no provisions like that in this Bill. Why? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise the member opposite that 
that is incorporated by reference to The Interpretation Act. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: section 
109 of The Non-Profit Corporations Act obliges the directors of 
a non-profit corporation to act honestly and in good faith and to 
exercise the care, diligence, and skill of a reasonably prudent 
person in the circumstances. It also obliges directors to comply 
with the articles and bylaws of the corporation. 
 
There has been so much controversy and so much turmoil and 
upset within the Métis Nation of Saskatchewan regarding the 
action of some of the members, yet there are no such provisions 
as I just outlined in The Métis Act. Why, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Again I would advise the member opposite 
that the concerns she’s raising are incorporated in The Métis 
Act by reference to The Interpretation Act. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, to the minister: section 112 of The 
Non-Profit Corporations Act provides that a director may 
receive reasonable remuneration and that directors may set that 
remuneration unless the articles or bylaws otherwise provide. 
 
The Métis Act does not address remuneration of directors at all. 
Again why was this excluded? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Boards of directors are bound to act in 
good faith and they’re bound by the fiduciary responsibilities of 
the corporation. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
first of all welcome to your officials here today to discuss this 
Act, The Métis Act. 
 
First of all I want to make it clear that I am of Métis descent. I 
am proud of it. But first and foremost, I like to think myself as a 
Canadian. 
 
In regards to this Act, The Métis Act, I have always stated that I 

see no problem with having a Métis Act. What I do see is a 
problem with this Métis Act and in the context of what is in this 
Act and also what is not in this Act. 
 
First of all in regards to elections, to many people in and around 
my area where I’m from, they thought that The Métis Act 
coming forth was to do mostly with elections. Now we know 
very well, Madam Minister, that there’s been lots of 
controversy regarding the elections and the process in which the 
elections took place. In fact, the member from Cumberland, his 
voice was not even counted . . . or his vote, pardon me, was not 
even counted neither was his family. And I find that very 
frustrating to him and also to Métis people that in many cases 
their vote was not counted. 
 
And the last election there is figures that there was supposed to 
be some 40,000 members of the Métis Nation. Of that 40,000 
approximately only 3,000 voted. The reason a lot of them did 
not come to vote is the problem with elections and the problems 
around the elections. 
 
Madam Minister, in regards to the problems of elections, you 
and the federal . . . pardon me, the minister and the federal 
government created $50,000 — 25 provincially, 25,000 
federally — to come up with a process to solve election 
problems in Saskatchewan in dealing with the Métis Nation. 
That is ongoing right now. 
 
The member from Humboldt brought forth a while ago a hoist 
in regards to hoisting this Bill for six months so that there 
would be more consultation regarding this Bill. It was voted 
down. 
 
To the minister: will the minister stand in the House today and 
make reference to the organizations she has put forth regarding 
the elections and solving the election problems in Saskatchewan 
to deal with the Métis, will she stand in the House today and 
say that this Act will not . . . or this Bill will not come into force 
on proclamation till that group of people, both provincially and 
federally, have dealt with the election problems of the Métis 
Nation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well, through the Chair, the fact of the 
matter is that this Bill is not intended to respond to the election 
process that the member opposite is referring to. I have a 
separate process, that being a tripartite process, to look at the 
recent election and to provide advice and recommendations 
with respect to changes. 
 
The MNS has their own election process that is separate from 
this Bill. I’ve already said that I do not intend to recommend to 
cabinet that we proclaim The Métis Act until the MNS does two 
things. First to develop bylaws; and secondly, to hold a Métis 
Nation legislative assembly to provide Métis people with a 
further opportunity to discuss and endorse the Bill. 
 
I anticipate . . . I have been told that that MNLA (Métis Nation 
legislative assembly) is scheduled for late November. It is my 
great hope that the election . . . the process of reviewing the 
recent election will also have been completed by that time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, in regards to the answer you just put forth to me, in 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2331 

 

regards to the 25,000 provincial dollars that is being spent to 
come up with a process for the Métis people in regards to 
elections, the $25,000 is taxpayers’ money. 
 
Should this not take into account some precedence, and 
therefore that the Act that’s before us now wait under 
proclamation till that is dealt with? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise the member opposite that 
we have provided in the past, and probably will in the future, 
small amounts of money — taxpayers’ money — to support the 
Métis in reviewing their processes and to building capacity. 
 
That, though, is unrelated to the whole question of this Bill. It is 
important, I believe, for members opposite not to be 
disingenuous and to be mixing up the controversy that there is 
with respect to the recent MNS elections and the issue of The 
Métis Act before us here today. 
 
The Métis Act is to celebrate the contributions, the very 
substantial contributions that Métis people have made to this 
province; to celebrate the historical significance of many 
symbols, including the sash, the flag, and so forth. It is also to 
set up an administrative body for the MNS, called the MNS 
Secretariat Inc., and as I have tried to outline in my answers to 
the member from Humboldt, we are including in significant 
part, the provisions of The Non-profit Corporations Act. 
 
The Métis Act is something to be celebrated. We have a 
separate process dealing with the election controversy, and I am 
hopeful that we will have a report on or about the same time 
that we intend to proclaim The Métis Act. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Deputy Chair. Madam Minister, 
yes, Madam Minister, we all want to celebrate and I use the 
words all, because all Métis people want to celebrate this Act. 
But there is a number of Métis people, in fact the biggest 
majority of Métis people, who are not going to be celebrating 
this Act because they’re not counted under The Election Act 
which is duly and most important to this Act that is here before 
us. 
 
That’s why I’m asking to let the people, the Métis people, know 
that yes, their voice will be heard. And that by holding this 
proclamation of this Act till that is dealt with is the most proper 
way to do it. That way all Métis people, Madam Minister, have 
a right to be celebrating this Act. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would advise the member opposite that 
The Métis Act is not about the Métis election process. It is a 
totally separate issue, and it’s important not to confuse them. 
 
The Métis Act, as I said, probably 10 years from now, we will 
all be celebrating this and we will have forgotten what the 
specifics were of the current controversy with respect to the 
February MNS elections. We have a separate process for 
assisting the MNS to review the recent election and to make 
changes. That is totally separate from The Métis Act, and we 
should in this House today be dealing with The Métis Act, not 
with the concerns about the Métis election process. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, in regards to the Bill on the first page, under: 

And whereas nothing in this Act is to be construed as 
altering or affecting the position of the Government of 
Saskatchewan that legislative authority in relation to Métis 
people rests with the Government of Canada . . . 

 
Government of Canada, Madam Minister. 
 
Then we go to Part III under “Bilateral Process” and it states 
under there, Madam Minister, and my colleague, the member 
from Humboldt, has reiterated that, that under: 
 

Bilateral process 
3(1) The Government of Saskatchewan and the Métis 
Nation - Saskatchewan will work together through a 
bilateral process to address issues that are important to 
the Métis people, including the following: 

 
capacity building; 

 
land; 

 
harvesting; 

 
governance. 

 
Madam Minister, on the first page it is stated in the Bill that it 
rests with the Government of Canada. Then I’m asking you, 
Madam Minister, why the bilateral process 3(1) contradicts it 
and is in the Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Again I’m going to say we have the 
authority to do what is contemplated in this Act, that is the 
signing of a bilateral MOU with the MNS. We have the 
authority under the constitution and we will be doing that. And 
we will also be respecting section 35 of the constitution. 
 
And I have already answered the questions about under what 
authority the province is legislating The Métis Act and the 
concerns about bilateral versus tripartite and constitutional 
authority and responsibility that you’re raising with respect to 
section 3. I’ve answered those to the member from Humboldt 
and I think that you can review the record to see the answers. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, I have indicated to the minister that I am 
prepared to support this Act should certain concerns that I have 
and other members of the opposition have be addressed. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, the reasons that I am prepared to support this 
Act are that firstly I believe this is something that is long 
overdue, and the recognition of the history and the culture of 
the Métis people is something that is long overdue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — It is also because . . . it is also because as 
a member of Eastern Region II, Eastern Region II — and 
Eastern Region II, Mr. Deputy Chair, I should indicate also 
blankets my entire constituency, the constituency of Carrot 
River Valley — and all of the elected officials within Eastern 
Region II are also very, very supportive of this Act. 
 
There’s a third reason, Mr. Deputy Chair, and the third reason is 



2332 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

is that because perhaps one of the best friends I ever had, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, a lifelong friend and colleague, Mr. Clarence 
Campeau, made the establishment of an Act such as this his 
lifelong dream and mission. And, Mr. Deputy Chair, if I could I 
would just like to take a moment or two and tell the House a 
little bit about Mr. Clarence Campeau. 
 
Clarence was born in 1947. As young as the eighth grade he 
realized there was a difference in the way non-Aboriginal 
people and Aboriginal people fit into society. 
 
Somehow he felt he never fit anywhere until he learned about 
the Métis people, his people. He became involved in the Métis 
Society in the late 1960s. In 1974 he became the youngest ever 
area director elected for the Métis Society of Saskatchewan. He 
also worked in research and development for the Gabriel 
Dumont Institute. He worked as an addictions counsellor and 
for the Métis Housing Corporation. 
 
He was provincial Chair for the Saskatchewan Native 
Addictions Council. He sat on boards of the Local Advisory 
Council to the Melfort Canada Employment Centre. He was a 
board member and a colleague of mine at the NEWSASK, 
Community Futures Development Corporation. He sat as a 
member of the Archerwill and Rose Valley school boards. He 
was on the SIMAS (Saskatchewan Indian and Métis Affairs 
Secretariat) provincial board and on the Métis Economic 
Development Foundation. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Clarence was so well renowned throughout this province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, for his passion regarding economic 
development that the Clarence Campeau Development Fund 
was designed to provide financial assistance to Métis 
individuals and communities in Saskatchewan for economic and 
small business activities. 
 
Clarence’s ultimate goal in life was self-sufficiency for Métis 
people. He believed that the Métis people should have control 
over their own destinies, be able to make important decisions 
over training and education in order for them to become 
self-sufficient. 
 
Clarence was addressing the importance of a Métis Act to his 
members and throughout the province right up until his death in 
1997. Clarence was addressing the importance of a Métis Act to 
all the Métis people across the province way prior to 1991, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
As I indicated, Clarence was a colleague of mine. Clarence 
appointed me as Chair of the social initiatives department for 
Eastern Region II, a position that I held for roughly seven years. 
 
But Eastern Region II, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is a very, very 
dynamic and viable force in the Métis community today. It 
provides programs and services that are second to none in the 
province. And the current area director, Helen Johnson, 
continues Clarence’s dream of seeking self-sufficiency for the 
Métis people. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I have two questions and I know that they 
would be questions that Clarence would ask. To the minister: 

will you facilitate the accountability concerns that some in the 
Métis community have with respect to this Act? And two, will 
you continue to listen to Métis people in order that everything 
possible is done to move the Métis community toward 
self-sufficiency as was Clarence’s lifelong mission and dream? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to thank the member opposite 
and I want to acknowledge at this time what I consider to be his 
very brave and very principled stand. 
 
I have had many discussions with members opposite about this 
Act and I have found that either they are being deliberately 
obtuse or they are pandering to fears or scaremongering and 
trying to find bogeymen where there are none. 
 
By contrast though, the member from Carrot River Valley 
clearly respects and understands the intent of The Métis Act. He 
clearly respects and understands the internal processes of 
non-profit corporations and of the MNS Secretariat. And he 
clearly respects and understands the MNS constitution. 
 
With respect to his questions about accountability concerns, the 
answer is yes. With respect to his question about will I continue 
to listen, the answer is yes. 
 
And I would say, in the spirit of Clarence Campeau, just as the 
member from Carrot River Valley intends to support The Métis 
Act, I would ask all the members opposite to put aside their 
minor concerns, to think about the future and to think about 
history, and to join with him and with the members on this side 
of the House and vote yes to The Métis Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to move at this time, Mr. 
Chair, that we: 
 

Amend Clause 8 of the printed Bill by striking out “may” 
and substituting “shall”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 8 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to advise the House that I 
would move to: 
 

Amend Clause 9(1) of the printed Bill by adding “, within 
60 days,” after “shall”. 

 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 9 as amended agreed to. 
 
Clauses 10 to 17 inclusive agreed to. 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2333 

 

Clause 18 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair the opposition 
had an amendment to Clause 18 to be printed into the Bill. 
However, we have recognized the minister’s amendment, the 
government’s amendment on that Clause. 
 
And I would just like to ask you, Madam Minister, will you 
give us the assurance that proclamation will not take place for a 
period of about six months at least, so that there can be further 
consultation with the Métis people of the province who are very 
concerned that this Act may have the potential to be an 
anti-democratic Act? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I can advise the member opposite that as I 
have already stated, it is my intention to recommend to cabinet 
that this Bill not be proclaimed until at least two things have 
occurred. 
 
First of all, that bylaws have been drafted; and secondly, that 
there has been a Métis Nation legislative assembly so that Métis 
people can go to that very proper forum and discuss and 
endorse the Bill. 
 
Now it is my understanding that the legislative assembly is 
scheduled for the end of November. Once that occurs and I am 
able to . . . and I get a report back on that, then I will be 
recommending proclamation of the Bill. 
 
So that will occur probably sometime in early December. 
Perhaps it might even be early January, I don’t know. So I think 
we’re debating here about a time frame of two months — 
whether it’s four months or six months. 
 
But quite clearly I have said, now three times in the debate on 
this, that I will recommend that we delay proclamation of the 
Bill until those other things have happened. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And so, Madam Minister, I 
take that that’s giving us an assurance that the Bill will not be 
proclaimed till at least early January. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I didn’t say that. Through the Chair, I said 
it could be the end of November, in December, or early January. 
We’re talking about, though, a proclamation that will most 
likely occur in the early winter months. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, in regards to 
clause 18 of the printed Bill, I would like to put forward an 
amendment that: 
 

Clause 18 of the printed Bill is struck out and the following 
substituted: 
 

“18 This Act comes into force on January 1, 2002”. 
 

Amendment negatived on division. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to advise the House that at this 
point I would move that we: 
 

Amend Clause 18 of the printed Bill by striking out the 
word “assent” and substituting the word “proclamation”. 

So this Act comes into force upon proclamation. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Clause 18 as amended agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — The committee will take a five-minute 
recess so we can get our process in order. Thank you. 
 
The Assembly recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I call the committee to order, and I 
apologize to the committee for erring in calling the question on 
the title of a Bill, which is not the correct procedure. I will now 
invite the minister to move that the committee report the Bill 
with amendment. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I move that we report the Bill with 
amendments. 
 
The division bells rang from 16:50 until 16:57. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 
Calvert Addley Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Wartman Thomson Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 
Jones Kasperski Osika 
Lorjé Yates McCall 
Draude Kwiatkowski  
 

Nays — 20 
 
Hermanson Heppner Julé 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken D’Autremont Weekes 
Bjornerud Brkich Harpauer 
Wakefield Wiberg Hart 
Allchurch Huyghebaert  
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(17:00) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 58 — The Highway Traffic 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 



2334 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Métis Act 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the amendments 
be now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move that Bill No. 42, The Métis Act, be now read the third 
time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to on division and, by leave of the Assembly, the 
Bill read a third time and passed under its title. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 

Subvote (SS01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I’m having difficulty hearing the 
minister, so would the committee please come to order. And if 
there’s any conversations that need to take place, please move 
them behind the bar. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Seated 
beside me is Bonnie Durnford, the deputy minister of Social 
Services. And seated behind me is Darcy Smycniuk, he’s the 
acting executive director of financial management. 
 
Seated in the rear of the Chamber is Phil Walsh, the executive 
director of income support. Next to him is Larry Moffatt, the 
executive director of community living. Next to Mr. Moffatt is 
Debra Bryck, who is the director of child daycare. And next to 
Ms. Bryck is Dorothea Warren, who’s the associate executive 
director of family and youth. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. Mr. Minister, I have a few questions 
here. Actually I have a lot, but I’m going to confine them. 
 
A question . . . and I believe we talked a little about rental and 
the ability to . . . for people to get their rent, maybe paying rent 
directly to the landlord. A lady from Regina had called and I’ve 
left the message with your office. But I’m wondering, Mr. 
Minister, what your department is doing in regards to rent and 
where landlords are having difficulty collecting the rent. 
 
And the specific question that arose here — and I still await a 
response from the office and they may not have had a chance to 

do total follow-up as . . . (inaudible) . . . arrived late last week 
— but in the fact the question arises that the fact that some 
landlords are finding that tenants leave and they’re really not 
aware of the fact that they’ve left; they’re already in arrears. 
And it’s difficult to follow up and recover or receive the funds 
for the rent on that property. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what the department is doing 
to address the problems where that arises where tenants may 
leave and have left unpaid rent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, without speaking to 
any tenancy agreements that landlords and tenants may have 
come to themselves, it is our practice to issue a cheque for the 
full amount of the rent and to have that cheque issued jointly to 
both the client of the department who’s eligible to receive that 
and the landlord. So there should be no reason that rents being 
made jointly that the landlord should not be paid. 
 
In the event that a client who’s a tenant leaves the premises 
prematurely without giving notice, the landlord can make 
application through the Rentalsman. And if the landlord can 
substantiate that, we do provide a security. We guarantee 
whatever ruling the Rentalsman may have come down with in 
terms of the month’s rent, or whatever it might be. And that can 
then be paid to the landlord. And then we call that an 
overpayment against that client — if they’re still a client, or if 
they become a client again — we call that an overpayment that 
we feel we should be collecting back from that client. 
 
So through those measures we’ve over the years reduced the 
amount of potential conflict or potential for conflict between 
our clients and landlords, and also to reduce what might be 
termed unacceptable practices on the part of clients or tenants, 
but also on the part of the landlords. And we feel it’s been 
working fairly well. Obviously this is a case where it hasn’t. 
 
But that’s the process. The landlord can go to the Rentalsman, 
substantiate the lack of notice, and the Rentalsman will make a 
ruling. And we provide a guarantee of one month’s rent for 
these kinds of contingencies. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, so just a quick follow-up. What I understand, are all 
cheques made jointly to the tenant and the landlord? And if so, 
and as the request that just came to the office, which we 
forwarded to your office, if a landlord doesn’t receive the 
payment, does your department find that there are occasions 
where some of the cheques do not get cashed? It’s quite 
possible that maybe a tenant may lose the cheque if it’s made 
jointly. You’re right. It would appear then it should get to the 
landlord. 
 
But if there are cheques not arriving, do you find at times that 
the department finds that there are cheques for housing that 
actually do not get cashed, possibly because they’ve been 
misplaced or lost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Yes, there are some exceptions to 
the policy. For example, if we provide assistance to, say, a 
working family, and that’s to top up their earnings from work 
but because of their need — say it’s a large family, that they 
can’t make enough on, say a low wage — that we can top up 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2335 

 

from social assistance, although less so now with the 
employment supplement and the Child Benefit. 
 
But if that’s the case and if the amount of the additional 
assistance we provide is, say, less than the rent that the person 
might be paying, then we would not issue a cheque jointly to 
the landlord and to the tenant. We would expect the tenant to 
continue to pay for that. 
 
With respect to misplaced cheques, yes, we have a process that, 
if people didn’t get their cheque — it was lost in the mail or 
someone took it from the mailbox — we have a process that 
involves signing an affidavit and all the like so that we can 
replace that. There is a process to go through, through that 
process. 
 
(17:15) 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and certainly I’ll look 
forward to the response from your office in regard to the 
specific case and do the follow-up and see what has happened 
in regards to the rent and the fact that there’s been a lack of 
payment in regards to that rent and to find out exactly what’s 
happened. And maybe we can get it resolved. 
 
I have another issue just in front of me and I’m not exactly sure, 
Mr. Minister, if there’s been actually a contact with your office. 
Certainly I think I had put it aside myself but it’s regarding an 
overpayment and I’ll just give a last name. It’s a Mr. Beech 
from Biggar who due to some health reasons had to look to 
Social Services but did apply for some work. 
 
An opportunity arose for a three-month period back in 1999. It 
indicates that the worker was aware of it and had given him . . . 
said yes, if there’s some work to try and see if you can do some 
partial work as a result of your health problems. Now he finds 
himself with an overpayment that he feels should not have been 
. . . And I don’t know. It almost sounds like maybe cheques 
continued even though he had indicated he was going to be 
working for a period of time. 
 
And so I would just ask, Mr. Minister, if your office could . . . if 
you could do a follow-up on that and get back to me in writing 
because it might be something that may not be accessible right 
offhand. And I’m not sure if you want to respond to that right 
now or if you just want me to move on to another question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — If there’s a specific case that we 
can review, we’ll be pleased to do that. I might say as a general 
policy that we encourage people to work if they’re able to work 
but on the other hand, if they’re enrolled to receive 
Saskatchewan Assistance Plan payments then we also expect 
them and it’s their responsibility to report any earned income to 
us. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I understand that’s what 
took place. But we’ll just do the follow-up to see exactly what 
happened and why the overpayment actually ended up. 
 
Back in May of 2000 you had indicated that you were putting 
together new funds to help persons with disabilities find jobs. 
And, Mr. Minister, it’s been at least a year now since that 
announcement was made and I wonder if you could indicate to 

us whether or not it’s been a successful program, whether 
you’ve been able to indeed assist people with disabilities to find 
meaningful employment and therefore move off of the direct 
involvement of Social Services. 
 
And if you could as well, Mr. Minister, indicate how many 
individuals have been able to move to full-time employment 
and move away from the dependence on Social Services. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Yes, last 
year there was an announcement made jointly with the 
Department of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training 
with respect to the funding of 12 organizations throughout the 
province. These organizations were formed by the 
Saskatchewan Association of Rehabilitation Centres. 
 
Their objective was to work with local communities to see if 
they could effect a change in attitude and hopefully to 
behaviour on the part of employers within the communities 
about taking on to their staffs into employment people with 
intellectual disabilities so that those persons might also have a 
chance at regular jobs in a regular economy. 
 
My understanding is that this project is about, oh, two-thirds 
complete. There are about 50 individuals that have been hired in 
Saskatchewan. There are more who are involved in training and 
job coaching to get them ready to take on jobs. 
 
But the important thing is that work has taken place in a number 
of communities across Saskatchewan to work with employers 
about changing attitudes so that not just this year we employed 
50, but that into the future we can grow the acceptance of 
mainstream employers about hiring people with intellectual 
disabilities and to find a place for them in their operations so 
that people with intellectual disabilities can take their rightful 
place in society. 
 
We’re very encouraged by what we see taking place. The 
change in attitudes I think is important. I think we need to 
recognize if individuals with intellectual disabilities can work at 
a regular job, same as anyone else in the economy, then we 
should try to find those kinds of opportunities for them to coach 
them, to train them to do that as opposed to having the only 
alternative being sheltered workshops. 
 
So we’re encouraged by the success we see taking place. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, I appreciate that. A 
follow-up question has to do with going beyond just assisting or 
working with people with disabilities find some meaningful 
employment, and that is working with individuals on assistance 
right now and assisting them or working along with them to as 
well find some meaningful employment. 
 
And I noticed in Ontario, Ontario has got the slogan, A Hand 
Up Rather Than a Handout, and basically designing a program 
that rather than their workers just totally assisting people and 
getting assistance, beginning to work with individuals to help 
them to actually get into the job force. 
 
And that probably, I’m assuming, that there are many people 
out there on assistance who may not have a lot of . . . or really 
understand the process of applying for work or the criteria of 



2336 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

putting together a resume. And certainly if they do . . . and 
sometimes maybe it’s not always their fault that they’re unable 
to find employment. 
 
Just this weekend, unfortunately, a young fellow actually came 
to me and asked about how the program . . . I mean how 
assistance works. He was just informed Wednesday or 
Thursday that he was being cut off assistance, and unfortunately 
also he was informed that he had to be out of the house. 
 
He’s got a young child that’s his responsibility. Even though he 
had taken — and I don’t know if the department had helped 
with some funding to get some training for a truck driving job 
— a local employer had actually given him some assistance. 
Unfortunately to date he hasn’t been able to find a job with the 
training he’s taken to give him some . . . the ability to get off of 
employment. 
 
So I guess the question is what is done to really work with and 
assist people in finding meaningful employment even after 
they’ve maybe upgraded and done some training and yet find 
that maybe the location there in, there aren’t a lot of jobs 
available? In some of the small communities right now, there 
aren’t a lot of jobs available. 
 
So maybe, Mr. Minister, you can indicate what your department 
is doing to assist people — rather than handing them the 
finances, but also working with them to find ways of finding 
meaningful employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the 
member for the question. I would not want to comment on the 
province of Ontario and how they are proposing to deal with 
their issues. But as it pertains to the general issue of labour 
force attachment or people on social assistance, we’ve taken the 
approach that first of all, we need to redesign our system so that 
there is in a sense, a carrot if you like, that there’s some . . . that 
people see a benefit in working as opposed to simply remaining 
on social assistance. And that we do that not from a punitive 
point of view, but from a positive point of view. 
 
And it’s for those reasons that the Government of Saskatchewan 
developed the building independence program some, oh I’d say 
three years ago, four years ago. The first aspect of the building 
independence program is called Saskatchewan training 
allowance, whereby we are prepared to provide training 
allowances to people who are on social assistance; this training 
allowance being more generous in the main than what people 
might expect to receive on social assistance. And that’s then 
tied to attendance at training courses so that we have more 
people on social assistance being trained for jobs in the 
economy. That was one aspect of it. 
 
The other aspect was to provide a better income support for 
families so that there is financial encouragement for them to 
continue working or to work as opposed to looking to social 
assistance for alternatives and included in that is family health 
benefits. 
 
It’s for that reason that organizations such as the OECD, which 
is the Organization for Economic Co-operation and 
Development, which is a think tank, a research unit, of the 
major industrialized countries — Germany, Britain, France, the 

Netherlands, Canada, I think the United States as well — have a 
research unit which tries to analyze trends that are occurring 
between various jurisdictions in the industrialized world so that 
we might learn from each other about what it is that we are 
doing, so that we can learn what is taking place in Switzerland 
and the same token, the people in Norway or the Netherlands 
might learn about how it is that we approach social assistance 
and labour force attachment. 
 
And the conclusion they came to in a study that they took of 
Canadian jurisdictions and some European jurisdictions was 
that Saskatchewan has the best approach, not Ontario or any 
other province. But when you want to set into place programs 
that encourage people to work as opposed to remaining on 
social assistance, Saskatchewan has the best approach. 
 
It’s probably the reason too that the British House of Commons, 
which has a parliamentary committee on income security, 
decided to visit Saskatchewan to look at our programs. So we’re 
encouraged by the success that we are seeing; also encouraged 
because we know that the greater the opportunities people can 
find in the labour force and to have earned income, the greater 
their chances that they will escape poverty. And it’s probably 
for those reasons that the Canadian Council on Social 
Development in reviewing income security programs, and 
comparing us to Ontario and Alberta, takes the point of view 
that when it comes to programs that seem to have an impact on 
poverty, Saskatchewan has a better approach than those two 
provinces. 
 
Well that’s the conclusion that they came to. 
 
Now we’re engaged in building independence phase 2. And as I 
indicated that when we launched a consultation on our welfare 
redesign — and I believe the member was present — we 
indicated that we would try to shift resources within the 
department without adding additional resources or staff within 
the department; but to redeploy staff. To have staff work more 
intensively with people who come to us and who need help 
because of unemployment. And that we would work with them 
intensively through the Canada-Sask employment centres to 
help them find a job where they may not have been able to find 
a job. 
 
And secondly, to also assist them with issues such as 
interviewing skills, resume preparation, all the things that one 
might find useful in looking for employment. And of course we 
also try to encourage them in furthering their employment 
because . . . or their education because lack of education and 
training is an issue for many people. So we continue to put 
emphasis on Saskatchewan training allowance and to try to 
encourage people with limited education and training to move 
in that direction. 
 
I think we’re having some success in that. The figures with 
respect to caseloads seem to indicate that the downward trend, 
which started in 1994, has been going for over six years, is 
continuing, and that we’re having some success in that. 
 
So yes, I agree with the member. And I think that all of the 
ministers of Social Services in Canada will agree that labour 
force attachment is desirable from the point of view of helping 
individuals and helping families to escape the poverty that is 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2337 

 

associated with social assistance. We agree on that. We may 
disagree on how you do that but I think that the approach we 
have in Saskatchewan is a far better approach. 
 
And I don’t say that in a boastful way. I think that’s the 
conclusion that people from outside of Saskatchewan come to 
about Saskatchewan’s approach being the right approach. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, thank you. And certainly 
we could get into even a further debate but I’m not going to 
pursue that tonight. You’re fortunate. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, you just made a couple of comments about 
how there should be . . . there’s client involvement . . . or 
necessity for people on assistance. 
 
In your most recent budget you announced 54 new positions in 
the department. I believe of that, 20 or so were dealing directly 
with individuals. There was, I believe 9 . . . 25 administrative, 9 
managers. And it just seems to me that’s fairly heavy on the 
managerial and the administrative side of the 54 positions. 
 
And I notice that a number of workers basically are suggesting 
that, really, while you’re talking about 54 new positions, a 
number of those are just ongoing jobs that were there before 
and have now been turned into permanent positions. So it’s not 
necessarily an increase of workers in the field. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Minister, a couple of other positions 
. . . points that need to be raised is the area of paratransits. An 
inquiry came from Saskatoon about the eight special needs 
buses for 3,000 where Regina has 30 for 3,500 people, and the 
inquiry was the fact that there seems to be a shortage in 
Saskatoon. And I don’t what the department has done or what 
efforts are being done to address that question regarding transit 
needs of special needs people in the Saskatoon area. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, I’m throwing another one at you, is this 
conflict of community-based organizations that provide services 
for handicapped individuals and the contractual problems that 
have been arising. I know there’s about three or four different 
areas I’ve hit you with all at once, but I’m wondering if you 
could let us know what’s happening in regards to the 
negotiations with the CBO (community-based organizations) 
workers organizations as well and their contracts — the 
individuals who work in the centres across the province 
providing care for people on disabilities as we try to move them 
into more of an independent style of living. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I’m not in a position to 
comment on issues with respect to paratransit in the cities. That 
is a question that can be directed to the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs and Housing who has responsibilities for support for 
paratransit operations in Saskatchewan. 
 
Although I do take an interest in these issues as the Minister 
Responsible for Disability Issues, I am not in a position, neither 
do I have the staff, to deal with the detailed questions that the 
member has in that area. 
 
The member mentioned, almost in disparaging terms, that we 
had hired 54 staff in the department. Actually there were 60 
staff who were hired. 

Six of those staff were for our community living division to 
assist families and individuals throughout Saskatchewan with 
intellectual disabilities to do the right placement for their future 
needs. We seem to have an increasing number, I believe, of 
people being identified as in need of our services and we need 
people to work with families to provide for the planning. 
 
The other 54 positions are in the child welfare area. About half 
of those are for front-line workers. And the other half are for 
front-line . . . almost half are for front-line administrative 
support. 
 
And I encourage the member not to get caught up in the rhetoric 
of his own party where they speak in disparaging terms of 
additional government workers being hired and then make the 
leap to calling them bureaucrats and administrators as if to say 
they have no importance. 
 
I might say it’s somewhat akin to a person being a jet pilot, a jet 
pilot who says . . . or you take the position that the jet pilot 
should somehow be responsible for doing the weather 
forecasting for his own flight, that the jet pilot should also gas 
up the plane, that the jet pilot should do all of the maintenance 
work with respect to the planes, that they should repair the 
engines and do all of that kind of work. 
 
Well we know that’s not the way that it works in the real world. 
In the real world we provide the jet pilot with on-ground 
support to ensure that that plane is ready and available for flight 
when that jet pilot needs it. 
 
And similarly in the area of child welfare, we have taken a 
position after review with our staff, that our staff have many 
administrative details that they need to attend to so therefore 
they took the position, they took the position that they are better 
served by having the appropriately trained administrative 
support staff so that they can do the work that they were hired 
to do, which is child welfare. 
 
Similarly the jet pilot is trained to do the work of flying the 
plane not sort of pumping the . . . pumping up the flat tires, or 
doing the engine repair. 
 
That’s the position that we take, similar to jet pilots, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. Minister, I just 
have one question. The last time Social Service estimates were 
up I was referring to the case of Sandra Richard, who was the 
foster mother of Karen Quill, and I just have one very specific 
question and it is: will Social Services give some compensation 
to Sandra for her loss of income during the year that Social 
Services put her home on hold as a foster home, in order to 
compensate her for that time when she did not . . . was not able 
to earn any income? 
 
Mr. Minister, this was basically due to the neglect of Social 
Services because Ms. Richard did bring it to the department’s 
attention that in fact there were . . . her home was overcrowded 
and she was asking for help. 
 
So did the minister reply to Sandra Richard’s letter? And will 
the minister consider compensation for Sandra for that year 
when she was with no income? 



2338 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I would generally 
say, without commenting on specific cases on the floor of the 
Legislative Assembly, that foster parents, we provide them a fee 
for services that they provide. We do not provide them income 
per se, but we contract with them to provide a service and for 
that we pay them a fee. Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
Subvote (SS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (SS02), (SS03), (SS04), (SS05), (SS06), (SS07), 
(SS09), (SS10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Social Services 
Vote 36 

 
Subvote (SS04) agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Just to extend a thank 
you to the officials who have joined us today and over the past 
number of weeks as we’ve discussed the issue. And certainly 
there we could have probably gone into a lot more debate in 
different areas, but I want to thank the officials for their time 
and their efforts and wish them a very pleasant summer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Chair, I want to at the outset 
thank the members opposite for their interest and questions in 
the area of Social Services. My only regret is that we didn’t 
have more time to explore a department that has many different 
facets and is doing very many interesting things. 
 
I would also like to thank my staff, not only for attending here 
but all of the staff of the department for the excellent work that 
they do, for the leadership that they’ve shown in a number of 
areas, for the innovation and effective programming that they 
provide. And I thank them for that, Mr. Chair. Thank you. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 

Vote 30 
 
Subvote (IA01) 
 
The Chair: — I would recognize the Minister of Aboriginal 
Affairs to introduce the officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I’d like 
to introduce the officials from both Intergovernmental Affairs, 
Aboriginal Affairs, and the Provincial Secretary. 
 
Attending with us today are Brent Cotter, deputy minister; Paul 
Osborne, ADM (assistant deputy minister); Al Hilton, ADM; 
Donovan Young, acting ADM; Glen Benedict, director; and 
Olivia Shumski of the anniversary secretariat. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Chairman, 

welcome to the minister and her officials. 
 
Madam Minister, I wonder if you could comment on the 
agreement between the federal government and the provincial 
government here. And I understand there’s an agreement called 
the Social Union Framework Agreement between the feds and 
the province. Could you tell me about that agreement and tell 
me if monies are transferred to the province from the federal 
government, what those monies are allocated for and how in 
fact those monies are dispersed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — In response to the member’s question, 
the Social Union Framework Agreement is, as it suggests, a 
framework agreement between the federal government and the 
provinces to better facilitate the provision of services to 
Canadians. 
 
It doesn’t transfer money and resources but it is a process of 
discussion, negotiation, working together to ensure that 
programs are better provided to Canadians across the country. 
And in fact this coming week, ministers responsible will be 
meeting in Winnipeg. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you. Mr. Chair, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, from your comments you had indicated that there 
were no monies that come through from the federal government 
to the provincial government in this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — There are no monies coming from the 
federal government to the provincial government under the 
Social Union Framework Agreement. Of course there are from 
various other arrangements and programs from the federal 
government but not under SUFA (Social Union Framework 
Agreement). 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I’m wondering then, if you said 
there’s no money specifically through the agreement but there 
are other organizations or other ways that money is transferred 
to the province for specific things, I presume, that would be 
discussed under the agreement, like education, housing, etc. 
 
So can you clarify for me just how then the federal government 
transfers money for that and in fact who is allocated that 
money, how that money is then transferred to the Indian 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The member asks the question, if I 
understand properly, then under what auspices would money 
come from the federal government to the provinces and how 
might that money might be dispersed? 
 
Maybe I’ll just give one example. The CHST (Canada Health 
and Social Transfer) transfers money from the federal 
government to the provinces for health and social programs for 
example; not specifically to individuals but to the provinces to 
administer in accordance with their programs after discussion 
with the federal government over priorities. But that money 
comes to the province and is then dispersed by the province 
through its various programs. 
 
I’m not sure . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh, to Aboriginal 
people. 
 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2339 

 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Through the Chair, I would like to advise 
the member opposite that Saskatchewan receives funding from 
the federal government under either CHST or equalization 
funding that is global funding for programs and services for all 
Saskatchewan residents and that obviously includes treaty 
Indians, Métis, non-status Indians. 
 
Under these arrangements there are no specific dollars set aside 
for Aboriginal people per se, however as the member opposite 
probably knows from time to time we do receive from the 
federal government specific funding for things such as 
Aboriginal court workers. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Madam Minister, I 
had a visit from one of the chiefs of the bands in Saskatchewan 
and it’s their understanding that there is money transferred 
specifically for Aboriginal people through this “Social Union 
Framework Agreement” and they’re not convinced that they’re 
seeing it and they’re wondering how it’s dispersed, so I ask the 
question on his behalf. 
 
Madam Minister, I have one more question before I’m going to 
turn the questioning over to my colleague here because he has 
some very important questions to put forward to you, and it’s 
regarding the First Nations Fund. As you well know we have 
had some debate in the legislature this session over whether or 
not the First Nations Fund is public money. 
 
Do you say that the First Nations Fund is public money? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I’d like to advise the member opposite that 
the issue of whether it’s public money or not is to me taking 
away from the real substantive point. And the substantive point 
is that the First Nations Fund will be, as a result of the 
Provincial Auditor’s report, will be fully accounted for. And 
that’s the issue that we should be concerned about. 
 
Ms. Julé: —  Thank you, Madam Minister. Well, Madam 
Minister, the substantive point is that if the Provincial Auditor 
has records of how the money — and if we would consider it 
public money — was used and if it was used correctly for the 
purposes intended under the Act, then we would be able to 
assure the grassroots, rank and file, Indian people of this 
province that that money is in fact coming to them and they 
would see the results that they would wish to see from it. At this 
time many of them are telling me they are not seeing the benefit 
from that money. 
 
But, Madam Minister, the money from the fund is public money 
and that’s an important thing to underline. It’s public money 
subject to trust law, including disclosure of transfers and 
expenditures. 
 
Madam Minister, the Federation of Saskatchewan Indians is 
incorporated with the Saskatchewan corporation branch as a 
non-profit. The fund is controlled and managed by this 
provincially incorporated body, the Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indians. And there is a section in the corporations Act that 
stipulates full disclosure in such cases. 
 
So this is something that must be acknowledged and certainly I 
hope that, as minister, that you relay and make quite clear to 
those people that you’re dealing with when, in fact, there is a 

law involved with how the money is to be used. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I just leave that with you. If you’d like to 
comment on that, you’re certainly welcome. Otherwise I will 
turn the questioning over to the member from Spiritwood. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much. I will try to be brief. 
I want to reiterate, as I have said during question period in the 
House, that I have received a commitment which I agree with 
and respect. I have received a very firm commitment from 
Chief Bellegarde of the Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations that he will see that the First Nations Fund puts into 
place all proper accounting procedures. 
 
I also would point out, as the member opposite is aware, that 
she has received a letter from Chief Perry Bellegarde indicating 
that proper research on her part would have discovered that 
First Nations annually undertake a rigorous accounting and 
audit process. Through this process, First Nations are 
answerable to government as well as their own citizens for all 
monies received at the First Nations level. First Nations have 
been, and will continue to be, accountable to their own people. 
 
Chief Bellegarde then goes on to say . . . I can assure you — 
referring to the member from Humboldt: 
 

I can assure you and your party, the Saskatchewan Party, 
that all of the money provided to the fund was properly 
distributed and that none of the $34 million are missing or 
unaccounted for. 

 
He further says: 
 

I would also like to take this opportunity to address your 
adamant call for a public inquiry into the alleged missing 
money. Again comments like this do nothing but reaffirm 
the negative perception that the public already has about 
First Nations people. I find it extremely irresponsible of 
your party to contribute to the difficulties and prejudices 
that our people face daily because it serves your political 
purposes. 

 
He then says: 
 

On behalf of First Nations in this region, I ask that you and 
your party be a bit more mindful of the comments you 
make and the impact, intended or not, they have on our 
growing First Nations population. 

 
Madam Member, I endorse Chief Bellegarde’s letter. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: Madam 
Minister, putting that letter on record is nothing that’s going to 
be a surprise to anybody. That record . . . that letter has been 
distributed all over the place. And I have responded to that 
letter. 
 
I have asked Chief Bellegarde this: I have asked whether you, 
as minister, gave him the information and the direction that it 
was his responsibility to ensure that all monies used from the 
First Nations Fund and all records of those monies were 
submitted to the Provincial Auditor. Because if you didn’t do 
that, you should have. 



2340 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

(18:00) 
 
I further asked Chief Bellegarde, or made a point to him, that if 
in fact a rigorous internal audit is taking place — and I 
substantiate that his words and his assurance of this, I think that 
is just great. But then if that rigorous audit is taking place, does 
have the records associated with how money is spent, then it 
would seem correct under the corporations Act to make sure 
that that is handed over to the Provincial Auditor. 
 
So that is the way that you would be accountable to 
government. Otherwise one cannot say you’re going to be 
accountable to government and not take the steps to ensure that 
accountability is in place. 
 
I have also mentioned to Chief Bellegarde that there need not be 
any . . . if a platform for prejudice is not given, if in fact there 
was open, transparent dealings as far as public money goes, that 
there will not be any platform for prejudice. 
 
And so, Madam Minister, I make those comments to you. I 
have, I have openly spoken about this issue with Chief 
Bellegarde on radio shows and have talked to many, many First 
Nations people in fact who are asking me, as I’ve mentioned to 
you before, have asked me to bring the issue forward, because 
they want to have an accountability measure in place that will 
assure them that the money is used for the purposes intended in 
the Act so that their people can benefit. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I turn the questioning over to my 
colleague from Spiritwood at this time. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, 
Mr. Minister, your officials again today. My questioning 
revolves around the Lac Eauclaire Treaty Land Entitlement, and 
the Pelican Lake Band Treaty Land Entitlement claim is on that 
portion of land. And at this time I would like to know if you 
have the information as to where the claim stands at this time? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much. I would like to 
thank you for that question. 
 
And again, I did want to very briefly answer the member from 
Humboldt just to make absolutely certain that she realizes and 
all members of this House realize that the First Nations Fund 
trustees have a responsibility to ensure accountability and they 
do have quality independent auditors to assist in putting 
procedures in place and they are committed to sharing the 
results of their audit with the Provincial Auditor. 
 
And quite frankly, I wouldn’t — if somebody sent me a letter 
like Chief Bellegarde sent the member from Humboldt — I 
don’t think I would be standing up and being proud of having 
received that sort of a letter. 
 
Now to the member opposite with respect to Lac Eauclaire and 
the Pelican Lake, I would like to point out to you that we have 
addressed occupant interests and we have made available land 
for sale. 
 
But as you likely know, there is a current issue of disagreement 
or dispute between the rural municipality of Big River and the 
Pelican Lake First Nation with respect to the Carlton to Green 

Lake Trail. We have offered to put into place a mediation 
process to resolve that. 
 
The Pelican Lake First Nation as well has agreed to enact a 
Band bylaw to protect and preserve the heritage of the trail. 
And I believe that this addresses the key concern of the RM 
(rural municipality). 
 
So I would be very hopeful that this particular treaty land 
entitlement matter can be settled fairly shortly. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, in 
your first regard to the member from Humboldt and your last 
statement, I will pass that on. And it’s maybe just as well she 
not be here, because we could keep going on for some time 
tonight. 
 
In regards to what you mentioned regarding the Pelican Lake 
Indian Band treaty land entitlement and the Carlton Trail 
portion, that was my next questioning. 
 
The reeve of the RM of Big River, Reeve John Teer mentions 
that there is an issue regarding the Lac Eauclaire TLE section 
which includes a portion of the Carlton to Green Lake Trail, 
and that’s what my next questioning is in regards. 
 
And you have mentioned that there’s a mediation process right 
now to try and rectify that problem. At this time can you 
expound on how long this may or may not take? And how soon 
the Carlton to Green Lake Trail will be looked at seriously so 
that the treaty land entitlement will go through with the 
expansion of that portion of the trail? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well, I would dearly love to be able to give 
the member opposite a clear, concise answer on this. 
Unfortunately as you may or may not know, the issue is still 
under some dispute, but we do have this mediation process on 
the go. 
 
I am aware that Sinclair Harrison of the SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) met today with the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing. I have offered to 
meet with Mr. Harrison on July 19 or 20 depending on his 
schedule and availability. 
 
We are very hopeful that we will be able to find a way round 
the impasse. As I mentioned, the Pelican Lake First Nation has 
agreed — and I think this is important information for people to 
know — they have agreed to enact a band bylaw to protect and 
preserve the heritage of the trail. 
 
And I do believe that addresses the main concern of the RM. 
However I will certainly, as I said, I will be meeting with Mr. 
Harrison, and if members of the RM want to meet with me as 
well, I will. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Madam Minister. 
Thank you for that answer. I think the people in and around the 
RM of Big River will look forward to that answer. 
 
I just want to go into . . . further in regards to Mr. Sinclair being 
at this meeting with you in regarding this matter. Is there any 
thought of having the reeve and maybe some councillors from 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2341 

 

Big River attend this meeting also because they actually deal 
with the process and the problem to begin with, rather than also 
Mr. Harrison? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well, again I thought I had indicated that. 
But I have not had a request from the RM of Big River to meet 
with me directly. However, I am more than willing to sit down 
with them at their convenience, within the next few weeks to 
discuss the matter. 
 
I have an open door policy in my office and that applies equally 
to RM councillors and reeves as it does to members of First 
Nations. So if they wish to meet with me to discuss the matter, I 
am more than willing to meet with them. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, I have a question that I believe would 
pertain to both ministers here this afternoon. 
 
It has to do with the treaty land entitlement settlement process. 
I’m aware of at least two RMs who are, find themselves in a 
very difficult situation because of this process. The situation is 
this. 
 
The RM of Edenwold and the RM of Cupar both . . . the Piapot 
Band has purchased land under both treaty land entitlements, 
specific land claims, in both RMs. The land is in the holding 
company. In the case of the RM of Edenwold, there is some 
$181,000 in tax arrears against that land. In the case of the RM 
of Cupar, there’s some $47,000 worth of tax arrears. 
 
Now part of those two figures, there’s also some charges by the 
RM for weed control that they were forced to do under the 
noxious weed control Act and so on. 
 
What remedies are available to these RMs to collect these 
taxes? 
 
Also I would like to make the ministers aware, in the case of the 
RM of Edenwold, there was some land that was transferred 
from the, from the holding company and went to reserve status 
with $24,000 worth of tax arrears owing against that land. The 
RM has not been able to collect those, to recover those taxes. 
And they are, they are quite concerned about this situation. 
 
And I’m first of all wondering, are the ministers aware of this 
situation? And if so, what are the remedies available to the 
RMs? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I would like to advise the member opposite 
that I did actually meet with various representatives, I believe it 
was from the RM of Edenwold and with the SARM board of 
directors about this matter and others, so certainly I am aware 
of it. 
 
With respect to the first issue you raised about the $180,000, 
that matter is before the courts so it would be improper for me 
to comment on it. 
 
With respect to the second matter that you raised, we have 
offered the services of a mediator and we are trying to find 
some resolution for both the RM and the First Nation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, does the province not feel they 

have a responsibility in this area. They were part of the 
negotiation process and the RMs . . . I believe SARM had an 
observer status. The local municipalities and the ratepayers 
within those municipalities are now caught in this situation 
where if they are not able to collect these taxes it’ll be a huge 
revenue loss to both RMs. 
 
And what I am seeking is some assurance from your 
government that at the end of the day, if these two RMs are not 
able to collect these taxes, that your government will come to 
their aid. Can you give those RMs that assurance? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Well I appreciate what you’re doing. And I 
do want to point out that all of us, First Nations and 
non-Aboriginal people, have to live together in this province 
and we have to find appropriate resolution to various issues 
including the matter of non-payment of taxes. 
 
But I don’t think you would come to me if you had a constituent 
in your riding who was refusing to pay his or her taxes and ask 
me to make a commitment on behalf of the provincial 
government to pay those property taxes. 
 
So I can’t make the commitment that you want from me. What I 
can say is we do have a mediator involved and the federal 
government has indicated that it will refuse to allow this land to 
attain reserve status until and unless the taxes are paid. 
 
(18:15) 
 
So I think that the processes are in place through the mediator 
and through the various safeguards that the federal government 
is putting into place to eventually resolve this issue. And it 
would be my hope that both the Piapot First Nation and the two 
RMs involved can continue to be good neighbours to each 
other. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, the RMs and the band are 
working together to try and solve this problem, but you 
indicated that if a ratepayer in one of the municipalities refused 
to pay his taxes, I certainly wouldn’t expect the provincial 
government to come to the municipality’s aid. But the 
municipality could acquire ownership of the land. 
 
The municipality, particularly in the RM of Edenwold’s case, 
where that land has already gone into reserve status, will not be 
able to attain ownership. And so therefore if those tax arrears 
cannot be collected, the ratepayers of that municipality will be 
left holding the bag. 
 
The provincial government negotiated with the federal 
government, along with the First Nations of this province, to set 
this process in place and what’s happening here is that the local 
ratepayers are being left out in the cold. They’re holding the bag 
on these tax arrears. And they have nowhere to turn but to the 
governments that negotiated the original agreement. And so 
what they are doing or asking for is some assurance from your 
government so . . . giving them an insurance that they won’t be 
left out in the cold and come up short with those dollars in tax 
arrears. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — I can appreciate that the member opposite 
did not appreciate my example of a private citizen not paying 



2342 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

taxes, so I’m going to try it again. I want to say we have offered 
to provide the services of a mediator in this dispute, and we are 
very hopeful that we will be able to find an answer to this, both 
for the RMs involved and for the First Nation involved. But we 
do not, as a provincial government, establish the rules with 
respect to seizure of land from reserves — that’s the federal 
government. 
 
So the solution that you would want to pursue must properly 
ought to be pursued with the federal government, not the 
provincial government. 
 
Having said that, I am not washing my hands of the matter. I am 
saying that we will provide mediation services and we will 
attempt to have the RM or the RMs involved be able to 
eventually recover this money that, that they say is owing to 
them. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, I don’t think we can let your 
government off the hook quite this easily. The RMs are a 
creature of the provincial government and therefore they are 
looking for some protection from the provincial government in 
this matter. 
 
They certainly, they are willing to work through the mediation 
process and all those sorts of things, but what they’re asking for 
at the end of the day, if none of the solutions work: are they 
going to be left holding the bag and lose those tax arrears? And 
are the local ratepayers of those municipalities going to have to 
carry that burden on their shoulders when it should be the 
responsibility of at least of all the people of this province if not 
all the people of this country? 
 
And that’s all they’re asking for is an assurance from your 
government. Will you be there with them at the end of the day 
if all these processes fail, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Again I’m going to try this. The complaint 
it seems to me is with Canada, not with the provincial 
government. Our obligations under the TLE process are to 
Canada. But we expect that other people’s, other parties’ 
obligations will be fulfilled, and we are hopeful that this will 
happen. 
 
It seems to me though that the RMs in question ought properly 
to be going to the federal government for a resolution on this. 
And again the provincial government is providing the services 
of a mediator. We’re not trying to leave them hanging out there. 
We are mindful of their concerns; we are mindful of the money 
that’s owing. And we are fairly confident through the processes 
that have been established that the RMs will be able to recover 
the money that’s owing to them from the First Nation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, you should know that the RMs 
tried to negotiate a tax compensation package under the specific 
land claims with Ottawa and they were told by Ottawa that 
Ottawa wouldn’t do that because it’s provincial . . . they deal 
with the provincial government. 
 
So now what you’re telling the RMs is going to Ottawa. Well, 
that doesn’t work, Madam Minister. 
 
So basically what you’re saying here today is that the RMs and 

the ratepayers of the RMs are left on their own and you’re not 
willing to stand by them, Madam Minister. That’s the message 
that’s coming through loud and clear. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Through the Chair, the only thing I can say 
is that the member is wrong when he says that there’s no 
compensation for tax loss for specific claims. There is a specific 
claims agreement that has been signed by SARM, endorsed by 
SARM, the money was paid to SARM with the agreement that 
it would be transferred to the municipalities as specific claims 
get resolved. And last year SARM, SSTA (Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association), and the Saskatchewan 
conservation and development authorities agreed to the package 
and it was in excess of $4 million. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just want to 
take this opportunity to thank the ministers and their officials 
today for the answers that we received. 
 
Subvote(IA01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (IA02), (IA14), (IA15), (IA16) agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Intergovernmental and Aboriginal Affairs 
Vote 30 

 
Subvote (IA16) agreed to. 
 
Vote 30 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Culture, Youth and Recreation 

Vote 27 
 
Subvote (CR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Beside me is Ken Pontikes, acting deputy minister. To his left, 
Jill McKeen, executive director, corporate development. To my 
right, Emile St. Amand, director of sport and recreation; Larry 
Chaykowski, executive director, finance, administration, and 
facilities; and Jocelyn Souliere, staffing and classification 
services. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome to the minister and officials. In the interest of time, I 
will be brief. If your answers will be the same, we won’t be 
here very long. I have a whole pile of questions and I think I’ll 
forego most of them, but I will ask you a few. 
 
On the film industry, Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister, I 
understand that a deal has been announced about a sound stage. 
Could the minister tell me what role the Culture, Youth and 
Recreation has played in this? And if it did, as to how many 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2343 

 

dollars? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll thank the member for the question. 
In actual fact there is no final determination yet about whether 
that project will go forward. But we do, through the department, 
administer the film tax credit, provide the funding to 
SaskFILM, which provides support to Saskatchewan 
filmmakers. And that would be our major role in the industry. 
 
But certainly are supportive of the project and hopeful that the 
various levels of government will be able to come together to 
make this happen so that we can have more benefit of film 
production in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So there’s 
no direct dollars — I may have missed the first part — there’s 
no direct dollars from Culture, Youth, Recreation that was 
going into the sound stage? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There isn’t. 
 
(18:30) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, this might be a 
follow-on to it and you may not have an answer for it, but it has 
been announced that the sound stage is going ahead, and I know 
that the film industry is maybe played between your department 
and other departments, but it’s a sizeable chunk of dollars that’s 
been announced going into it. And I’m wondering if there’s 
been any assurances from the film industry to you or your 
department for some kind of a long-range commitment for the 
dollars that we’re putting into this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — In actual fact, this project has been 
substantially driven out of the Regina Economic Development 
Authority. And there were business studies done and feasibility 
studies, and it appears as though the project, which is really 
more than a sound stage — I like to refer to it as an education 
broadcasting production centre — which links a number of 
other investments that have been made in CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) and SCN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Network) and SaskFILM and some private 
entrepreneurs in the film and production area into a single site 
to maximize that relationship. 
 
And in looking at that proposal and all the people that were 
consulted in developing it, it’s right now projected that there 
would be at least 80 per cent occupancy, which would mean 
that the project should run firmly in the black. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — That sounds good, Madam Minister. 
 
I’ve got a couple of questions now on lotteries, if I may, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. And it is my understanding that of every lottery 
dollar that’s spent in Saskatchewan, 13 cents go to something 
called the government payments. Can you tell us how much this 
amounts to on a yearly basis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The amount that I think you’re 
referring to — correct me if I’m wrong — is we do have a 
licensing fee that’s nine and a half per cent of sales, which 
amounts to 11.8 million. 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And may I 
ask how that money is used? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — That money flows into the General 
Revenue Fund and is part of setting the priorities of the budget 
right across government. So without tracking each dollar, some 
of it may have been spent on highways, some of it may have 
been spent on health care, but it’s spent on the general 
budgetary purposes of government. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So in absolute fairness, I guess, it’s 
really a hidden tax on the lottery system. Beyond this 13 cents, 
there’s another 2 cents in administration fees. How much do 
you take in annually on this 2 cents in administration fees? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’re not clear what your question is. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well the information I have is that 
beyond the 13 cents that we referred to, or 11.8, there’s an 
additional 2 cents on every dollar that is charged for an 
administration fee. Is this correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We can’t find the 2 cents you’re 
referring to, but while I’m on my feet I will mention that we 
are, I think, the only province in Canada that just transfers all 
the lottery money directly to sports, recreation, and culture 
while only retaining nine and a half per cent. So I would say 
there’s nothing hidden about this whole process. In fact it’s a 
very generous process. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Madam Minister, just a couple of 
questions on youth. Besides the hiring program that we 
discussed in one of our previous sittings, can you tell me if 
there’s any other initiatives that your department is planning to 
promote youth employment and training, other than the hiring 
program for the summer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s actually a couple of things 
underway and some things anticipated for the future. At the 
moment of course we have the summer employment program 
which is attempting to — and I think quite successfully — link 
people to career opportunities. 
 
But as well, we’re doing a project with the Labour Force 
Development Board because in their work — and as you know 
the Labour Force Development Board is a board co-chaired by 
business and labour to look at emerging labour force issues in 
Saskatchewan — in their work with students in the schools, 
they determined that students had a very poor understanding of 
what the opportunities are in Saskatchewan and couldn’t even 
name what the major sectors of economic activity were in the 
province. 
 
So they have a project going to help inform students of where 
the growth sectors are in the Saskatchewan economy so that 
students can be thoughtful about choosing their careers and 
understanding what kind of opportunities that exist in the 
province for them. 
 
And also for the future, there’s two other areas that I plan to be 
putting emphasis on. One is the development of more supports 
to youth who choose entrepreneurship as a course. And myself, 
the Minister of Economic Development, and Post-Secondary 



2344 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

Education had previously established but are working on some 
renewal on a youth PACE (Provincial Action Committee on the 
Economy), which will basically be young entrepreneurs and 
young people interested in business directions. 
 
And as well to look more broadly at what opportunities exist in 
rural Saskatchewan, urban, and the North, for more structured 
leadership development opportunities for youth. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. That was my next question, you already 
answered it, thank you. 
 
Madam Minister, if it’s appropriate, the rest of the questions I 
have are long and drawn-out, and if you would agree, I would 
just like to forward them to you and ask that if you would do a 
written reply, at some time, rather than go through all of them 
right now. 
 
If you would be agreeable to that, I’ll just send them to you at a 
later date. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And if I could 
also offer it to the member opposite, if at some point you 
wanted to meet and discuss what you thought were some of the 
priorities and to have a bit of a dialogue about this, we’d 
certainly be happy to do that. 
 
We have very good staff in the department, and I think there’s 
some exciting opportunities ahead and we’d be interested in 
having your input into that. So certainly I agree to answer the 
member’s questions at any time that he might bring them 
forward. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister, and one 
last one. When we spoke, I believe it was our first chance at 
estimates, we’d talked about cultural grants. And I may be 
wrong here, so excuse me if I am, but I understood that there 
was a methodology of cultural grants because I’d spoke about 
two places specific in my area. 
 
And I’m recollecting — I couldn’t find it in Hansard where you 
were going to provide me the methodology whereby these 
people could apply for it. And as yet I haven’t received that. 
And I don’t know if I understood you correctly at that time or 
not, if there is a method whereby they can apply for the cultural 
grants. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s our understanding that response is 
on its way to you, hopefully not by Pony Express but some 
quicker method. And so you should be receiving that shortly. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And if it 
comes by Pony Express, it goes along with the theme of the 
park that they’re trying to establish in Willow Bunch. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to thank you, Madam Minister, 
and your staff for the answers to the questions that we’ve put 
forward in the last few weeks on behalf of all of us on this side, 
and especially from my position as the critic for Youth, Culture 
and Recreation. So I’d like to thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I’d like to thank the member 

opposite for his interest in this area, and also all the people from 
the department who have worked to assist in answering the 
questions and keep this department on the path of growth and 
development. 
 
Subvote (CR01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (CR02), (CR05), (CR03), (CR04), (CR06) agreed to. 
 
Vote 27 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Culture, Youth and Recreation 
Vote 27 

 
Subvotes (CR04), (CR06) agreed to. 
 
Vote 27 agreed to. 
 
The Deputy Chair: —Thank you all very much. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Energy and Mines 

Vote 23 
 
Subvotes (EM01), (EM02), (EM03), (EM04), (EM05), (EM06), 
(EM07) agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Energy and Mines 
Vote 23 

 
Subvote (EM03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 23 agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
(18:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, leave to return to 
motions for return (debatable). 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS FOR RETURNS (Debatable) 
 

Return No. 1 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers, the order of the Assembly 
do issue for return no. 1 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Intergovernmental Affairs: the 
government’s expenditure for Team Canada’s trip to China 
in 2001. 

 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we now have the answer and I 
recommend we pass the motion. 



July 4, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2345 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 2 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
member from Saskatchewan Rivers, that an order of the 
Assembly do issue for a return no. 2 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Property Management 
Corporation: (1) the cost incurred to send the former 
Premier to Vancouver on Executive Air as part of the Team 
Canada Trade Mission in 2001; (2) the names of those who 
accompanied the former Premier on this trip and the cost. 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We now have an 
answer and I recommend we pass the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 57 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by the 
member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, that an order of the 
Assembly to issue for return no. 57 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: (1) the 
amount that was spent on salaries by ISC during the year 
2000; and (2) the amount of this salary expense that was 
related to ISC’s Land and Geomatics services and the 
amount of this salary expense that was related to other 
activities of ISC. 

 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we now have the answer. I 
recommend we pass the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 58 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by the member for Redberry Lake, that an 
order of the Assembly do issue a return no. 58 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs and Housing: (1) the 
total amount of grants-in-lieu paid, or to be paid by the 
province to the city of Regina for all provincial 
government-owned properties in the city; (2) that the 
amount paid, or to be paid, in grants-in-lieu to the school 
system in Regina for provincial government-owned 
property with the city for the current fiscal year; (3) 
whether the provincial government received a tax notice or 
grant-in-lieu notice from the city of Regina or the school 
divisions in the city for the current fiscal year and, if so, in 
what amount for each; (4) if the provincial government was 
subject to property taxation, the amount it would owe 
individually to the city of Regina and the school divisions 
in Regina for the current fiscal year. 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, we now have the 
answer and we recommend we pass the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 65 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I move seconded by the member 
from Lloydminster that an order of the Assembly do issue for 
return no. 65 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Northern Affairs: (1) the non-profit and 
community-based organizations that received funding from 
the office of Northern Affairs in the 2000-2001 fiscal year; 
(2) the amount that each of these organizations received. 

 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we now have the answer and I 
recommend we pass the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 67 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I move seconded by the member from Swift 
Current that an order of the Assembly do issue for a return no. 
67 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: (1) 
since, and including, 1996, the number of SaskPower 
employees that have been dismissed without cause; (2) the 
amount of total severance that has been paid to these 
dismissed employees; (3) the number of severance 
agreements that were accompanied by a gag order. 
 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, we now have the answer and I 
recommend we pass the motion. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Return No. 68 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move, seconded by the member from Rosetown-Biggar that an 
order of the Assembly do issue for the return no. 68 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Economic and Co-operative 
Development: the number of forestry jobs that have been 
created in Northern Saskatchewan since April 1, 2000 and 
what the actual figures are for the number of forestry jobs 
in Northern Saskatchewan on that date and the actual 
number currently. 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would move the 
following: 
 

That we amend return no. 68 by deleting all the words after 
“to the Minister of Economic Development” and substitute 
the following: 
 
Based on the four major forestry projects and many smaller 
projects in the forestry and forestry-related sectors, the 
amount of new investment that has taken place and the 
number of new jobs created since April 2000. 

 
And seconded by . . . 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 



2346 Saskatchewan Hansard July 4, 2001 

 

The Speaker: — State your point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, an amendment to a motion 
must in some way relate to the main motion. I guess the use of 
the word forestry in the motion would perhaps qualify it. But 
the original motion dealt with forestry jobs, Mr. Speaker, and 
the amendment in no way, shape, or form deals with jobs. 
 
(19:00) 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the member for his comments on 
raising the point of order. I would just reread the amendment as 
it is. The amendment reads: 
 

To the Minister of Economic Development: that based on 
the four major forestry projects and many smaller projects 
in the forestry and forestry-related sectors, the amount of 
new investment that has taken place and the number of new 
jobs created since April 2000. 
 

I would interpret that the item, new jobs, refers to jobs in the 
forestry sector; therefore I found the motion in order. 
 
Amendment agreed to on division. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 

Return No. 70 
 

Mr. Heppner: — I move, seconded by the member for 
Cannington, an order of the Assembly do issue for return no. 70 
showing: 
 

To the Minister responsible for the Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority: Provide the exact terms of 
reference of the Conflict of Interest Commissioner’s 
investigation of the former Minister of Liquor and Gaming. 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would recommend 
that we defeat this motion for a number of reasons. The most 
important and significant reason is that the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner is in fact an officer of this Assembly. And it is 
not the purview of any member of this Assembly to direct an 
independent officer of the Assembly in any way. 
 
So based on the responsibility of this Assembly to that 
individual, I recommend we defeat this motion. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 

Return No. 71 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, seconded by 
the member from Saltcoats, an order of the Assembly do issue 
for a return no. 71 showing: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: Whether the Workers’ 
Compensation Board pays to fly P.C. Consul, 
vice-president of human resources, technology and 
corporate support, back and forth from Calgary every 
weekend; and if so, the amount that this has cost so far and 
when it began? 

 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I recommend that we 
defeat this motion because of the personal issues related to the 
individual being asked about. And in this motion I am going to 
recommend to the Assembly that this motion be defeated. And I 
believe the member has been briefed on what those reasons 
were. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 19:06. 
 
 


