















































Hansard: June 28, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
 June 28, 2001 
 

 

2223 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, today I present a total of 10 
petitions from residents of the southwest concerned with the 
condition of Highway 43. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
Saskatchewan government to repair Highway 43 from the 
village of Vanguard to its junction with Highway 4 in order 
that area residents may have access to necessary services 
without endangering life and property. 
 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition that reveals that commercial greenhouses in 
Saskatchewan are classified differently than agricultural 
enterprises under the current labour standards legislation. The 
prayer of this petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary amendments to The Labour Standards Act to 
recognize the needs and realities faced by commercial 
greenhouse proprietors and employees. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I present this petition on behalf of petitioners in 
the Biggar area. Thank you for this opportunity. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have petitions to 
present again today from people in my constituency who are 
concerned about the Fyke report. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Kelvington health 
care centre be maintained at its current level, offering 
24-hour acute care, emergency and physician services, and 
that laboratory, physiotherapy, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services be readily accessible to users 
from Kelvington and district. 
 

The people that have signed these petitions are from 
Kelvington, Porcupine, Lintlaw, Rose Valley, Okla, Hendon. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 

of Glasnevin, Avonlea, and Kayville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
residents from actually across Saskatchewan that are concerned 
about the hospital in southwest Saskatchewan, in Swift Current. 
The prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, petitioners today on these petitions are from the 
city of Swift Current, Nipawin, Morse, Regina, Wymark, and 
Waldeck. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens who’ve 
expressed an interest in the maintaining and upgrading of the 
Saskatchewan road network. And the prayer goes as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and its vision 
of increasing the funding to $900 million over the next 
three years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed today by the good 
folks from Preeceville and Sturgis, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about the EMS (emergency medical services) report. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Lake Alma, 
Saskatoon, Kamsack, and Ceylon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition that is very similar to the one that was just presented, 
on behalf of the people of the Saskatchewan. The prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



2224 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work together to improve 
community-based ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Redvers, 
Wakaw, Antler, Storthoaks, Gainsborough, Redvers, and 
Reston, Manitoba. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition dealing with health care. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, transplant, and long-term care 
services available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners must have been the same ones 
that signed the last one because they also come from Redvers, 
Wawota, Antler, Storthoaks, Gainsborough, Carlyle, and 
Reston, Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
from citizens concerned about high energy prices. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial power and energy relief to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as is in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Meota, Battleford, and North 
Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present today to do with the lack of funding to non-profit 
personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 
 

The communities of the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are Melville, 
Bangor, Bredenbury, Esterhazy, Kamsack, Pelly, Stockholm, 
Atwater, and Churchbridge, Mr. Speaker. 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by the citizens concerned about the high rates that the 
Crown corporations are charging, SaskPower and SaskEnergy. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by citizens from Elbow, Regina, Saskatoon, and Moose 
Jaw. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again I rise in the Assembly to bring forth a petition with 
concerns regarding the cellular telephone coverage in the 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood and Chitek Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again with a petition from citizens concerned about the high 
energy rates. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Cadillac. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly to increase 
funding in all areas of speech and language services for 
preschoolers; and nine other petitions that are hereby tabled as 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2225 

 

addendums to previously tabled petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise on behalf of my colleague, the hon. member for 
Regina Wascana Plains, to introduce to you and through you to 
the members of the Assembly a group of seven young people — 
students who are enrolled at the Ranch Ehrlo Society in Pilot 
Butte. And they’re accompanied here today by their teachers, 
Everett Agopsowicz and Todd Frei. 
 
These young people are aged 14 to 17 years of age. I believe it’s 
their first visit to the Legislative Assembly and I would ask all 
members to accord them a very warm welcome today. Thank 
you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and to all members of the House two 
young ladies seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. These two 
ladies represent businesses here in the city of Regina and 
they’ve come today to bring to the government’s attention a 
very serious concern facing all businesses in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to introduce Ms. Wendy Hernandez. Ms. Hernandez is 
the owner of Synergy water consulting, a business here in the 
city of Regina. And the second lady is Ms. Tamara Fiorante, 
who is also a business owner in the city here. 
 
And I would ask all members to welcome both Ms. Hernandez 
and Ms. Fiorante this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 
to introduce to you and to all members of the legislature some 
guests who are from Regina, North Dakota, and Minnesota. 
And I’m talking about the people in your gallery. 
 
Ken Stalwick is here, in the middle. Ken is a teacher at Luther 
College in Regina, the high school. And he has with him his 
parents Harvey and Margaret Stalwick. Many of you will 
recognize both Harvey and Margaret as long-time Regina 
residents. Harvey was the former dean of the School of Social 
Work here in Regina. He’s now a professor at Concordia in 
Moorhead, Minnesota. And Ken’s especially pleased to have 
with him his brother Trevor’s children, Ashley and Michael. 
And they live just south of Fargo, North Dakota. 
 
I’d ask all members to welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on behalf 
of the Saskatchewan Party official opposition I too would like 
to welcome the students and the staff from Ranch Ehrlo. I had 
the opportunity to visit there a little while back. And I can 
certainly appreciate the work being done. 
 
So welcome here today and I hope you enjoy the proceedings. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all Members of the 
Legislative Assembly, two young people sitting in your gallery. 
 
They are Cameron Broten, and Julianne Broten. They are from 
Saskatoon. And Cameron is a student at the University of 
Saskatchewan who has spent some time in the last year in 
Guatemala and is now tree planting in British Columbia but 
plans to complete his degree at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan). 
 
Julianne is a political studies student at the University of 
Western Ontario. And she is working in my office for the 
summer and then she is going to return there to complete her 
degree. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Speaker, that their grandfather, Mr. 
Broten, served in this legislature I believe in the Douglas 
government. And I’ve had the opportunity to meet both of these 
young people, and I’m happy to report to you that they’re very 
astute observers of politics. 
 
And I’d like to ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
them here to the legislature today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and to all the members of the House, three 
very good friends of mine and the member from Coronation 
Park. 
 
Seated in your west gallery is Miles Pelletier, Vince Folk, and 
Mick Ryan. And I know the gentlemen are down here in Regina 
today on some business and they’ve taken some time out to take 
in the proceedings of the House. 
 
So I ask all the members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Generous Gift to Government House 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week at 
Government House, the Premier, the Provincial Secretary, and 
125 others were guests of the Lieutenant Governor for a 
presentation of a very generous gift to Government House, and 
for a warm tribute to the couple making the donation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, friends of Government House have been working 
for years to restore the house and its furnishings to the 
conditions resembling those that were in place at the time when 
Monsieur Forget, our first provincial Lieutenant Governor, 
assumed office in 1905. At that time Madame Forget brought 
with her a grand piano which, unfortunately, no longer 
functions. 
 



2226 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

But at this gathering the problem was remedied as Dr. Morris 
and Jacqui Shumiatcher presented a new Yamaha grand piano 
to replace that of Madame Forget’s. If you have priced a grand 
piano lately, Mr. Speaker, you will appreciate the magnitude as 
well as the appropriateness of this gift to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
On its first evening the piano was given a proper and excellent 
workout by some of Regina’s finest musicians including 
Carolyn Speirs, Ed Willett, Barry Robins, Pauline Minevich, 
David McIntyre, and our Premier, Lorne Calvert, who led them 
in a rousing rendition of “For They are Jolly Good Fellows” to 
thank Jacqui and Shumi. 
 
Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor thanked the Shumiatchers 
on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan, and I would like to 
add my voice to thank this very generous couple as well. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to remind the members they are 
not to use first or last names of members seated in the House 
except in the case of quotations, and I do not believe that that 
was a quotation. 
 

St. Gabriel School Graduation 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last week I had the 
pleasure of attending St. Gabriel School graduation. 
 
The grade 9 graduates entered the auditorium to the music 
“Wide Open Spaces” sung by the Dixie Chicks. 
 
After the singing of “O Canada” the audience and students 
heard remarks from the principal, Mr. Julian Slywka. 
 
Presentations to the grads included pins from the St. Gabriel’s 
Home and School, and each grad also received a bible from the 
local Catholic Women’s League. 
 
Mr. Julian Slywka and Mr. Garchinski presented scrolls. Mr. 
Garchinski commented on the high level of stress students and 
young people must deal with in today’s fast-paced world. 
 
One of the grade 9 graduates, Lisa deBussac, sang the song 
“Voices of the Future” written by her sister, Eboni. 
 
There was a number of awards presented but the hands-down 
winner was a young lady named Clare Webster, winning a total 
of six awards. 
 
The St. Gabriel Home and School Award is given to the student 
in each grade that shows a positive attitude, is co-operative and 
respectful to others, as well as being a hard worker. The 
homeroom teacher selects the winners. 
 
This year’s winner for the grade 6 class was my daughter 
Alexandra; grade 7 winner was my son, Marshall, who has won 
this award on three other occasions. 
 
Most improved student award for the grade 9 graduating class 

also went to my daughter, Lacey. Lacey and her friends, Lisa 
deBussac, Tanya Guran, will be attending St. Angela’s 
Academy at Prelate this fall, and we wish them well. 
 
The graduation ceremony ended with the graduates leaving to 
the song “Smoke on the Water.” Graduates, their parents, 
teachers, and guests attended a barbecue later that afternoon. 
 
I’d like to congratulate students, staff, and parents on a very 
successful year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Companies Expand Operations 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like 
highlight some good economic news from Saskatoon. Mitchells 
Gourmet Foods is expanding its operation by a $42 million 
processing facility which will create 155 new jobs and 
Mitchells is working with the Muskeg Leg and Whitecap 
reserves to recruit production line workers. 
 
Centennial Food of Calgary will be constructing a plant in 
Saskatoon, an investment of $34 million to employ 190 people. 
 
CNH-Saskatoon, which was Flexi-Coil, is hiring 300 additional 
production workers. And in high-tech, Mr. Speaker, PMC 
Sierra is hiring an additional 20 full-time employees in the 
coming year. 
 
SED Systems has three new contracts for design, construction, 
and installation of high-tech gizmos with a value of $12 million. 
 
Two more, Mr. Speaker: Digital Environmental Management 
and WaveCom Electronics are expanding to make new 
contracts and satisfy growing demand. 
 
There’s more, Mr. Speaker, TGS Properties had first quarter 
revenue of $6.2 million — up 65 per cent from one year ago. 
Fytokem Products is selling products from Saskatchewan herbs 
and plants to L’Oreal and Jergens for the cosmetic market — 
that’s if the opposition haven’t trampled them all from hiding in 
the bushes. 
 
And in a list compiled by cashless Economic Development 
department, there were 10 other small businesses opened in 
May. 
 
So don’t be fooled by the doom and gloom of the Sask Party, 
Mr. Speaker, we’re doing fine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyburn Goalie Drafted by 
Los Angeles Kings Hockey Team 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
20-year-old Terry Denike, goalie for the Weyburn Red Wings 
was drafted on the weekend by the Los Angeles Kings in the 
fifth round of the NHL (National Hockey League) draft. 
 
Denike’s coach, Dwight McMillan, had great praise for the 
young hockey player. He said: 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2227 

 

God gave him talent, but Denike works hard every day and 
he gives it everything he’s got. 
 

McMillan says he’s also impressed with Denike as a 
community person and he’s helped extensively with the young 
people in the schools. Denike played for the Weyburn Red 
Wings starting three years ago when he was 17, and he 
backstopped for them to win the league championship this year. 
And they made it to the Anavet Cup and then onto the Royal 
Bank Cup. 
 
Denike says the Weyburn Red Wings are the best organization 
he’s ever been part of. 
 
Congratulations Terry. I’m sure you’ll make the community of 
Weyburn and the Weyburn Red Wings very proud. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Benefits for Widows 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, a sad fact of Canadian history 
is that workers’ compensation benefits for spouses of workers 
killed on the job were terminated when the widows remarried. 
This is why the government chose to correct this wrong in 1999 
by choosing to make a one-time $80,000 payment to these 
widows, and Canada Customs and Revenue Agency assured us 
that the $80,000 would be tax free. Many widows accepted the 
payment only to have some of the workers’ compensation 
money clawed back through the old age security. 
 
The federal government have twice refused our request for a 
remission order. Now in order to overcome this setback, the 
widows and this government are working together on a number 
of fronts to put pressure on the federal government to issue a 
remission order that would allow the widows to keep the money 
they are entitled to — the full $80,000 they received from the 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Part of the criteria for getting a remission included 
demonstrating that financial hardship, coupled with an 
extenuating factor, has been caused. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these widows have suffered a hardship, a hardship 
caused by the federal agency. This clawback is wrong and 
unfair and we are going to work together to resolve this issue. 
 
I would ask all hon. members to join me in urging Ottawa to 
issue a remission order so that these widows can receive the 
money to which they are entitled. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shortage of Speech Therapists in Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I delivered 
to the minister responsible for disabilities, letters from parents 
of children with speech and language difficulties. 
 
Communications disorders affect 10 per cent of all children. 
Research shows that children who receive early therapeutic 

intervention can improve their language functioning, thus 
reducing the need for special help in the school years. 
 
There is a severe shortage of speech therapists in the province 
and many positions are vacant. Speech pathologists and 
therapists are being lured to Alberta. This means that parents 
here oftentimes cannot access services for their children. 
 
One mother wrote that her son, who is autistic, has been 
diagnosed three times but has yet to receive any therapy. Private 
therapy costs between 55 and $80 an hour, which puts it beyond 
the reach of many young families. This is another example of 
the two-tier health care system the government claims to oppose 
but which in reality is already here. 
 
The sad truth is that unless families can afford private therapy 
sessions, their children will receive service on a very infrequent 
basis. One letter I received said it best: 
 

All of the children of our province deserve the right to 
communicate to the best of their ability so that they can 
achieve their academic and career goals, establish social 
relationships, and lead healthy, productive lives. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Saskatchewan Urban Parks 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the proudest 
achievements of past NDP/CCF (New Democratic 
Party/Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) governments 
has been the establishment of an extensive urban park system. 
This was the legacy of both the Douglas and the Blakeney 
governments. They believe that everyone should be able to 
enjoy and to access parks, whether they live in a city or not. 
 
And on Tuesday, this government continued the commitment 
shown by these previous governments by announcing a 
significant new investment in urban parks. With the help of the 
Centenary Fund, the government provided $1.5 million to six 
urban parks. The new investment will be provided over three 
years, and it will be divided between the six parks that make up 
the Association of Saskatchewan Urban Parks and Conservation 
Agencies. 
 
These parks include Chinook Parkway in Swift Current, the 
Battlefords River Valley in North Battleford, the Meewasin 
Valley Authority in Saskatoon, the Wakamow Valley Authority 
in Moose Jaw, the Wascana Centre Authority in Regina, and the 
Tatagwa Parkway in Weyburn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these parks play an important role in their 
respective communities, and indeed right across the province. 
These urban parks not only add beauty to their communities, 
they help to stimulate tourism, encourage environmental 
awareness, and support economic development. 
 
The new funding provided by the Centenary Fund will assure 
that these parks continue to contribute to the recreational 
opportunities of the citizens of Saskatchewan and the tourism 
and economic climate of the province. It is important that we 
build upon the legacy left by the previous governments and 
preserve this legacy to make sure that future generations will be 



2228 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

able to enjoy Saskatchewan’s urban parks. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Legislation to Protect Children in the Sex Trade 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Justice. Yesterday, The Special Committee to Prevent the 
Abuse and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade 
introduced its final report. After months and months of very 
serious work, the committee believes the recommendations we 
have put forward will allow for the development of the some of 
the strongest laws in the country to prevent the involvement of 
children in the sex trade and punish those who prey on these 
children. 
 
The government has put The Highway Traffic Act on the order 
paper for Tuesday. Mr. Speaker, to the minister, are the changes 
proposed for The Highway Traffic Act going to address any of 
the recommendations in the report, and if so, will you please 
detail the changes the government is preparing to make. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the . . . remind the member to 
direct her questions through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to thank the member for the question. 
 
Notice was given yesterday, I believe within an hour or two of 
question period, of changes to The Highway Traffic Act. I’m at 
a loss to explain to the Assembly as to how we can anticipate 
legislation that isn’t yet before the Legislative Assembly. 
Suffice it to say, Mr. Speaker, that this matter will come up on 
Tuesday. But we can consult with the member to advise her of 
the specific amendments in The Highway Traffic Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am very 
excited about this and I am very pleased. The children of the 
province have waited a long time and so have every person in 
this province. So I am pleased to hear that the government will 
be taking some very quick action to deal with certain items that 
the special committee has identified would act as a deterrent to 
those who prey on children through the sex trade. 
 
I want to make it perfectly clear that the Saskatchewan Party 
will certainly support legislation based on the recommendations 
put forward by the committee because we believe the protection 
of our children is of utmost importance to our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the official opposition would be pleased to give 
leave today for the government to introduce changes to The 
Highway Traffic Act today. Will the minister accept this offer 
and bring this legislation forward this afternoon? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — I, as one member of the 

Assembly, would certainly be willing to do that. But these are 
matters that the House leaders decide on, and it’s up to those 
two individuals as members of the House. If they want to do 
that, Mr. Speaker, I think I would be delighted with that, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, I can guarantee the minister that our 
House Leader and our entire caucus will certainly be more than 
pleased to give assent to this happening today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, it is imperative that the provincial 
government now prepare to move as quickly as possible to 
implement the recommendations brought forward by the special 
committee. If some of the recommendations are made during 
this session, it will be a great start. But to wait another year for 
any other action would be inexcusable. 
 
(14:00) 
 
There are children on the street today that need our help. There 
are johns preying on these children. And I ask each and every 
member of this House to stop and to think, right now, how 
many children on the streets in this province will be sexually 
abused in this province over this long weekend. Surely 
something can be done so that it doesn’t continue for a whole 
year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this government commit to a fall session of 
the legislature so that more of these recommendations can be 
implemented in legislation, or are they prepared to allow the 
abuse and exploitation of children in our province for another 
year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened with 
some interest to the comments made by the member opposite 
with respect to putting this piece of legislation through the 
House this afternoon. If the member was interested in that, they 
had a list of the agenda items for today, they knew that we gave 
notice of motion for the legislation, and we could have had it on 
the agenda for today. It would have been as simple as a phone 
call if they disagreed with the agenda. 
 
But having said that, Mr. Speaker, let me say to the members of 
the opposition that this legislation will be before the House 
before it adjourns. If they are interested in giving speedy 
passage to it, we would be more than willing to see the Bill 
passed in a couple of hours, because that’s very possible to do. 
 
I want to close by saying, Mr. Speaker, that I want to commend 
members on this side of the House who chaired and who sat on 
that committee and who did so much work over the past years 
to ensure that we could put in place rules and processes where 
children in this province can be protected. 
 
I do take though, however, a little bit of offence to that member, 
knowing that the members from this side of the House who sat 
on that committee are every bit as concerned and every bit as 
convinced that we need to find solutions and worked every bit 
as hard as she did on initiating these initiatives. 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2229 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Remission Process for the Provincial Sales Tax 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP’s economic development plan is a massive 
failure, thanks in part to high taxes and bureaucratic red tape 
that buries small businesses and kills jobs. That’s why the NDP 
has just posted the worst job loss record since the Great 
Depression. That’s why more than 30,000 people have left 
Saskatchewan in the past 12 months. And that’s why people are 
giving two thumbs down to this incompetent, arrogant, and tired 
NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Wendy Hernandez is a small-business owner in 
Regina, and if the Finance minister took the time to read his 
mail last week, he will be familiar with Ms. Hernandez’s 
concern. She says the way the NDP is collecting the PST 
(provincial sales tax) is killing her business and many other 
small businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP government forcing small 
businesses to pay the PST to the government before the 
business even collects the PST from its customers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, for the information of the 
House — yes, I did read the letter from Ms. Hernandez and I 
think I have also responded to her. 
 
I want to tell the House, Mr. Speaker, that PST remissions are 
due by the 20th of the month following the purchase of any 
product or service, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite who’s suggesting to 
the House that we’re not concerned about small business, that I 
have a letter from the Canadian Federation of Independent 
Business, which is the spokesperson, Mr. Speaker, for small 
business. And what they have to say about our recent changes 
to PST is this. They say, this is from Marilyn Braun, the 
director: 
 

CFIB is therefore pleased that improvements are being 
made to make it easier for businesses to report to 
government. This is indeed good news and will encourage 
entrepreneurial activity and job creation in the small 
business sector. 

 
And if I have to choose who to believe, Mr. Speaker, the 
Canadian Federation of Independent Business or that member, 
I’m going with small business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, Wendy Hernandez owns a small 
business here in — called Synergy water consulting — in 
Regina and she wants to grow her business here in 
Saskatchewan. But she is considering leaving this province 
because of the NDP government. 
 
The problem is that every time she turns around, the 
government is throwing up another roadblock to her success, 

like forcing her small business and thousands of businesses in 
this province to pay the PST on sales they make, before they 
collect the PST from their customer. Not only is that unfair, it 
also adds to the operating cost of the business and makes the 
business less competitive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, small businesses collect millions of dollars of PST 
for the NDP (New Democratic Party) government. Will the 
minister listen to the concerns of Wendy Hernandez and 
thousands of small businesses like hers? Will the minister stop 
punishing small businesses simply for collecting PST on behalf 
of the NDP government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve already indicated to the 
House that PST is due on the 20th day of the month following 
the purchase. 
 
But I want to say to the House and the public, Mr. Speaker, that 
not only have we cut red tape for small business, as indicated by 
the Canadian Federation of Independent Business, but I can also 
report that in this budget, Mr. Speaker, we cut the small 
business corporate income tax rate from 8 per cent to 6 per cent 
and raised the level at which the lower rate applies. And do you 
know what the opposition did, Mr. Speaker? They voted against 
it. 
 
So it’s one thing for this member to stand up in this House and 
say that he wants to support small business; when it actually 
comes to doing anything for small business, Mr. Speaker, they 
oppose it, Mr. Speaker. That’s their record. 
 
Their record is one of complaining; our record is one of making 
changes that benefit small business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — The minister I think talks about a world that 
doesn’t really exist. And I wonder if Mr. Hernandez’s concerns 
about collecting of his PST are indeed interpreted the same way 
by this minister. 
 
The NDP, as government, is not putting more money in the 
pockets of Saskatchewan families. Families are paying more. 
They’re paying more PST, more for SaskPower, and more for 
SaskEnergy. 
 
This NDP government is not creating jobs. The NDP has killed 
21,000 jobs in the last . . . the worst job record in the last 70 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is using every business in Saskatchewan 
as a tax collector. In many cases the businesses are required to 
pay the government before the customer pays the business. 
Typical NDP business plan — the government gets fatter and 
the businesses get poorer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister do the right thing today and 
extend the payment period for business to pay the PST, or is the 
NDP content to keep gouging small businesses and chase them 
out of the province? 
 



2230 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, they get up and talk about 
business having to collect tax. When they were in office, what 
did they do? They harmonized the PST with the GST (goods 
and services tax). That’s what they did. They wanted everybody 
to be their tax collector. And when we got into office, we 
cancelled harmonization, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say this too. They say they’re concerned about 
business. What did they do this week in the House? They voted 
to give no funding to the Tourism Authority, no funding to the 
Small Business Loans Association, no funding to the Trade and 
Export Development agency, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they 
did. No funding to the regional economic development 
authorities. 
 
Because when it comes to complaining, they deserve an A, Mr. 
Speaker; when it comes to actually supporting any measure to 
help small business, Mr. Speaker, they deserve an F and that’s 
exactly what they’re going to get from the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want 
to bring to the attention of the Finance minister what is 
happening out there to small business. And I want to read a 
quotation from Ms. Wendy Hernandez in the letter that the 
Minister of Finance has indicated he has received. I quote: 
 

The message is clear from you and your government, it is 
not profitable to do business in Saskatchewan. 

 
That is what she wrote in a letter to the Finance minister last 
week. 
 
Ms. Hernandez also goes on to give the NDP the following 
warning, and I quote: 
 

In speaking to other business owners, many are beginning 
to vote with their feet by leaving the province. 
 

Mr. Speaker, Ms. Hernandez is confirming what we have been 
saying for months. The economic development plan of the NDP 
government is failing miserably and it is chasing people and 
jobs out of this province. 
 
That’s why the Saskatchewan Party voted to defeat the NDP’s 
Economic Development budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP government has a 
chance today to do something that will actually help businesses. 
Will the minister announce that he will extend the due date for 
submission of PST by 30 days, effective July 1 of this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, we’re cutting small-business 
taxes; they voted against it. We’re investing in technology to 
cut red tape for small business, congratulated by the Federation 

of Independent Business; they voted against it. 
 
But what I find the most galling in all of this, Mr. Speaker, is 
they talk about wanting lower taxes. That member, Mr. 
Speaker, files a report with the media from their economic 
adviser, WEFA. What does it say? On page 10 it says this; their 
adviser says: 
 

Consider the experience of the federal government. They 
are refraining from further commitments to tax reduction. 
 

And that’s what they say we should do in this report. They say 
we should not cut taxes, even though day after day they say the 
taxes are too high. 
 
Well I’ve got news for them Mr. Speaker. We’re cutting taxes 
in this fiscal year. We’re cutting taxes in the next fiscal year as 
announced in last year’s budget. And we’re going to cut taxes 
the year after that for small business, for individuals, and 
everybody else, with or without the support of that sorry Tory 
opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Rates 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all of the 
rhetoric in the world from the Minister of Finance doesn’t 
change the fact that this government’s policies are hurting small 
business in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister of SaskEnergy. 
High taxes and PST policies are certainly hurting small business 
but so are rising utility rates. Meanwhile, the natural gas price 
continues to fall dramatically. Today’s spot price, $3.78 a 
gigajoule. Today’s one-year price, $4.58 a gigajoule. Add the 
50 cents that SaskEnergy says it costs to land it here, you’re still 
barely over five bucks. And what do we all have the privilege of 
paying to the NDP for gas: $6.30 a gigajoule, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Natural gas prices are going down; SaskEnergy rates are going 
up. Mr. Speaker, why is SaskEnergy gouging Saskatchewan 
residents? When will the minister direct SaskEnergy to take the 
necessary steps to pass on the falling price of natural gas to the 
people who deserve it — the customers of SaskEnergy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, day after day this member 
rises in the legislature to ask why SaskEnergy won’t pass on the 
savings. Mr. Speaker, day after day I rise in the legislature and 
respond by saying the process that SaskEnergy has, Mr. 
Speaker, will ensure that lower prices will be passed on to 
Saskatchewan energy customers, Mr. Speaker — will be passed 
on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wish the member would listen to what I’m 
saying because the savings will, will, will be passed on to 
SaskEnergy customers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, supplementary question to the 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2231 

 

minister. How will those savings be passed on and when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I have tried to 
explain this and I give the member credit by acknowledging he 
said he’s not an expert. 
 
There is a very different process, Mr. Speaker, of the buying 
policy that SaskEnergy has in place versus many of the private 
utilities that member chooses to quote from, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As an example he says why don’t we buy on the spot? Well 
let’s look at Calgary or let’s look at Edmonton where last year 
most of those folks there purchased from companies who were 
buying on the spot price, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, through SaskEnergy, we sold at $4.52 a 
gigajoule. In Edmonton and Calgary, Mr. Speaker, they paid 
close to $10 a gigajoule, Mr. Speaker. We hedge; we lock in 
prices. The customers and the companies, I should say, that he 
quotes from, Mr. Speaker, they buy on the spot price. I think 
that the process that SaskEnergy employs is one that we should 
continue to stick with. 
 
And again I say, I would far rather live in Saskatchewan here 
where we have guaranteed low prices, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister’s 
confirmed a couple of things. One, we are now paying too much 
for natural gas and the NDP may return it to the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re hearing. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps saying that $6.30 
is the maximum rate and some day he’s going to cut 
SaskEnergy rates. Well every day he waits he’s overcharging 
SaskEnergy customers and every day he waits he’s losing 
SaskEnergy customers. The city of Estevan is now considering 
dropping SaskEnergy and using a private supplier for natural 
gas. The city manager of Estevan says he could save 60 to 
$120,000 a year by buying it from the other company. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other companies are charging less for natural gas. 
It’s clear SaskEnergy is overcharging. When is the minister 
going to do the right thing and direct SaskEnergy to take the 
necessary steps to cut the price of natural gas? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from the 
Vancouver Sun where there was an application made to the BC 
Utilities. And here is what happened in BC (British Columbia), 
Mr. Speaker, where they said the volatile . . . volatility, I should 
say, of gas prices was much too volatile yet. It says 
 

. . . in an application filed Tuesday before the BC Utilities 
Commission, BC Gas recommended against a rate 
reduction, saying natural gas markets are still (far) too 
volatile, (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Mr. Speaker, clearly what SaskEnergy has done by employing a 

process of locking in and hedging, buying insurance or collars if 
you will, has proved to save Saskatchewan consumers of 
natural gas far more than any other jurisdiction in North 
America, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to quote, Mr. Speaker, from an article here, from 
The Herald of June 19. It says: 
 

Fact and reality have no place in the Sask Party side of this 
debate. Swift Current’s own MLA, Brad Wall, led the 
charge with a daily rant in the legislature quoting irrelevant 
numbers from irrelevant analysts about irrelevant 
comparisons between Alberta and Saskatchewan. 

 
End of quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rates for Ambulance Service 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is the birthplace of 
medicare . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Saskatchewan is the birthplace of medicare, 
Mr. Speaker, where universal and equal access to medical care 
is viewed as a right. The Canada Health Act expressly prohibits 
policies that result in two-tier access to health care yet this is 
what is happening in Saskatchewan with rural residents paying 
the penalty for living greater distances from medical facilities 
than their urban cousins. 
 
I’m referring to ambulance service, Mr. Speaker. The Fyke 
report says that: 
 

Ambulance fees should not be based on distance. Rural 
residents are inherently disadvantaged by their distance 
from more specialized services. It is unfair that they should 
also pay higher rates when transport to services is required. 

 
No one is arguing against that recommendation. The 
Saskatchewan Emergency Medical Services Association 
recommends a standard ambulance fee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question for the Minister of Health: will you 
undertake to immediately institute standard ambulance charges 
throughout the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very 
pleased to have this question from the member because this is 
an issue throughout the province that we’re looking at very 
carefully. 
 
One of the reasons that we commissioned the Emergency 
Medical Services Review last year, and we received a report 
about this, was to look at exactly this issue about access to 
medical care in Saskatchewan. 
 
There was some suggestions made in that report. There have 
been some very good ideas also brought forward by the 
associations of the people who work in this area. Mr. Fyke had 
a chance to look at some of this. We are reviewing that within 



2232 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

the department. The Standing Committee on Health Care will 
probably receive some information about that as well. It’s all 
included in our overall review because it is a crucial factor in 
how we design our health system for the future. 
 
What we are going to do is listen to the people. We are going to 
listen and build on the positive things that we have now so that 
we can have a better system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, the question of ambulance fees 
has been studied by the EMS development project, the 
Saskatchewan Emergency Services Association, and the Fyke 
Commission. They’ve all come back with exactly the same 
recommendation, standard fees throughout the province. 
 
Everyone agrees that basing ambulance rates on distance 
discriminates against rural residents. No one is disagreeing with 
that. 
 
We have consensus, there is simply no reason to delay further 
the government acting on all of the reports, which ask for equal 
service for all Saskatchewan residents. 
 
There is also the 3.5 million the government announced quite 
some time ago to standardize rates of pay for EMS workers 
throughout the province. That has still not been paid out. When 
is that going to be paid out? 
 
Why is the government delaying when everyone is in agreement 
that standard ambulance charges should be a right of 
Saskatchewan residents? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The amount of 
money that the member refers to, the 3.5 million is included in 
this year’s budget, and I assume that it will be resolved when 
we resolve all of the budget issues so that it can be paid out at 
that time. So I’m looking forward to that happening very soon. 
 
What I would say to the member is that we need to work with 
the providers of the emergency medical services. We need to 
work with the local communities as they define and decide on 
what kind of care they need. And we also need to look at the 
total picture in the province, because all of the factors that are 
there from all these different parts will help us build a better 
system for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have a great deal of faith in the 
people on this side of the House for how we run this system and 
we’re going to continue to build on that strength. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker. I was on to 
another item on the agenda already. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Excuse me. Would the Assembly give leave 
to revert back to ministerial statements? 
 
Leave granted. 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Tabling the Report on the 
Disability Action Plan in Saskatchewan 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
thank my colleagues in the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it gives me great satisfaction, as Minister 
Responsible for Disability Issues, to table with this Assembly a 
significant report, the Saskatchewan Disability Action Plan, 
prepared by the Saskatchewan Council on Disability Issues. 
This Council has worked for the past two years consulting 
extensively with the public and the disability community to 
produce this document. 
 
I urge my colleagues on both sides of the House to read and 
consider this report. It represents to us the thoughts and the 
feelings of people with disabilities and particularly what action 
we, as government and as a community, can take to help people 
with disabilities achieve greater inclusion into mainstream 
society. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one in five people in Saskatchewan reports having 
a disability. This is a huge population which is too often 
marginalized and living on the edges of society. The central 
theme to the Saskatchewan Disability Action Plan is 
citizenship, the concept that individuals with disabilities have 
the same rights and responsibilities as other citizens to be 
included and to participate fully in society. 
 
This government supports that philosophy and will be working 
with the disability community and with this Assembly to 
respond to the many thoughts and ideas put forward in this 
report within the concept of citizenship. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to summarize the seven areas the 
report focuses on because they illustrate the diversity of issues 
facing this community and facing this Assembly. They are: 
health, education, employment, disability supports, safety and 
security, income support, awareness and understanding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this document provides a framework that will 
enable this Assembly to consider new programs and policies 
that will help this significant portion of our population live a 
better life and to contribute more to the life of the province. 
 
I urge all members, Mr. Speaker, to give it their full and 
thoughtful consideration and to incorporate this report into all 
our future actions. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I want to 
take a moment firstly to thank the minister for sending me a 
copy of the statement he gave this afternoon. But as well to 
compliment all the individuals who have taken the time to 
address this issue in regards to disabilities and how people with 
disabilities live in our society, how they’re treated, how society 
treats them. 
 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2233 

 

And putting forward a number of ideas, Mr. Speaker, that I’m 
sure, as the minister has indicated, will be looked over and 
discussed very carefully so that we indeed can begin to look 
very carefully at how we treat individuals with disabilities; how 
we take the time to understand the problems that they face just 
in their everyday lives, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as the minister indicated, just some of the significant 
hurdles that they face, whether it’s a health problem or whether 
it’s education, employment opportunities, Mr. Speaker, and 
disability supports. 
 
And certainly my colleagues and I have had representation from 
individuals themselves who have disabilities regarding some of 
the issues they face such as . . . One of the major factors that 
many people with disabilities face right now, not only in our 
large centres but in all centres across this province, is the ability 
to travel around or have access to public transit and times when 
they could use it to provide, especially when you look at 
employment, Mr. Speaker, having public transit available so 
that you can get to a job and back from a job and have access to 
a public transit that does provide that opportunity. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, in consultation with the minister . . . 
And I look forward to discussing this a little further as well 
when we get into further discussion in estimates. 
 
But I believe, Mr. Speaker, as we review this report and the fact 
that it’s come from a number of individuals who do face this 
problem, and they have taken the time to put down the concerns 
and to raise the issue of the things they have to deal with, I 
think it would be very appropriate that this Assembly and all 
members of this Assembly do take the time to review the report 
very carefully in order that we may as a society really show 
individuals, who unfortunately through circumstances beyond 
their control end up . . . have disabilities — or have to face the 
fact that they have to live with them — that they are just as 
important a part of our society as anybody else in our society. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Yes, leave to introduce a Bill with 
respect to the Committee of Finance. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government House Leader has requested 
leave to introduce a Bill . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — A motion. 
 
The Speaker: — A motion. I expect he’s consulted. Is leave 
granted? 
 
Leave not granted. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand and provide a response to written question no. 
237. 

The Speaker: — Response for question 237 is tabled. 
 
(14:30) 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my left is 
Ron Styles, the deputy minister for the department. Directly 
behind me is Don Wincherauk, the assistant deputy minister in 
charge of corporate services. And beside Mr. Wincherauk is 
Terry Blomme, the executive director of southern region, and 
he is sitting directly behind Mr. Styles. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and welcome to the 
minister and her officials. And, Madam Minister, may I just 
begin by asking, you could extend to one of your officials our 
best wishes. I understand his parents were involved in a 
significant accident. I just heard this morning. So we want to 
extend those best wishes to Mr. Martin and his family at this 
time. 
 
But, Madam Minister, the last time we had an opportunity to 
address the issue of Highways in this Assembly with you and 
your officials, we just nicely got onto the Highway 48 in the 
southeast part of the province of Saskatchewan. Since that time, 
I’ve had a number of rural municipalities and towns consult me 
in regards to the condition of Highway 48. And as I indicated, 
certainly as a result of a lot of heavy traffic and significant 
traffic on Highway 48 due to the terminal at Fairlight, the 
highway is in fairly rough . . . a rough situation at this time. 
Specifically from No. 8 through to the Manitoba border and it 
improves a little bit, as you get closer to Wawota. But as we’ve 
discussed in the past, it’s a highway that needs a fair bit of 
work. 
 
And what I’ve discussed in the past is where this highway is 
priorized in your department. What I have found since then is 
that there’s been a fair bit of discussion with rural 
municipalities and towns, discussion that suggests that these 
communities feel that this highway is of significance in their 
area, economically, and for the tourist traffic. And they’re not 
prepared just to sit idly by and they’ve proposed a potential 
solution for the highway to have the highway upgraded and 
working together with the federal government on their grains 
program. 
 
And I believe, Madam Minister, you’re probably fairly familiar 
with this proposal, where the RMs (rural municipality) are 
suggesting that they become partners, that they put modest 
finances toward the project, that they become contractors, and 
as a result of their ability to contract to some of the services, a 
substantial savings to the highways, to the department, and 
potentially down the road maybe the improvement to some of 



2234 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

these thin membrane surfaces, bringing them up to a fairly 
significant road haul-ability whereby we might be able to have 
a . . . rather than going on . . . moving the traffic onto some of 
the grids. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I can certainly personally attest to what 
heavy traffic on grid roads is doing, as we’ve seen just outside 
of Kipling on Highway 709 . . . or the grid road 709, the 
significant work that had to be undertaken by the Rural 
Municipality of Kingsley. And as I was talking to the reeve the 
other day, he indicated that your department again realized that 
what had been originally agreed to would not cover the costs of 
the damage to that road. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I’m wondering where the Highways 
department is in regards to the suggestion coming from RMs, 
how far you have pursued it, and is this an avenue that could be 
pursued in order to upgrade some of these thin-membrane 
surfaces into a heavier-haul surface? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that in 
that region of the province we have the Southeast Area 
Transportation Planning Council. The council has agreed that 
this is a priority highway, that it needs to be upgraded, and so 
it’s their top priority. 
 
The second point I want to make is that we, the department, and 
the RMs and the Area Transportation Planning Council 
acknowledge that it’s very difficult to have alternative truck 
routes in that area. 
 
What we are doing is we are jointly applying to the prairie 
grains roads fund to see whether or not we can leverage some 
money to improve the highway. And what we would do is take 
their money, the prairie grains roads money, which is our 
money and the federal government’s money, the RM money, 
and try and put together a partnership in order to begin to 
upgrade this particular transportation corridor. 
 
So it’s certainly on our agenda. I can tell the member that it is 
. . . it will not proceed this year. It’s unlikely to proceed this 
year. But it’s something that we may be able to move forward 
with in the near future. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Madam Minister. And that 
was part of my next question. And certainly when . . . if indeed 
you are able to access funds under the grains transportation 
program, when would it be possible to see some work done? 
 
Would it be possible to see something like that even take place, 
like even some of the engineering and the surveying, this fall or 
early next year? 
 
Madam Minister, as you indicated the southeast regional 
corridor — and I believe in your discussion with our Highways 
critic the last time you were up — indicated that the Department 
of Highways is certainly trying to work together with different 
transportation authorities to have them sit down and evaluate 
the needs for their area. And as you’ve indicated, certainly the 
southeast region has put forward a very strong proposal in 
regards to Highway 48. 
 
So, Madam Minister, I wonder if you could indicate what you 

think the potential is of accessing some of the federal funds; 
when you might know whether or not . . . when those funds 
might be available; and possibly when an upgrade of this road 
might be able to take place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The application would be made in the 
fall. We would hear later in 2001. And then if it was successful, 
then we could start our work next year. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, one final question to the minister. 
Madam Minister, is this type of discussion taking place in other 
parts of the province? Are other transportation authorities and 
through their local governments entering into this type of 
discussion to address some of the many numbers of thin 
membrane surfaces that certainly we have to find a way to 
address? Is that going on? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Chair, I can tell the member that 
this discussion is taking place in every area of the province. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
Madam Minister, and welcome to the officials. I’ve got a few 
questions that I would like to ask. 
 
And it was with a great deal of interest in the previous sittings 
of estimates for Department of Highways, I heard how much 
money is going into all different areas of the province for roads. 
But I did not hear any about in my particular area; so it’s pretty, 
it’s pretty natural that I would ask that question. 
 
We have, Madam Minister, as you’re probably aware three 
prime corridor routes from the United States into Canada, 
which are . . . which used to be very high tourist routes, namely 
Highway 2, 4, and 37. And the condition of these roads right 
now is so deplorable that we are turning back traffic . . . or 
traffic is turning back on all three of these routes. 
 
Highway 13 is — I’ll have another question about that later — 
is in an absolute deplorable condition . . . (inaudible) . . . 
sections of it at least. And I surely don’t have to tell you about 
Highway 18 because that had enough notoriety in the last year 
to last for a long period of time. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the minister, if I could ask what 
kind of a plan there is for the Highways 2, 4, 37, 13, and 18 in 
the Wood River constituency? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that we 
are going to be spending $4,321,728 in your constituency this 
year. I’ll give you a description of what we’re spending the 
money on. 
 
Cadillac to south of Junction No. 43, there’s a paving project 
for 21.4 kilometres of surface at a cost of $2.764 million. 
 
As well, on Highway 13 from Assiniboia to 16 kilometres east, 
there’s 16.1 kilometres of paving work that’s going on for a 
total of $1,557,728. So the total, as I said, is $4,321,728 and the 
length of the kilometres in your constituency is 37.6 kilometres. 
 
What I can also tell you in last year, 2000-2001, there was 40 
kilometres of work done for a cost of $4,570,890. And in the 
previous year there was 68 kilometres of work done. Now that 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2235 

 

would be spot improvement, a full seal, and resurfacing for a 
total of $2,160,389. 
 
So for the last four years, to the member, I can tell you and I’ve 
only given you the totals for three years but I have a four-year 
total for your constituency. The length of work done in those 
four years is 145.6 kilometres of work at a cost of $11,053,007. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. That really 
sounds good until you travel the roads and they’re in absolutely 
terrible shape. 
 
I guess the follow-on would be is the out-year plans for our key 
border crossings, which I’ve mentioned, 2, 4, and 37. We can 
talk about tourism all we want and the rhetoric that goes along 
with it all we want, but this actually is turning back tourism. 
 
And in what you’ve already given to me, there’s absolutely no 
plan that I’ve heard for this year and I’m wondering if you have 
an out-year plan for these roads? Unless we have another huge 
plan for tourism to come into this province via some other 
means like air because it actually is affecting tourism to a great 
deal right now. 
 
So is there any out-year plan or future plans for 2, 4, and 37 
from the border north? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member, and I had a 
very good discussion with your critic, and this is my 
observation as our new Highways and Transportation minister 
in the province of Saskatchewan, the province of Saskatchewan 
will spend a billion dollars in the next three years, close to a 
billion dollars on our highways. We have over 12,000 
kilometres of road in the province. We have close to 8,000 
kilometres of thin membraned surface roads. 
 
We have so much money in the province and every day I . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . We have so much, we have so much 
and it’s not enough to deal with all of the things that need to be 
dealt with. 
 
And what we have is we’ve decided, before I became the 
minister, that we were going to invest in strategic corridors, 
corridors where we have a lot of high volume truck traffic. 
We’re trying to ensure that those corridors leading into some of 
our high throughput elevators, those corridors where there’s a 
lot of grains and oilseeds that are coming off the farm, that 
those are the places that we’re going to invest in first. 
 
It does lead to the question you raise because there’s no doubt 
that if you look at the amount of volume that’s going over our 
roads, I believe there’s about 245,000 tonnes of volume that 
went over our roads in the ’80s and today it’s over a million 
tonnes of volume that goes over our roads and we expect it to 
go much higher. 
 
But if we are to improve tourism in the province, we are going 
to have to take a look at that whole area as well. Because right 
now our strategic plan is to deal with trucking and high volumes 
of traffic and loads of traffic, but there is certainly an argument 
— and I said this to your critic — to take a look at what does 

this mean. If we’re putting all of our money into those strategic 
corridors, what does it mean in terms of some other activity, 
economic activity we could generate in the province through 
tourism? 
 
So what I wanted to say to the member from Assiniboia is you 
raise a valid point. It’s been raised by your colleague. But it’s 
something our government is thinking about. 
 
We have just dual-named Highway 11 between Regina and 
Prince Albert as the Louis Riel Trail. We did that as a result of 
communities along the corridor, non-Aboriginal communities 
asking us to dual-name the highway because they think that 
they have an opportunity to develop the tourism industry along 
this particular strategic corridor. They think that they have an 
opportunity to create jobs and grow business and that’s 
certainly something that we will be pursuing. 
 
All of our money has been determined for this year, but it’s 
something that we need to take another look at when we come 
to allocating next year’s budget, which has already been 
determined. 
 
We’re the only department that has a multi-year budget. We 
know what our money is going to be for next year and we need 
to determine whether or not all of that money goes into our 
roads for grain haul or will some of it be redirected into those 
roads that will promote tourism. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I used tourism as an example because that’s 
where I get a great deal of my calls from. 
 
The industry corridors I totally agree with because we’ve been 
driving some industry, as we know, out of the province because 
of a lack of roads or poor roads. And doing it right and doing it 
properly off the bat, I think there’s some light at the end of the 
tunnel, and I totally agree with the member from Cypress Hills. 
Let’s do it and do it properly so we’re not having to pothole fix 
every year. 
 
Which brings up the question — and I know we debate it on 
occasion — is do you fix roads to preserve industry or do you 
make roads to create industry. And I know that’s, well it’s a 
tough one and you explained, there’s money not to do 
everything. 
 
And when I see industry corridors that are not springing up 
because of a lack of road, it begs the question, is, what our 
long-range plan is going to be. 
 
It’s interesting to note the Louis Riel Trail you name because in 
my area it’s the Red Coat Trail, and it’s hard to tell which is the 
road and which is the Red Coat Trail because that’s how bad 
roads are in some of areas of Wood River. 
 
I do have a question though when we talk about this. When we 
repair roads or fix them, sometimes they last for a little while 
and I’m not sure to what standard . . . I know some of them are 
TMS (thin membrane surface) roads. But even some that have 
been fixed recently, they’re shot again. And I don’t know if you 
have the experience or coming back to you . . . or if people 
come back to you with the questions on this. But even some of 



2236 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

the recent construction is starting to break up and I don’t know 
if you’ve received any complaints about that or not. 
 
But my question really goes a little bit deeper and I have to ask 
this one question because there are so many potholes in the area 
of, as we know, 18. And I don’t want to belabour that point 
because we know what happened. 
 
But has any direction ever been given from your department to 
the Department of Highway crews to seal potholes and not fill 
them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — On those roads where we believe it’s 
an effective treatment, we will fill the pothole and we will seal 
the pothole. It’s hard to understand but I’ll try and explain it as 
it’s been explained to me, because I had the very same 
questions that you’re asking me, and many members have asked 
me when I came to the ministry. 
 
The TMS roads were never built to the kind of standard that is 
required to take the kind of truck traffic that they’re presently 
enduring. Every truck that goes over a road — I’m talking 
about the big trucks — represents about 9,600 cars. So when 
you think about the TMSs, they were built for light traffic. They 
were not built for the kind of volumes and weights that are 
presently going over those roads. 
 
And as I said earlier, we have close to 8,000 kilometres of that 
type of road in the province. 
 
Some TMSs are better than others. And I don’t know if you 
recall the history of how we came to have thin membrane 
surface roads, but they were basically roads, they were gravel 
roads, and in this . . . I think it was the ’60s and ’70s or late ’60s 
people wanted dust-free surfaces and so they were coated with a 
thin membrane of asphalt and oil. So these things are very thin 
and they don’t have the kind of sub-base that’s required to 
withstand the kind of pounding that trucks do to our roads. 
 
And that’s why we have primary roads, like between Saskatoon, 
P.A. (Prince Albert), out to Moose Jaw. Those roads are built to 
withstand the kind of truck traffic. But the kinds of roads that 
you’re talking about were never built for that kind of volume. 
And those roads are presently taking that kind of volume. 
 
And the problem that we have as a department is that — and I’ll 
just give you an example — depending upon the design a 
typical paved highway costs, if you were to build it to standard, 
between $325,000 per kilometre to $535,000 a kilometre. A 
typical thin membrane surface would cost about $90,000 a 
kilometre. We don’t build those kind anymore but that’s what it 
would cost. 
 
A typical gravel road costs between 50,000 to $150,000 a 
kilometre. And surfacing costs, which I find absolutely amazing 
. . . And I was out visiting a site in the member from Weyburn’s 
constituency yesterday. You know, one little truckload of 
asphalt is $700. And that’s just the cost to the contractor. That’s 
not the cost if you wanted to have a bit of a profit. 
 
But a typical resurfacing project costs anywhere from $70,000 a 
kilometre to $130,000 a kilometre. 
 

And to strengthen, to build up the TMS highway to a granular 
strength road, which isn’t primary weights — you’d still have to 
have winter weights for the spring season where they can’t go 
on the roads — just to take those TMSs up to granular strength, 
which isn’t primary weight, anywhere between $100,000 a 
kilometre to 140,000. 
 
So when you think about all of the kilometres we have in the 
province, and we have our budget of 312 million, which is a 
significant increase in this year’s budget, we simply need more 
money. We simply need more money. 
 
And the question becomes: how do you balance that with tax 
reductions which reduces your revenues, increased costs in 
health care, people want more money towards revenue sharing. 
People want more money towards post-secondary education, K 
to 12, and how do you balance that. 
 
And that’s one of the challenges of being in government, for the 
member opposite. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wartman: — To ask leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair . . . Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. I would like to introduce to you and through 
you to members of the Assembly two people in the Speaker’s 
gallery, Dave Abbey and Darlene Cleven. Dave is retired, was a 
staff person with the Department of Highways whose duties 
were legislative officer for Highways and Transportation. 
 
Dave is now retired and Darlene has taken over those 
responsibilities. Darlene is also married to Allan Widger, who is 
one of the officials who is here with us today. And so we get a 
lot of good family work in this area. 
 
So I’d like all to welcome them to this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. McMorris: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Also to all the 
members, I would like to say a few words about Mr. Abbey 
that’s in the gallery. I had the opportunity of working quite 
closely with him for a number of years for the Safety Council, 
which I see he’s got a Safety Council shirt on, which is great 
that he’s still carrying the cause. 
 
We’ve had the opportunity of working on a number of 
committees. And he was the president of the Safety Council for 
a number of years and was truly committed to the, to really the 
. . . especially in the traffic area, in the traffic area to the safe 
transportation of people throughout the province. 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2237 

 

And it’s very fitting that you would come on a day of estimates 
when we’re talking about highways and some of the concerns 
that we have from this side of the House dealing with safety 
issues and highways. 
 
So I would like to welcome Mr. Abbey and say that I hope he 
enjoys the proceedings, although I’m sure he’s seen them many, 
many times before. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

 
COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 
Vote 16 

 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I find it 
kind of . . . intrigued by the minister’s answer. It was a 
relatively simple question. It’s like asking for the time and 
getting told how to build a grandfather’s clock. 
 
My question is very simple: has anyone from your department 
ever sent word out to the Department of Highways to seal 
potholes, not to fill them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The answer to the member’s question, 
which I said earlier, is: there are occasions when we . . . it 
depends on the situation, the conditions of the road. It depends 
on whether or not the road is wet and so on. 
 
But there are many occasions when they seal. There are other 
occasions when they fill the pothole they seal. And then there’s 
other occasions where that doesn’t make sense. 
 
So the crews have a work plan and it depends upon the 
condition of the road. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Madam Minister. I 
guess that’s part of the question that I would have. There was a 
highway crew that informed me that they got direction that they 
are not to fill potholes; they’re to seal the edges so the potholes 
do not get bigger. I wouldn’t want to get the highway crew into 
trouble but that seemed totally ludicrous to those that drive the 
highway, when the holes are so deep that they’re scraping the 
bottom of cars and the highway crew is saying we have 
direction not to fill it, just to seal the edges. 
 
So if in fact there has not been direction, then I will go on to my 
next question is: why are some of these potholes not filled? And 
I’ll give you just a couple of examples in . . . I live through this 
on a daily basis when we’re not in session because the 
highways that I’ve mentioned I drive on. 
 
To the former minister, a letter recently went — and I’m not 
sure whether you’ve seen this letter, Madam Minister — but it’s 
east of Meyronne, there’s a huge hole in the road surface, more 

than half the width of the road and approximately eight inches 
deep. And this letter came from an individual from Alberta and 
it goes on quite extensively, if you’ve seen the letter I won’t 
bother. But he has a very good point. Now here’s a visitor that 
has come from Alberta and had the misfortune of this pothole 
on the road. 
 
And I think there’s two on that stretch of road that are 
catastrophic and they’ve been that way for 8 to 10 months. Now 
I’m certain that that highway crew even drive over those holes. 
 
It’s hard to explain . . . for you to explain to me, but me to 
explain to the constituents, why can’t those holes, rather than 
driving over them with the heavy equipment, why can’t they 
stop and fill them? And they are, they are a serious hazard. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The department officials here know 
exactly which area you’re talking about. The department 
believes that there is a spring that goes under that road. That 
particular area that you’re talking about has been repaired and if 
a heavy haul goes over, it breaks up again within about a 7- to 
10-day period. So there’s a . . . we believe that there’s a 
problem with springs going under that particular piece of road. 
Springs meaning there’s water under the road. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m not 
sure if there’s a spring because it was that way in the wintertime 
also. And I know the one . . . in fact if it’s been filled as recent 
as two days ago, there is a senior citizen that lost control of her 
car, and I don’t know if it was this particular one or one about 
12 miles or 14 miles to the west of there, and it’s been there for 
at least eight months and I don’t think it’s ever been filled. 
 
So I would encourage you and your department to at least have 
some of these things filled even if it lasts for a couple of weeks 
because we’re going to write somebody off on these. 
 
And it’s very interesting. I know when we debate . . . These 
roads weren’t made for trucks. We understand that and that’s a 
totally different question as to why. Like why are railroads 
gone? So what was the cause and we know the effect now but I 
don’t think it’s time to go there and say it’s all in the problem of 
the trucks. There’s a whole problem created before that time. 
 
But I am very concerned and I also would like to advise the 
department that . . . And I realize there’s some cost to the 
product for filling potholes. But a good portion of Highway 18 
that was filled by the citizens who supposedly don’t have the 
technical experience as the highway crews, actually that road is 
still very driveable to this day and that was done a year ago. 
And I drive that one quite frequently. 
 
So when some of these other potholes that the local citizens did 
not fill, remain a hole and a huge hole as explained in this letter, 
I’m wondering if we could provide some direction to some of 
these crews. And I’d really like to say there are some excellent 
crews out there. There’s some absolutely excellent crews. If you 
go right where I live we are basically pothole-free, but I can 
sure tell you where one crew stops and another starts. 
 
And I guess that’s an interpretation of direction I suppose and 
that’s why I asked the questions about if there’s direction 
provided about sealing and not filling potholes because it’s very 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

evident. And I would encourage you to come for a ride with me 
through the constituency and I can show you three different 
road crews just by the condition of the road. 
 
My question I guess now, Madam Minister, has this letter been 
answered with compensation to . . . what this individual can do 
for compensation? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are just in the process of drafting 
the letter and it will be responded to. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
 
Madam Minister, I now have a few questions regarding the 
Highway Traffic Board. Could you please provide the House 
with an explanation as to what the Traffic Board is, what it 
does, and how many people are on it? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that the 
Highway Traffic Board is not in our estimates and we don’t 
have those officials here. I just want to make one point before 
we move on. 
 
I’ve had an opportunity to go across the province and see the 
work that’s being done by the people that work in the 
Department of Highways and Transportation. I’ve also had an 
opportunity to visit with contractors across the province. And I 
just want to say to the member that it’s my opinion that these 
are men and women that take the work that they do on behalf of 
the citizens of our province very seriously. 
 
And I see that the member from Weyburn is shaking her head; 
and I see that the member of Weyburn obviously is not as 
respectful of civil servants in this province as should be. But 
there are people in this province that work on behalf of the 
citizens of this province each and every day. 
 
And what I can tell you is just last week our department crews 
sprayed 687,570 litres of asphalt for patching and sealing on our 
roads. They used 17,180 tonnes of gravel and 1,620 tonnes of 
coal mix to repair the roads. They’ve completed 36,720 metres 
of machine patching and 339,920 metres of seal coat patching. 
And they’ve worked over 8,100 hours repairing the roads on 
behalf of the people of this province. 
 
And I think if you want to become government, Member, one of 
the things you will have to learn, that it is important to value the 
people who work on behalf of the citizens of this province and 
not shake your head. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Would the committee please come 
to order. Would the member for Saskatchewan Rivers please 
come to order and the member for Regina South. We’ll all have 
a chance to . . . the members on the opposition side will have 
their opportunity to ask questions if they so desire. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
Madam Minister, the reason I asked the questions, I was not 
condemning the men and women that are down there. I am 
condemning maybe the direction they got. That’s why I referred 
to the direction they got about sealing potholes rather than 
filling them. That is direction. 
 

Now it’s interpretation of the direction, but I never really did 
get the answer. Sometimes we tell them this and sometimes we 
don’t. Sometimes you can’t seal them. Sometimes you have to 
fill them and seal them. There’s a whole bunch of direction 
there. 
 
And I’m more concerned in the direction that these men and 
women are getting from the department than whether they’re 
doing a credible job or not. I think they really do a credible job; 
and I know a crew that we’ve got does an exceptional job. 
 
But, Madam Minister, again I know how to build and finish that 
grandfather clock because I did not get an answer to the 
question about the Traffic Board. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Highway Traffic Board does not come 
in the estimates of the Department of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Deputy Chair, is the minister 
suggesting that the Highway Traffic Board does not come under 
the Department of Highways? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Just to confirm that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that the Highway Traffic Board does not come under 
the minister or the Department of Highways. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The Highway Traffic Board does not 
come under the Department of Highways and Transportation. I 
am the minister responsible for the Highway Traffic Board, but 
it is not contained within these estimates. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman of Committees. 
Madam Minister, and to your officials, just a quick question 
about some specific issues in my constituency. And I don’t have 
a lot of highways in my riding; for the most part it’s mostly 
urban. 
 
But certainly the No. 4 Highway goes through my riding and 
there are some concerns there. And of course the Trans-Canada 
comes through it as well. 
 
My concerns though relate to the No. 4 Highway, and 
specifically to a portion of the No. 4 Highway that’s just south 
of the bridge at Saskatchewan Landing Provincial Park. There 
is a, there’s quite a hill there as you come up through the river 
hills; and I know that your office and your officials have been 
contacted by municipalities and people in that area about that 
road. 
 
And specifically, the concern of course is the request that there 
could be widening of the road — an additional lane of the road. 
And every time — my wife is actually a former engineer with 
the department — and so every time we drive together down the 
road I ask her about it, about the costs of that particular . . . of 
doing something there. And of course she can only offer some 
guesses and certainly I don’t imagine it’s a nominal cost. I don’t 
believe that at all. 
 
However I also don’t underestimate the importance of it. 
Because I myself have been on that road many times and 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

 

followed up semi . . . you know, tractor-trailer units or farm 
equipment in the spring and in the fall. And as you come around 
that corner there headed south, it’s truly very dangerous, 
especially for traffic coming down. 
 
And so that’s why the areas have been contacting their MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly), the member for 
Rosetown-Biggar, myself. I have many constituents contacting 
me. And that’s also why they’re contacting the department. And 
I believe again the response from the department has been that 
this wasn’t deemed as a priority for immediate work. 
 
And I wonder if you could answer that question, Madam 
Minister. You know, why isn’t it a priority? What about that 
particular request doesn’t allow it to be ranked higher in the 
department system than it’s currently ranked? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Right now in the department we have a 
rating system. It’s called warrants and it determines, when you 
go to invest in a particular stretch of road, what you need to do 
in terms of not only rebuilding the road or paving the road but 
also what you need to do to improve the safety of the road. 
 
And at this particular time this particular stretch of road — and 
I’m very familiar with the part that you’re talking about — 
would not have enough warrants to merit a passing lane. But we 
also recognize that there’s been . . . that the amount of volume 
on that road is increasing. 
 
You will know that there is some rutting on that road and the 
department did some work on the road, I believe, last year. This 
is a piece of road that we’re looking at. There will need to be 
some resurfacing done on this road in the fairly near future. 
And if the traffic volume merits a passing lane, and it may 
because of the increased volume, then it’s obviously something 
that we would put into the design when we go to resurface the 
road. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I think there’s some 
reason for hope in your comments there. And I agree with you 
that the road . . . I’m hopeful that the numbers and this warrant 
system will see an increase in the traffic. 
 
As you may know, there’s a golf course currently under 
construction there and I believe they’re going to go right to 18. 
The residential development of the landing is growing 
continually, and it’s quite a nice place. The marina there is also 
a very positive development. 
 
And so I guess the only other question that I would have then is 
the system, the rating system then, is it initiated then by, in 
some cases, by constituents or by municipalities calling in or 
. . . and so therefore I guess you can see where I’m going. 
 
Should we continue to be vigilant in writing letters, or is this 
going to be something that happens as a matter of course every 
year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The member will know that north of 
Swift Current we did build a truck-climbing lane recently based 
on the amount of volume of traffic and also based upon what 

citizens were saying on that. 
 
And we expect that the lobby will continue. There seems to be a 
very significant lobby. I’ve received many letters from citizens, 
RMs, members of the subdivision, and so on. So it’s certainly 
something that I’ve become aware of. I was aware of it before 
but since I’ve been the minister there’s been a lobby effort. 
 
You know, there’s no question that if the volumes continue to 
go up, and I know that there have been significant increases in 
the volumes because of the marina, because of increased 
tourism. Now with the enhanced subdivision I think there will 
be more. The golf course. I anticipate that this is a very real 
possibility that we will have to put a passing lane on that hill. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees, and Madam Minister, welcome to your officials. 
It’s a pleasure to be able to have a few moments here to just ask 
a couple of questions about some concerns in the constituency 
of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Madam Minister, one of the main corridors in the constituency 
of Saskatchewan Rivers is No. 55 Highway from Prince Albert 
through to Nipawin. It is a piece of highway that has an 
extensive heavy haul traffic on it. And I’m not . . . don’t want to 
leave you with the impression that when I talk about heavy haul 
that I’m talking about normal large truck traffic — the so-called 
18-wheelers. 
 
Madam Minister, these are trucks that do extensive amount of 
hauling for the Weyerhaeuser pulp mill. They also do extensive 
hauling from Carrier Lumber to The Pas, Manitoba. For 10 
months of the year that highway is used extensively. It is 
supposed to have been originally designed to handle heavier 
traffic, but we have found out through the last few years, 
Madam Minister, that this highway falls under a criteria that 
I’m afraid a large number of our highways are falling under in 
this province, Madam Minister. 
 
What has happened is that the criteria has needed of course to 
be changed for what is regarded as a primary highway and what 
is regarded as a secondary highway. Now those people who live 
along that highway, those people who use the highway to 
operate business, there are many trucking companies in the 
Prince Albert/Nipawin area and in between that use the 
highway and would prefer to use the highway as a primary 
highway on a regular basis, on a year-round basis. 
 
Unfortunately, Madam Minister, for two months of the year that 
is not possible. And what has to take place, Madam Minister — 
and I’m sure this must take place in many areas of the province 
— is that then these trucks must reroute for a two-month period 
of time in order that business may continue in this province. 
 
Rerouting, Madam Minister, brings about considerable expense, 
and certainly when we’re talking about heavy-haul traffic these 
are trucks that are in general super Bs and even King Bs to a 
large extent also, Madam Minister. What we’re finding is that 
all of a sudden this province for a two-month period of time is 
actually going through a period of extensive pollution because, 
Madam Minister, they are being forced to drive much further 
distances in order to be able to continue to conduct business. 
 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

Madam Minister, the forestry industry in northern 
Saskatchewan doesn’t shut down because there is a spring 
break-up on. These large corporations, Weyerhaeuser, Carrier 
Lumber, the pulp mill in The Pas — Tolko — also has to 
continue to operate. But, Madam Minister, the extensive 
expenses that are incurred because of the highways that have 
been deemed to be secondary suddenly can’t be used to the 
extent that they are on the year-round basis that they should be. 
 
What does your department and you, Madam Minister, what do 
you see envisioning in being able to maintain or upgrade certain 
secondary highways in this province to a primary status so that 
business can be able to operate in a much more significant and 
efficient manner? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Through the Chair to the member, what 
I can tell the member is our government announced a major 
forestry expansion in the province. In fact our Premier was 
involved in an announcement last Friday to significantly expand 
the value added to the forestry industry in the Meadow Lake 
area. 
 
Our department is working very closely with the Department of 
Economic Development and Co-operation as well as the 
forestry industry in the province to ensure that our roads are at a 
standard that will meet the economic development initiatives 
that have been undertaken by the province of Saskatchewan 
through our coalition government. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Deputy 
Chair of Committees, to the minister, what is needed, Madam 
Minister, is some sense of a time frame. We have talked on this 
side of the House for several months through this sitting and 
last sitting as we talk about economic development taking place 
in this province. And of course we have expressly voiced our 
displeasure, as you will recall Tuesday evening, the economic 
development plan for this province that we feel is significantly 
lacking. 
 
It is certainly positive when we see corporations such as Tolko 
from British Columbia wanting to establish themselves in 
Saskatchewan. They see some . . . great deal of possibilities 
here. And certainly those of us on this side of the House, 
Madam Minister, also see those possibilities. 
 
But, Madam Minister, if we’re going to be a 10-month 
province, this is a significant reduction in the opportunities for 
business to be able to create a positive bottom line so that 
they’ll want to stay here, Madam Minister, and create the job 
opportunities that are desperately needed. 
 
We’re all quite well aware on this side, Madam Minister, that 
last year the policies of this NDP government cost job losses of 
21,000. We’ve also seen that because of the policies of this 
NDP government, that 9,000 people . . . we had a net loss of 
9,000 people in this province, Madam Minister. 
 
There are some infrastructure changes that are going to have to 
be taken on in short order, Madam Minister. And we see very 
clearly on this side of the House, that your department and you 
as the minister, in all likelihood should have and maybe even do 
have the vision that is necessary in order to promote the 
continuation of this kind of business expansion, Madam 

Minister. 
 
So we’re wondering on this side of the House, Madam Minister, 
those secondary highways that are very, very crucial . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Order. If the member from 
Arm River and the member from Elphinstone wish to carry on a 
conversation they may do so behind the bar but not across the 
floor. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. And I am pleased that you took the opportunity to 
intervene. It’s of course very important that the minister be able 
to hear the question so that she may be allowed the opportunity 
to respond in an appropriate manner. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees, to the Minister of 
Highways, Madam Minister, what kind of a time frame do you 
see for your department in taking on the extraneous load of 
being able to upgrade secondary highways in this province to a 
primary level so that businesses that want to move into this 
province will be able to operate in a more efficient manner on a 
12-month rather than a 10-month basis. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that 
we’re working on 951, 155, 55, west side, and we’re planning 
future work on 106 and 135. 
 
I can also tell the member that we work very closely with the 
forestry industry, Weyerhaeuser in particular, and their priority 
road was a road that we’ve constructed in the last two years that 
takes them over to No. 2. 
 
I know the member is trying to . . . I know he’ll be sending out 
his comments to his constituents in Sask Rivers. But I just want 
to tell his constituents, because I know you’ll be sending out 
Hansard, that our government has worked very closely with the 
forest industry — that’s why we’ve expanded the forestry 
industry in the province; that’s why the announcement was 
made on Friday with the Premier of our province and Tolko and 
the Meadow Lake Tribal Council for an expansion in the 
Meadow Lake area. 
 
And not for the edification of the member, but for your 
constituents — and your constituents are aware of this — we 
realize the importance of the forestry industry in the province 
particularly when it comes to job creation and economic 
development. 
 
I know the member has launched into his political rhetoric in 
the last several minutes since I was sitting here listening. I do 
want to get through my estimates and I have answered — I’m 
not going to respond to each of the points you have raised — 
but each of the points that you raised are blatantly partisan and 
it’s the most partisan discussion that I’ve had from any member 
in the legislature when it comes to the specifics of our spending 
estimates. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Chair, or Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees, to the minister, I believe the . . . I had a very 
simple question and I will repeat it. And maybe what I should 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

 

do, Mr. Deputy Chair, is repeat it in a much slower tone of 
voice so that the minister will be able to keep up to it. 
 
Has your ministry set forth a time frame to upgrade secondary 
highways in this province so that businesses can operate in a 
more prudent manner from secondary to primary? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are upgrading highways constantly. 
We’re upgrading thin membrane surfaces to structural 
pavement, structural pavement to primary weight roads. So the 
answer to your question is yes. 
 
And I answered it in my previous answer when I talked about 
the work that we’re doing with the forestry industry when you 
launched into your whatever it was on forestry. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. My 
questions will be, hopefully, maybe a little tighter and maybe I 
won’t go on to the issues that my colleague had. 
 
But I guess my questions are, and we seem to as the Highways 
estimates are wrapping up, probably going back into our own 
constituencies and asking questions on that very thing. And I 
know every so often as we’ve gone through each constituency 
where it talked about highways, I have thrown out Highway 35 
and mentioned Highway 35 and you’ve always kind of sat there 
and just shook your head like, forget it, there’s not a chance; it’s 
not going to be repaired. 
 
And so I guess formally, can I ask you what intentions 
Department of Highways has for Highway 35? Not necessarily 
from Weyburn south but from Weyburn north, which really 
transverses my whole constituency right from the south border 
down around Weyburn to the north border on the other side of 
Fort Qu’Appelle. So Highway 35, what are the Highways 
intent? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well to the member of Morris . . . or 
the member from Indian Head-Milestone — sorry — the 
departments say that this is a troubled highway. And it has a lot 
of trouble on it. 
 
I don’t know if I gave you all of the information with regard to 
your constituency. Would you like to hear about what’s going 
on in your riding? 
 
But I can say that it’s not a road that we have in our horizons in 
the next year or two. But there’s a lot of work that is being done 
in your constituency, and I don’t know if you want me to put it 
onto the record. If you do, I will. If you don’t, I can send this 
over to you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I think probably just sending it over to me 
would be fine. I’m certainly aware of a couple of spots that 
some work is being done on. And you made the comment that 
there’s going to be so much highway construction that we’re 
going to be sitting in our vehicles in the summer waiting to get 
through certain areas. 
 
And I do have to admit that I was about 15 minutes late going 
to a Lang Credit Union 50th anniversary because of highway 

construction. But when I got there I said, how can I complain; 
sorry for being late, but how could I complain. 
 
But I’m not really, I mean a lot of the highways in the 
constituency I will admit are in pretty good shape. I have some 
fairly major highways running through my constituency — be it 
No. 1 or No. 6 or 48. But where we run into the trouble is on the 
north/south routes as opposed to the . . . some of the other 
routes. 
 
And some concern . . . I guess I’m interested when you 
mentioned that it’s a troubled highway. I know of a number of 
constituents that have had trouble on that highway, including 
one person — and I talked about it in my debate, my Throne 
Speech debate — where one person who . . . their daughter had 
rolled a vehicle, and she went up the next day to find out where 
it was rolled. And the ditches hadn’t been mowed, and lo and 
behold — she borrowed somebody’s car — the daughter had 
totalled off the first car the night before, she totalled off the 
friend’s car as she hit a deer on the way up to see, about a mile 
from where the daughter had rolled. 
 
So there is some troubles on that highway. The highway is a 
troubled highway by the sounds of it. Maybe if I could get you 
to briefly explain — and I don’t want to get into the whole 
substructure of the highway — but what are some of the 
concerns? And because it’s troubled, does that mean it’s written 
off? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you’d know, we only have so much 
money and we have to go to priorities. And in your 
constituency it’s 56, Highway No. 56. We’ve done a lot of work 
on that highway in the last couple of years; we’re strengthening 
the road, creating a granular surface on that road. 
 
The other thing I can tell you is that we’ve increased our 
mowing, the money for mowing, in this year’s budget by 24 per 
cent. So we want to see more ditches mowed before we get into 
the kind of situation that you’re talking about with your 
constituent. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you. Yes, I’m certainly glad that 
Highway 56 was repaired. I know the thought around the 
constituency many times has been maybe we should have 
another contest on the worst highway, because I believe during 
the campaign of 1999 we did a little bit of a spiel on that, and 
Highway 56 was, in our eyes, voted as the worse highway. But 
now of course that’s taken out of the competition. Thank you 
very much. 
 
But I believe we could just move a little bit further west and go 
onto Highway 35. I’ve had a number of constituents ask me and 
I guess I would like to hear it from the minister. That No. 35 
Highway, we feel, in our area is a fairly major north/south route 
from the US (United States) border all the way up to Tobin 
Lake. Lots of lots of tourism traffic. 
 
But there’s some concern and rumour around the area that 
perhaps Highways are not as interested in fixing that highway. 
Certainly from the border to south . . . or north to Weyburn is in 
pretty good shape. And then is it maybe the Highways’ idea to 
angle all the traffic up into Regina and then take 10 north? 
Because there’s about a 30- or 40-mile stretch in there that 



2242 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

hasn’t had much work, doesn’t get much work, and I mean you 
can get to the North. You do have to kind of zigzag around that 
area. And it just so happens that that zigzagging sends all the 
traffic into Regina. 
 
And I know some of the people along that corridor have had 
concern with that. Is there some sort of an ulterior plan of 
Highways to try and divert around some of those communities 
. . . not to try and divert, but certainly to push some of the traffic 
into the cities on its way up to the northern part of our province. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What we do is we respond to traffic 
pattern and truck volume. And right now the place that we’re 
having the most traffic is Highway No. 6, and that is from the 
Port of Regway up to Milestone . . . or just outside of 
Milestone. That’s where our truck traffic is and that’s where our 
volume is. So that’s what we’re . . . when we try and priorize 
where we’re spending our money, that obviously is a road that 
needs to have some work done on it. Because we get a lot of 
complaints about it and it’s got the high volume. 
 
Now once we get through with that road, then I think we can 
look at the road that you are talking about because we realize 
that there is traffic on that road as well. 
 
But we don’t have as much traffic on that road as we do on 6, 
so what we’re doing is we’re trying to improve 6 as our 
north/south . . . one of our north/south corridors. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess to the minister then, and I don’t 
want to get . . . I’m sure you’ve gone through, in the many 
hours of estimates that you’ve been in here, how you priorize 
the work that you’re going to do. And I know you’ve talked 
about a rating system and all that. 
 
But just from that answer I guess . . . it really did seem to 
indicate that your main priority is the truck traffic, and you’re 
looking at those roads and maybe the tourism aspect isn’t as a 
high priority on designing the roads especially. Because you 
know, I certainly do feel like the north/south route being the 
most direct — 35. And certainly a lot of the people coming 
from the States are going up to the northern part of the province 
for fishing, hunting, and that type of thing. 
 
So I guess is that it’s maybe more of a comment than it is a 
question, but a lot of the priority is put on then where the truck 
traffic would go as opposed to possible economic development 
and tourism. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just want to tell the member that we 
have a truck traffic volume map, and this is the average daily 
traffic. And on the route that your Highway No. 35, we’ve got 
about 265 traffic count, and on No. 6, 670. So you can see that 
there’s quite a difference so that’s why we’re . . . the money we 
do have we’re investing in 6 over 35, because we’re looking at 
volume right now. 
 
But I take your point. It’s a good argument. Because I do realize 
that people coming out of the States take that road up to Tobin 
Lake. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Madam Minister, I have a letter from the town of 
Raymore which is just inside my constituency, located at the 

junction of Highway 6 and Highway 15. And their concern is 
with Highway 15. I’ll just read a couple of quotations from the 
letter: 
 

Raymore town council would appreciate consideration of 
identifying No. 15 Highway as a major economic corridor 
across central Saskatchewan. 
 

They go on to say that there are three grain terminals located 
west of Raymore. One in between Raymore and Semans. One at 
Nokomis, and then further west on Highway 15 at the Mid-Sask 
Terminal south of Watrous. 
 
And I’d guess . . . there’s also some other economic proposals 
on the table, I guess, out there. One is a feedlot, and the lack of 
a major highway in that area is certainly a deterrent. Apparently 
there’s a liquid fertilizer storage facility being considered for 
Nokomis and again the highway is a problem. 
 
So I wonder, could you just tell me what your plans for that 
section of highway, Highway 15, west of Raymore, I guess, all 
the way to No. 11 Highway. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I believe the member from Watrous has 
already been onto this question and we had quite a discussion 
initially in estimates . . . the member . . . your Sask Party 
member from Watrous, where I went through all of the detail to 
that road and you might want to refer to Hansard, if you care to 
do that, instead of having me sort of repeat what I’ve already 
told her. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Oh. I guess we could do that. Could you just 
summarize it very briefly, Madam Minister? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Just so you know, we don’t have Barry 
Martin in the legislature today as his parents were in a serious 
accident. But what I will do is give you what the officials here 
recall. Two years ago under the CAIP (Canada/Saskatchewan 
Agri-Infrastructure Program) program we did some 
strengthening of the road from Raymore to Semans, and this 
year we’re going from Nokomis in the direction of Kenaston. 
And we think it’s to No. 2 but we’re not absolutely sure. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for that executive 
summary. 
 
I guess the only other suggestion I might have, I heard you in an 
answer to a previous question, you talked a bit about mowing 
and some budgets for mowing for some constituencies. I would 
maybe perhaps . . . it’s more of an observation and a suggestion 
to pass along. 
 
This year with the drought in certain parts of the province and 
so on, I know there’ll be a lot of livestock producers will be 
salvaging hay wherever they can find it. I know from past 
experience that your mowing crews weren’t out too early and I 
would suggest that’s a good thing, particularly in the view of 
recent rains. If you have any thoughts of getting out there early, 
I would just maybe not do that. Give the cattle people a chance 
to salvage some of that roadside hay. 
 
And that would be the only other suggestion that I’d have at this 
time. Thank you. 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2243 

 

Subvote (HI01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (HI02), (HI04), (HI10), (HI03), (HI06), (HI11) agreed 
to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 
(15:45) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 145 
 
Subvote (HI01) agreed to. 
 
Vote 145 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 2000-01 
General Revenue Fund 

Highways and Transportation 
Vote 16 

 
Subvotes (HI04), (HI03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 16 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Rural Revitalization Office 

Vote 43 
 

Subvote (RR01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll invite the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — To my left is Harvey Brooks, who is 
the deputy minister for Rural Revitalization. Behind me is Dion 
McGrath, our director of policy. And to Dion’s left is Patricia 
Alcorn, who is our new director of communications. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just have a couple of 
brief questions, Madam Minister, and I know this is . . . we all 
know that this is a new unit or department that’s been set up. 
 
And I guess we have some questions as far as the qualifications 
of the people you have put in place to deal with this very 
important area. And I know . . . I certainly know about Mr. 
Brooks’ qualifications. I’ve been at many Wheat Board 
meetings in the past where he’s been there. 
 
But I wonder, could you just briefly outline the qualifications of 
the staff members you have here with you today. And again, 
just the executive summary will be quite sufficient. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well as you said, our deputy minister 
has impressive credentials — a Ph.D. in Economics. Dion 
McGrath has a master’s degree in History. He’s been an analyst 
in Economic Development Corporation for the last four years. 
And his work is in community, rural, and regional economic 
development. Patricia Alcorn has a master’s in English. She has 
been the manager . . . she was the director of communications 
for Tourism Saskatchewan so she comes to us with a 

background in tourism. She was there for I believe . . . how 
many years? Five years. And prior to that she was the manager 
at SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) for corporate 
relations. So I think we have people who have some significant 
credentials. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister, for that 
information. 
 
Madam Minister, I have a situation in my constituency and you 
may not think that it’s Rural Revitalization but it does in fact, I 
think it is related. It’s a business in Strasbourg, Saskatchewan 
that sells electronic equipment and so on. They recently . . . you 
may not know but SaskTel put up a new tower and it came 
on-line in January and the residents of that area are very happy 
with the cell service they are getting in the area. But the owner 
of D & D Appliances has a problem and he cannot sell cellular 
telephones directly. He tells me that SaskTel has directed him to 
go through another supplier and he presently has to go through 
Audio Warehouse in Regina. 
 
Now I realize this doesn’t necessarily fall within your area but 
what it is, it’s really hampering his business ability in rural 
Saskatchewan. And I think in these times we have to do 
everything we can to make sure that these businesses . . . It’s a 
family-run business; he’s been in business for a number of 
years and this really means a lot to their business if they could 
be the primary seller because at this point in time they don’t 
receive any commissions. They get all their information 
second-hand through Audio Warehouse. He says it’s hampering 
the level of service he’s been able to provide to his customers 
and he asked me to bring this to your attention. And I would 
hope that the minister of Crown corporations would also take 
note of this situation. 
 
And I would just, as I said, bring this to your attention, and 
perhaps could you comment on that situation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have many, many people coming 
through our office now who are having difficulty with various 
government agencies, departments, or Crowns. We don’t 
believe that the person who owns this business has come to our 
office yet but if they would like to contact our office we could 
see what we can do to maybe assist this merchant with his 
difficulties with SaskTel. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Madam Minister, because I think 
what this is is an example of is one arm of government working 
. . . is counterproductive to efforts of another arm and I will 
certainly pass that along to him and I’m sure you will be 
hearing from him shortly. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Madam 
Minister, I’m not sure if you’re aware that I asked a question of 
the Minister of Education a while ago about CommunityNet 
program and the fact that there are many businesses that are in 
rural Saskatchewan that feel they could benefit very much from 
this program. 
 
Doepker Industries in Annaheim was quite concerned that 
although the CommunityNet is coming to the school, they could 
use it, and it’s not available to them. 
 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

Have you heard these concerns, and what are your doing to 
address them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that we 
are aware of the issue that she raises, particularly in those 
centres where there may be one very large business and not the 
numbers of other users that would allow SaskTel to go forward 
with high-speed Internet. 
 
There is a broadband task force that is working on this issue, 
and I think we’re optimistic that we’ll be able to work our way 
through this. 
 
As you know, SaskTel is a competitive Crown. It has to deal 
within a competitive environment. It has some rules that it has 
to follow under federal legislation. And . . . but we think that we 
can make our way through the issue that you raise. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I just, and I know it may have been dealt 
with before in estimates, but just so that I’m clear. I know I’ve 
had lots of people ask me . . . and when it came out in the 
budget, rural revitalization, and as most of our MLAs are from 
rural Saskatchewan, I’m sure we’ve all had phone calls on it — 
now just what exactly is rural revitalization going to do for rural 
Saskatchewan? 
 
And just a couple of the questions that were asked here today 
already. To me it sounds like you’re just trying to be a bridge. 
You’re going to take the complaints from rural Saskatchewan 
and then go to the department and complain on behalf of rural 
citizens. 
 
And so I guess, maybe I’m giving you a — I don’t know how 
long this commercial is going to take — but I’m giving you 
some air time here to then once again explain to me so that I 
can then explain to people that have been questioning me on 
just exactly what the heck is Rural Revitalization department 
going to do. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well this question has been asked 
before and I will answer it again. 
 
The purpose of our office is to ensure that all parts of 
government are properly focussed on rural economic 
development. So when people raise their individual issues — as 
the member from Kelvington did, as the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood did — our job is to make sure that 
government departments are not working at cross purposes with 
each other or inside government departments to impede rural 
economic development. 
 
So what we try to do is to get people focussed in government on 
rural economic development. Because there are many issues 
that government departments are focused on, but we’re trying to 
get people to focus on rural economic development specifically. 
 
Our office does not have direct responsibility for any programs 
or services. Those program delivery and services are delivered 
by other government departments. We’re not going to duplicate 
delivery systems. But our challenge is to ensure that all of these 
agencies, departments, Crowns are adequately focussed on rural 
economic needs. 
 

Now what we’re going to do as well, we need to . . . we want to 
. . . one of the problems that has been identified by the Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy is the difficulty that rural 
enterprises have in attracting investments into their businesses. 
And I’m now talking about some larger businesses. So one of 
our jobs will be to focus investment vehicles on rural economic 
development. 
 
People have wonderful ideas but they have difficulty accessing 
capital or pools of capital. So one of our key challenges will be 
to focus investment vehicles on rural economic development. 
 
As well we’re going to . . . Our government has gone through a 
whole process since 1995 of dealing with regulations, trying to 
get rid of unnecessary regulations that aren’t really . . . that are 
impeding, can be impediments to development. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Not that you want to do what some governments have done in 
other parts of Canada where you totally deregulate — I’ll just 
use the Government of Ontario — and then you get yourself 
into some difficulty. But we want to ensure that our regulatory 
regimes are there to do what they’re supposed to do, not to 
impede economic progress. 
 
Our other mandate will be the whole area of education and 
training in terms of rural economic development. And the 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, 
through the regional community colleges, is providing a real 
focus so that through the Internet, through technology, rural 
people can have access to skills development and educational 
opportunities. 
 
As well we want . . . we’re involved in identifying those key 
sectors of rural Saskatchewan where there are development 
opportunities. You know you raise the issue of — and 
obviously we’re very concerned about it — if you look at the 
jobs that have been lost, most of those jobs have been lost in 
agriculture. 
 
So the question becomes what do we do to ensure that there are 
job opportunities in rural Saskatchewan? So what areas of the 
economy can we develop so that people can have access to job 
opportunities, business opportunities, education, and what kinds 
of skills do we need in order to have access to those 
opportunities? 
 
And then that sort of gets to the issue raised by the member 
from Kelvington — the high-speed Internet — because we 
know that there are companies, businesses that are locating in 
rural Saskatchewan and they want access to that kind of 
technology in order to do the work that they are doing, and I’m 
talking about information technology companies. So that’s 
basically the work that we’re focused on and have been focused 
on in the last couple months. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — I guess just a follow-up then is that . . . I 
mean I kind of gathered then that there’s probably four or five 
areas that you’re really working on economic development 
more geared for rural even though you have a Department of 
Economic Development . . . Co-operative Development, the 
capital and trying to attract capital for rural Saskatchewan, 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

 

different things, the four or five different areas. 
 
The ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) 
committee though, I guess then if I can just question, is there 
not some overlap with ACRE as far . . . are they just strictly 
agriculture and then you’re going to stay away or are you going 
to work with Ag or how is that? Is there any overlap there at 
all? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — First of all, I don’t know if you’re 
aware of this, but I am the Co-Chair of ACRE so one of my 
jobs, as well as being the Minister Responsible for Rural 
Revitalization, is to work with ACRE. And ACRE is a . . . it has 
a four-year mandate. And ACRE has many subgroups that go 
beyond agriculture, so there other subgroups of ACRE that are 
working on economic development strategies that go beyond 
agriculture specifically. 
 
ACRE has a number of subgroups that are now reporting 
progress and they have presented some interim 
recommendations. The final reports of the subgroups are going 
to be submitted in the fall, this fall, and then there will be a 
consultation document that will be finalized in the fall. And 
then they’re going to go out and do consultation across the 
province and have town hall meetings. 
 
That’s not our job. That’s the job that they’re going to be doing. 
And then next spring they’re going to deliver their final report 
to government. 
 
So there is no cross duplication. I’m not going out across the 
province holding town hall meetings. That’s the work that 
they’re going to be doing. But I certainly am meeting with 
people across the province to develop my own understanding of 
the issues that people are confronted with given that there has 
been some fairly dramatic changes that have occurred in this 
province in the last 15 years that have significantly impacted 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — One real quick question. And again I 
apologize if this has been asked before, but do you ever look at 
when you set up the department setting it up outside of Regina? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Absolutely. And one of the . . . that was 
something that was considered in terms of the Office of Rural 
Revitalization. Part of the difficulty we have is that all of the 
Crown offices, the head offices are located here. All of the other 
deputy ministers are located here. And your member from 
Saltcoats raised that issue on the day that this was announced in 
the Throne Speech. 
 
The reason why it’s here is because we need to be able to work 
with the department officials, the senior department officials, 
the deputy ministers here in Regina. And that’s why the 
decision was made to locate the office here. And the member 
from Saltcoats understood why and he accepted the rationale for 
locating the office here. 
 
Subvote (RR01) agreed to. 
 
Subvote (RR02) agreed to. 
 
Vote 43 agreed to. 

The committee reported progress. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. To my left is Carl Neggers, 
the assistant deputy minister in the department. Immediately 
behind him is Ron Styles, the deputy minister, and behind me is 
Bernie Churko, who is the policy adviser in the department. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you Mr. Deputy Speaker. I have a 
few questions with relation to this Bill that I would like to ask 
the minister, and specifically get right to it. 
 
In terms of the truck routes and weight restrictions, the first 
question I’d like to ask is who or what groups did the minister 
meet with in putting together this Bill? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can advise the member is that 
the department has met with just about every group imaginable 
around this particular piece of legislation, including the 
Saskatchewan Trucking Association, the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, as well as the 
Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association as well. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You added 
the term wrecker in the amendment. In terms of licensing auto 
wreckers, could the minister please provide an explanation as 
why the clause under section 2, after clause 2(bb), why is this 
being added? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In 1997, during the legislative 
provisions respecting the licensing of auto wreckers, it was 
removed. And at the time the definition of wrecker was 
inadvertently left out of The Highway Traffic Act so it’s being 
reinserted. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, there’s a new section here, 14.2, dealing with 
The Land Titles Act. Why is this included here; and for the 
record, why is this being added in respect to Bill 53? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It’s a consequential amendment, so it’s 
really a housekeeping amendment. It was left out in the past and 
so it’s being inserted. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We’ve had 
a number of concerns brought to our attention, and I know 
they’ve been discussed in the House briefly, regarding the 
downloading of responsibility to the RMs. 
 
My question is what percentage of the total costs will rural 
municipalities be paying to provide alternate routes or new 
roads for heavy traffic? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can advise the member with these 
alternate truck routes, partnerships with the rural municipalities, 
any money that we save in terms of having to repair those . . . or 
upgrade those thin membrane surfaces is shared with the rural 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

municipality. So it’s not costing them any more because we are 
putting our savings into that alternate truck route. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Can the minister give me a percentage of 
what the cost would be, or is it impossible to give a percentage? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In order to properly answer the 
question we’d have to . . . it depends on the materials in the 
road. It depends upon a whole number of factors. And we 
would have to . . . you’d have to give us an example and then 
we could give you a determination. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I understood that was going to be 
difficult. It seems to me that as minister you’ll have the final 
say at the end of the day to determine whether or not an RM 
should provide an alternate route. 
 
Is this in fact true? Is it your office that will have the last say in 
this? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The legislation says they have to agree. 
So I can’t arbitrarily force a RM into an alternate truck route. 
There has to be agreement. I don’t have that legislative 
authority in this legislation. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank goodness. Thank you, Madam 
Minister, because I think there’s a bit of concern out there. I 
know we’ve been receiving some concern over that. 
 
There’s always a concern, even in a partnership deal, with an 
alternate route when it comes to downloading. And that is very 
much a concern. Now we have RMs that are in partnership with 
an alternate route. In terms of upkeep, how will that work and 
who will be responsible for the upkeep? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The partnership means that they do 
maintenance on the road. Because we’re saving money, our 
portion that we’re saving goes into the maintenance of the road, 
so we’re paying for that maintenance. 
 
And we’re saving money because of the reduced wear and tear 
of our thin membraned surface roads. Like they’re not failing. 
And you talked about a failure previously in our Highways and 
Transportation estimates. 
 
If we have alternate truck routes, we take those trucks off the 
roads. The roads aren’t failing so we’re not having to do all of 
the maintenance that we would normally have to do with a 
TMS. And we’re taking those savings and diverting it into the 
alternate truck route partnership. So the RM is in a position 
where they’re doing the maintenance and we’re assisting them 
through financial remuneration. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So if I get that right, Madam Minister, 
it’s a partnership in the building of it, but you’re only going to 
be a partner in the maintenance of it all, so I gather, is what you 
just said. And is that for perpetuity? Or is it . . . 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I could tell the member that for as long 
as the partnership lasts, that’s what we’ll be doing. 
 

If the road needs to be upgraded, then we assist in the upgrading 
of the road by providing money. And then once the road is 
upgraded and it’s an alternate route, then we put money into the 
maintenance of the road. And we will maintain . . . help 
maintain that road each year of the partnership. 
 
If the partnership agreement ends, then our money will revert 
back in to trying to keep our thin membrane surfaces as dust 
free as possible. But we also know if it were to end, then that 
heavy traffic goes back onto those thin membrane surface roads 
which can fail and create all kinds of problems for people living 
in the area but also for the department in terms of maintaining 
those roads. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We 
discussed this briefly in another forum, whether it was QP 
(question period) or at some other point, and what was 
discussed is penalties for vehicles that are in contravention of 
using this alternate vehicle . . . or alternate route. And I know 
we discussed, briefly, areas where the alternate route only goes 
X miles. 
 
Now they have to still travel on TMS, and the example that was 
used in the House was resupply of the small town. And even if 
there is an alternate route, an alternate route will not go through 
a small town. And I believe the answer that was given on that 
particular day is they can get a permit. 
 
Is that what your plan is, is people that are not using the 
alternate road surface but wish to use . . . a TMS road would 
have to get a permit to use, and along with going into small 
towns for resupply, would they have to get a permit? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — A follow-up to that, Madam Minister. 
What would these permits cost and where will they get permits 
and who will be policing it if heavy traffic does not use the 
alternate route? 
 
And we know that that’s already fraught with some problems 
because an alternate route is not necessarily an all-weather 
route, and so if we get into situations with alternate routes and if 
we ever get rain, that they’d still have to travel a TMS in order 
to get to their point of destination. 
 
So that’s a multiple question: who’s policing it, the cost of 
permits, where the money is going? There’s just a whole bunch 
of loose ends yet, Madam Minister, that need to be identified. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — In terms of who’s policing it, we have 
compliance officers in the province. We’ve increased the 
number of compliance officers in this provincial budget by five. 
 
As well we know that RMs and citizens in the area want to 
maintain — who go into an alternate truck route — want to 
maintain their thin membrane surface, so we anticipate that 
they’re going to be advising us if there are people that are not 
getting the necessary approval from the RMs. And the permits 
are issued by the RMs that are affected by the alternate truck 
route and where the TMS runs through particular RMs. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I want to be fairly quick, Madam 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

 

Minister, because I think we want to address the next Bill also. 
But if there’s not an alternate truck route and trucks are having 
to get a permit to come into a small town, is that not just 
another form of tax? Why are we penalizing vehicles coming 
into a town to resupply, if there’s not an alternate truck route 
that’s going through the town? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are trucks that go on thin 
membrane surfaces which are secondary weights. But if they 
want to go primary weights, like really heavy weights, that 
would be the kinds of weights that you see on trucks between 
the border and coming up out of Estevan and into Regina and 
then all the way to P.A. — those are primary weight roads — 
then they have to get a permit. 
 
So if they want to carry primary weight loads, which are 
heavier than secondary weight, then they have to get a permit. 
But if a truck is carrying secondary weights, they can go down 
those TMSs. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 8 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Clause 1 
 
The Deputy Chair: — And does the minister have different 
officials? No? All right. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have a 
few questions and I’ll try and keep them brief, but this is an 
extremely important issue. And I know we want to get on to 
other items here in about five minutes, so I’m going to try and 
make this very quick. 
 
An awful lot of concern has been raised with reference to this 
Bill and how this Bill may diminish the prospects for growth 
and development in Saskatchewan’s rail industry. It may 
prohibit future investment. 
 
Can the minister give assurance that those people in the 
industry that have fears over this Bill are unfounded fears? 
Because we feel that investment into the short-line railway is 
going to be very much diminished because of this Bill. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I could tell the member that we have 
consulted extensively on this Bill. We’ve consulted with SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities), LUSGAR, 
SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban Municipalities Association), 
various community groups like West Central Road and Rail, 
Wood Mountain Road and Rail, Southern Rails Co-operative, 
Cudworth Group, the Golden Prairie Short-Line Co-op, South 
Central Transportation Planning Committee, the Red Coat Road 
and Rail, the village of Wood Mountain, the Wood Mountain 
Road and Rail, the Great Western Railway, the United 
Transportation Union, area transportation planning committees, 
Prairie Malt, Carlton Trail Railway, the Canadian Wheat Board, 
the Canadian National Railway, the Canadian Grains 
Commission, Miller Western Pulp, and the list just goes on. 

The people that have the biggest concerns with this Bill are the 
two class 1 carriers, CN (Canadian National) and CP (Canadian 
Pacific). 
 
What I can also tell the member is that the legislative 
amendments are being introduced to assist farmers and rural 
communities in order to meet their grain handling needs. It’s 
also there to harmonize with the present federal legislation. And 
it defines timelines for various approvals to get into the 
business of operating a railway, and conversely to get out of 
operating. 
 
And I can tell the member that this Bill enjoys significant — 
and I say significant — public support by people who are 
involved in the grain handling industry as well as shippers. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well, I guess that’s a point that is 
probably very much debatable. I’m not sure where all of that 
information comes from that everybody is in support of it 
because I’m definitely not hearing that. And I would give you 
just some excerpts of some of the responses that I have 
received. 
 
And one of the comments that I have received, again, an excerpt 
from it is: 
 

Based on reasonable business principles, this legislation 
diminishes the prospect for growth and development in 
Saskatchewan’s rail industry as well as industries 
associated with the rail. 
 

And that has been our concern all along with people wishing to 
get into a short-line rail business. I believe that this inhibits the 
future private investment in these industries just by some of the 
caveats that are put into the Bill. 
 
In fact one phrase that I had received from a group is that 
“problems with the Act are so widespread it should be 
withdrawn and redrafted.” 
 
So there are some concerns out there. And the concerns . . . 
maybe you have not received some of the concerns but they are 
there. 
 
So again, Madam Minister, there are concerns there, whether 
you’ve heard them or not they’re concerns about private 
industry being involved. So I wish we could put on the record 
that outside investors should not be fearful of this legislation 
that they should be willing to come in and invest in our 
short-line industry. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The quote that you, the member, makes 
is a quote that we heard from CP. So if the member could put 
on the record who he’s heard from that have these significant 
concerns, that would be very helpful because we have only 
heard concerns from basically CN and CP. The other groups — 
and I’m talking about short lines, Member, I’m talking about 
short lines — they are supportive of this legislation. So I would 
ask the member to put on the record who you are quoting from 
because I think that would be helpful in terms of us 
understanding who you believe has significant concerns. 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well as I explained, they’re excerpts 
from quotes from various people. Probably from rural people. 
 
Is it true that the railways wishing to discontinue operations and 
dismantle assets will be subject to the Highway Traffic Board’s 
determination of why those . . . of what those assets will be 
valued at? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What we’re doing is harmonizing with 
the federal legislation. The Highway Traffic Board will act no 
differently than the quasi-judicial body of the Canadian 
Transportation Agency. So it’s simply a parallel to the federal 
legislation and the federal quasi-judicial body that deals with 
the whole issue of salvage once a class 1 carrier gets out of the 
business of rail lines and there’s rail line abandonment, and 
there’s salvage that has to be dealt with and compensation to 
communities. 
 
So it’s simply a parallel to the federal legislation to support 
communities. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — And that’s been one of the concerns 
again in the investment area that I’ve been receiving is if you’re 
using the salvage assets as part of your . . . as part of your 
insurance to get into the railway business, you have to have an 
awful lot of money. If you can’t use that salvage value because 
you don’t know the salvage value of the railroad until after you 
have actually gone through all the steps in the Bill, which is 180 
days or some long period of time. 
 
So that’s why I believe it’s difficult for investors to get 
involved, if that can’t be used as collateral. Is this a correct 
statement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that the 
asset is available for collateral under the provincial legislation 
in the same manner that the asset is available for collateral 
under the federal legislation. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — But, Madam Minister, when is the value 
determined? I believe in your Bill that the value of the asset is 
determined following the disbandment of the facility. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Our legislation on this matter is a 
mirror image of the federal legislation other than our legislation 
allows for a determination of the value earlier, at an earlier 
point than the federal legislation. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I’m really not convinced whether it 
follows the federal or not and whether it’s right to not be able to 
put a value on the salvage before . . . when you’re negotiating a 
price of the railroad, if you’re unable to use that as collateral on 
an unknown quantity, whether it’s with the federal legislation or 
not, I don’t believe this is correct. And if that is the case that the 
salvage value will not be determined until after the . . . if the 
railroad goes bankrupt then we determine the salvage value. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We have a copy of the Canadian 
Transportation Act and under it’s called Division V, 
transferring and discontinuing of the operations of the railway 
line, it’s sections 140, 141, 142, and 143, as well as section 145. 
And it’s actually, the net salvage value under the existing 
Canadian Transportation Act counts . . . it’s called . . . it’s 143, 

section 143(3)(1). So if you want to examine this, Member, you 
will see that they are similar. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. They may 
be similar but that doesn’t necessarily make them correct. 
 
It also appears in this Bill that there’s very wide-ranging powers 
that the minister has with this Bill in terms of constructing, 
authorizing certificates, fixing terms of conditions, railway 
opening approvals. Will there be any sort of a recourse 
companies may have, such as an appeal board, rather than just 
having all ministerial powers? Is there some methodology by 
which companies have that right to appeal? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that the 
minister — and it could be any minister — has responsibility 
for the public interest. 
 
It was very clear, for the consultation that we went through, that 
the public, in terms of the people that were consulted, wanted to 
ensure that short lines that were coming were not coming only 
for the salvage value of those lines. So they’d operate them for 
a short time, and if there was no legislative authority in the 
province, they could come, build up the hopes of those 
communities along the line, you know they decide they’re not 
making enough money, then they could take the salvage and 
run. 
 
And we wanted to make sure — and the community groups 
wanted to make sure — that there was due diligence done. So 
that we knew that the people that were coming for the short-line 
industry had the financial capacity to run a short line. 
 
So we wanted to be able to do due diligence. And that’s why 
the minister has the kinds of authority that is contained in the 
legislation. 
 
The second point I want to make is that if the minister does not 
act in a responsible way, is punitive or whatever, obviously the 
business that’s making application could apply to the courts if 
the minister is not responding in a way that is within normal 
business practices. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I hope I’m 
not sounding like I’m against this Bill. There’s a lot of good 
parts of this Bill. And I’m very much in favour of short-line 
railroads, as I mentioned in . . . the other day when I spoke. It’s 
unfortunate it didn’t start about 10 years ago because a lot of 
the lines are already pulled, such as my own line. If this would 
have been enacted some eight years ago or seven years ago, I’d 
still have a railroad and maybe an operating elevator in my area. 
 
Which leads me to the next question that this Bill does not 
cover and has been brought to my attention by a number of 
groups is environmental issues. And there’s nothing in the Bill 
that I can find — and I’ve read it pretty closely two or three 
times — on environmental issues. 
 
Did you discuss environmental issues prior to? And this could 
be a far-ranging question — environmental issues including 
cleanup? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Environmental issues are usually dealt 



June 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2249 

 

with in the Acts that are covered by the minister responsible for 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management. 
 
And so what you try and do is to have a piece of legislation that 
pertains to a particular issue. In this case, it’s the issue of rail 
lines. 
 
In the province of Saskatchewan, it’s an issue of trying to 
ensure — given that there is a lot of interest in short lines now 
in the province and we have some successful short-line carriers 
in the province — that in the public interest we have similar 
legislation to the federal legislation so that communities along 
those short lines can be protected from circumstances that may 
not be in their best interests. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I kind of 
feel that because this is a railway Bill it should be inclusive 
with some stipulations such as cleanup or restoration of the line, 
such as even cleaning up ballast. 
 
And I can suggest to the minister that in the railway that’s been 
abandoned at my place, the ballast is still there. 
 
I do not think that’s correct. I do not think that should be a 
SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) issue. I think that should come under The 
Railway Act. 
 
And I believe that in your Bill that there should be some 
provisions in the Bill which stipulate to somebody that is going 
to abandon a track that they just can’t pull the rails, pull the ties, 
sell them at a profit, and then walk away. 
 
So now I understand what you’re saying — well that’s SERM’s 
problem now. Well I don’t believe it’s SERM’s problem. I 
think it should be the problem of this Bill. And I’m wondering 
if you’ve got anything that you can comment on about if a line 
is going to be abandoned and sold for salvage. What about such 
things as ballast and returning it back to its, if you wish, its 
natural state? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can tell the member that rural 
municipalities now have the authority under the legislation . . . 
under their legislation to enact bylaws that would do what the 
member is requesting be done. 
 
And I’m advised that the courts . . . There was a challenge to 
whether or not municipalities had that kind of authority, 
legislative authority. The courts have ruled that they do. 
 
And we have many municipalities that have enacted bylaws that 
ensure that if a railroad leaves a particular area, they have to 
restore the area to its original condition. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 20 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(16:45) 
 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Highways and Transportation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I move that 
this Bill be now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Railway Amendment Act, 2001 
 

Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 16:48 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bills: 
 
Bill No. 7 - The Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) 

Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 14 - The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 27 - The Corporation Capital Tax Amendment Act, 

2001 
Bill No. 51 - The Income Tax Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 23 - The Rural Municipality Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 24 - The Urban Municipality Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 25 - The Northern Municipalities Amendment Act, 

2001 
Bill No. 6 - The Planning and Development Amendment Act, 

2001 
Bill No. 31 - The Saskatchewan Heritage Foundation 

Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 22 - The Assessment Management Agency 

Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 40 - The Teachers’ Dental Plan Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 41 - The Teachers Superannuation and Disability 

Benefits Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 54 - The Education Amendment Act, 2001 
 - Loi de 2001 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur 

l’éducation 
Bill No. 39 - The Occupational Health and Safety Amendment 

Act, 2001 
Bill No. 1 - The Partnership Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 15 - The Credit Union Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 32 - The Queen’s Bench Amendment Act, 2001 
 - Loi de 2001 modifiant la Loi de 1998 sur la Cour 

du Banc de la Reine 
Bill No. 55 - The Miscellaneous Statutes Repeal (Regulatory 

Reform) Act, 2001 
Bill No. 9 - The Power Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 50 - The Mineral Resources Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 10 - The Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 

2001 
Bill No. 11 - The Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax 

Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 3 - The Historic Properties Foundations Act 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard June 28, 2001 

 

Bill No. 34 - The Saskatchewan Natural Resources Transfer 
Agreement (Treaty Land Entitlement) 
Amendment Act, 2001 

Bill No. 29 - The Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund 
Amendment Act, 2001 

Bill No. 16 - The Film Employment Tax Credit Amendment 
Act, 2001 

Bill No. 45 - The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

Bill No. 33 - The Legislative Assembly and Executive Council 
Amendment Act, 2001 

Bill No. 49 - The Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors 
Amendment Act, 2001 

Bill No. 19 - The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 20 - The Land Surveys Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 43 - The Police Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 35 - The Public Trustee Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 36 - The Public Trustee Consequential Amendment 

Act, 2001 
 - Loi de 2001 apportant les modifications 

corrélatives à la loi intitulée The Public Trustee 
Amendment Act, 2001 

Bill No. 44 - The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 
2001 

Bill No. 26 - The Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act 
Bill No. 4 - The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 5 - The Dietitians Act 
Bill No. 13 - The Class Actions Act 
 - Loi sur les recours collectifs 
Bill No. 12 - The Water Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 
Bill No. 53 - The Highways and Transportation Amendment 

Act, 2001 
Bill No. 52 - The Railway Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to these Bills. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:54. 
 
The Speaker: — I wish everyone a good Canada Day weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 
 


