















































Hansard: April 24, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 701 
 April 24, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
again today to present petitions on behalf of people throughout 
the Bruno, Humboldt, Muenster area who would like to see 
Bruno be allowed to be part of the Humboldt telephone 
exchange. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt, from Muenster, from St. Gregor, Warman, and Quill 
Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition regarding the . . . regarding two of the government’s 
Crown corporations, SaskPower and SaskEnergy. Both recently 
announced significant rate increases for residential and business 
customers. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from the constituency of 
Rosetown-Biggar, primarily from Lucky Lake, Birsay. I see 
Swift Current out of the riding, and Beechy. And I’m happy to 
present this petition on their behalf. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today regarding the EMS (emergency medical 
services) report which many feel will have a detrimental effect 
on rural Saskatchewan. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley, 
Fosston, and Yellow Quill Reserve. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the high price of energy. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Ridgedale, Melfort, and Kinistino. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the possible 
conversion of some paved highways to gravel. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to set 
aside any plans to revert Saskatchewan highways back to 
gravel, commit that the government will not download 
responsibility for current numbered highways onto local 
governments, and to consult with local residents, and to 
co-operate in finding and implementing other alternatives. 

 
The petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Hearne and Briercrest. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition from citizens concerned about 
ambulance services. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work and improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Naicam. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in southwest Saskatchewan concerned about the state of 
the hospital there: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is presented . . . or has been 
signed by people in Swift Current, in Hazlet, in Webb, in 
Tompkins, from Cabri, Lancer, Pennant, and Success. 
 
I so present. 
 



702 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about ambulance service in the rural 
areas. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Radville and Ceylon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the retention of 
the Hafford Hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Hafford 
Hospital remains open. 
 

And it’s signed by the citizens of Richard, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned about the high cost of energy rates. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Citizens are from Davidson, Regina, Bladworth, Saskatoon, 
Imperial, and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition 
regarding the high cost of energy rates. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, from Shell Lake, and Milden. 
 
I so present. 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition in 
regards to the Pioneer Lodge and the citizens that are concerned 
with what’s happening there. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of service and care be maintained at the Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Mossbank, 
Assiniboia, Fir Mountain, and Willow Bunch. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again on behalf of concerned citizens reference the cuts at 
the Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signators in this come basically from all 
over southern Saskatchewan including Regina, Moose Jaw, 
Willow Bunch, Viceroy, other places in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province on the following matters: 
 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia; 
 
Upgrading of Highway 43; 
 
Energy rebate to consumers; 
 
Hafford Hospital; and 
 
Bruno and the Humboldt telephone exchange. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 28 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Agriculture: in the past fiscal year 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 703 

 

2000-2001, how many applications for land purchases did 
the Farm Land Security Board receive from 
out-of-province residents? And of those applications, how 
many were rejected, how many were approved, and how 
many were granted exemptions? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day 
no. 28 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: what method is SaskPower using to 
supply electrical energy to the community of Deschambault 
Lake? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
give notice that on day no. 28 I’ll ask the government the 
following question: 
 

How much is budgeted for travel outside of Canada by 
officials of SaskPower to investigate investments made or 
under consideration for the year 2001? 

 
I will also ask: 
 

How much is budgeted for travel outside of Saskatchewan, 
but within Canada, by officials of SaskPower and its 
subsidiaries to investigate investments made or under 
consideration for the year 2001? 
 
With parallel questions for the years 2000 and 1999 
respectively. 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly a group of 60 students from Caroline 
Robins School which is in my constituency of Saskatoon Mount 
Royal. They’re sitting in the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, and 
they’re accompanied by their teachers, Tom Paterson and Linda 
Liebrecht. 
 
They have been visiting Regina, seeing some of the sights. We 
are going to get our photograph taken later on. They’re having a 
tour of the building and we’re going to have refreshments. So I 
know the students are having an enjoyable time. 
 
I hope they find the proceedings here interesting and I’d like all 
members, Mr. Speaker, to join with me in welcoming the 
students and teachers from Caroline Robins School today as 
well as any parents, chaperons, and the driver who may be in 
attendance. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to introduce 
to you, Mr. Speaker, and through you to all members of this 
Assembly, two ladies seated in the east gallery, a Mrs. Norma 
Donovan and a Patricia Line, both tireless workers for us in the 
city of Moose Jaw — Norma in Moose Jaw Wakamow and 

Patricia in Moose Jaw North. 
 
And I’m sure that all members will be happy to welcome them 
here today and I hope they have an interesting and educational 
day in the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the other members of the Assembly, 45 
grade 6, 7, and 8 students from St. Catherine School here in 
Regina, and their teachers, Mr. Allan Schmidt and Mrs. Lynne 
Selinger. 
 
And they’re going to have the opportunity to witness some of 
the events today in the Assembly. As well we’ll have a chance 
to visit later and have drinks, and they can ask questions about 
what they’ve seen here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask you and all the others to join me in 
welcoming them to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d 
like to introduce to you and through you to the members of the 
Assembly, a constituent of mine, and actually a past constituent 
of mine, that lives in Yorkton, Caroline Armbruster and her 
sister-in-law Deana. 
 
I want to mention to them, Mr. Speaker, that I am available for 
supper if they wish to buy. I have quite a fair amount of spare 
time at that certain time of the day. 
 
So I’d like all the members to welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Assiniboia Rebels Win Keystone Cup 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks ago I 
rose in the Assembly to congratulate the Assiniboia Southern 
Rebels on winning the Saskatchewan junior B championship 
and I indicated at that time that they’d be off to Maple Ridge, 
British Columbia, to partake in the Keystone Cup. 
 
Well I rise today, Mr. Speaker, to let everyone know that I’ve 
very pleased to announce that they won the Keystone Cup in a 3 
to 1 victory over the Ridge Meadow Flames in Sunday’s gold 
medal game, which is emblematic of the Western Canadian 
junior B championships. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Assiniboia finished the 16 round robin with a 3, 0, 
and 2 record and needed an 8-3 victory over Ridge Meadows in 
the final preliminary game to earn a berth in the championship. 
The Rebels goaltender, Sheldon Tuck, was outstanding 
throughout the tournament and was selected as the 
championship’s most valuable player. 
 
En route to winning the Keystone Cup, the Assiniboia Rebels 
posted 26 straight games without a loss. It’s quite a feat. 



704 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

I would like to acknowledge and congratulate Coach Chik 
Volsky and all of the Assiniboia Southern Rebels for their 
outstanding achievement in the Keystone Cup. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 (13:45) 

Sask. Exports to Grow 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In today’s 
Leader-Post, there’s a very interesting and encouraging article 
with at least one very tantalizing line, and the article comes at a 
very appropriate time. 
 
The headline is: “Sask. exports to grow” and the article quotes 
none other than the chief economist of the Export Development 
Corporation of Canada who predicts, among other things, and I 
quote: “seven-per-cent rise in Saskatchewan export sales this 
year.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — “In fact,” he says, and I quote again: “the 
province’s expected export growth is (now the members 
opposite will like this) triple the national average.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — “Triple the national average.” It’s what my 
friend from Dewdney would call good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s also interesting to note that the article says one of the 
reasons Saskatchewan’s economy is in good shape is we’re not 
as dependent, our exports are not as dependent, on the 
American markets as other provinces’ are. 
 
In the article, the economist goes on to say Saskatchewan’s got 
a pretty good diversification record despite its reputation — a 
reputation which the members opposite constantly sully. 
 
We know, and others like the economists of the major banks, 
the credit rating agencies, and now one more voice, Mr. 
Speaker, that the Saskatchewan economy is doing just fine, 
thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Avonlea Prairie Thunder - Western Canadian 
Female Hockey Championship 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ve been very eager 
to tell you about the Avonlea Prairie Thunder. The Avonlea 
Prairie Thunder recently won the gold medal in the Western 
Canadian Female Hockey Championship. 
 
The team went undefeated in round robin play against teams 
representing Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, and Hockey 
North. The team met Manitoba for the final game and defeated 
them 6 to 2 to capture the gold medal. 
 
Congratulations to the female athletes and coaches Wayne 
Watson, Brad Mohr, manager Carol Holland and trainer Carol 
Hubbard. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Early Childhood Intervention Week 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, as writer and speaker Margery Sheronce remarked: “A 
child has only one start in life and it’s up to us to make it a good 
one.” 
 
Ensuring that children born with some type of developmental 
delay get that good start can present challenges not usually 
faced by new parents. As parents adjust to the reality that their 
child will require extra help, they may feel alone and often 
overwhelmed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
During Early Childhood Intervention Week, which is this week, 
we acknowledge those challenges facing all of us to ensure that 
every child has the best start at life and a chance to fulfill their 
potential. 
 
Fortunately in Saskatchewan we can offer parents and children 
help. The early childhood intervention program provides 
families with caring professional staff that support and assist 
parents of a young child with a disability until that child either 
enters the school system or no longer requires the services of 
the program. 
 
Early childhood intervention services are delivered by 
community-based, non-profit organizations located around our 
province. 
 
I would ask the members of this House and indeed all citizens 
to think about and acknowledge the very important contribution 
made by those early childhood intervention services and service 
providers. The infants and young children they work with do 
indeed have only one start in life, and it is these dedicated 
professionals that make the difference. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Flooding in Southeast Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
wish to inform the House today of a disaster that’s taking place 
in my area as we speak. The disaster is flooding. Not only is it 
affecting the Indian Head-Milestone constituency but it’s also 
affecting a number of other constituencies such as Estevan, 
Moosomin, and Weyburn. 
 
I spoke to the reeve of the RM (rural municipality) of 
Wellington this morning who said that 40 to 50 sections of land 
are under water. The front page of The Leader-Post today talks 
of Floyd Keller from the Osage area who is surrounded by 
flooded land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only have these farmers had to withstand the 
devastating effects of low commodity prices, dysfunctional 
safety net programs, and now this — disastrous floods. 
 
Mr. Speaker, quite often it is said on the farm that we never lose 
a crop in April and May. But, Mr. Speaker, when you don’t 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 705 

 

seed until the end of June, the chances of getting a crop are 
quite a bit less. 
 
The economic hit on the areas around these flooded areas is 
going to be significant, and it’s an area that’s already been hit 
hard with, as I said, low commodity prices. I think we’ll be 
hearing more of this in the days to come and I really do believe 
that some disaster relief is going to be needed to help these 
farmers through yet another tough year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina’s Royal Red Horse Show 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to announce to the Assembly that the Canadian National 
Arabian Horse Show, better known as the Royal Red, is 
guaranteed a home in Regina this year and for the next five. 
 
The Royal Red will continue to be a feature attraction at 
Regina’s Exhibition Park and will continue to attract the horse 
lover and general tourist alike to our city and to our province. 
 
I should mention that the excellent facilities at Exhibition Park 
are a major reason for Regina being chosen, as well as the 
welcome that the city extends to the people who come for this 
show. 
 
This year’s show between August 20 and 25 is the 44th annual 
and the 14th consecutive show in Regina. 
 
It is estimated that the Royal Red brings $12 million annually to 
our economy. Owners, exhibitors, visitors, and tourists spend 
approximately 6.8 million each year. The rest comes from 
economic links created between Saskatchewan agricultural and 
agribusinesses such as the purchase of feed and 
pharmaceuticals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 12 million is not an insignificant boost to our 
economy. The 10,000 annually contributed in support of this 
show by the Agriculture Development Fund is a wise 
investment indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I congratulate Doug Cressman, his bid committee, 
and the Regina Exhibition Park for keeping this fine show in 
Regina. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Town of Craik Concerned for the Future 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with concern I 
rise today to speak to the House about the community of Craik. 
Last month the Cargill elevator was demolished and later came 
the announcement that the sole surviving Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool elevator will close in July. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I related to this House in an earlier member’s 
statement, the community of Craik has worked hard to survive, 
and their efforts at saving their community are commendable to 
say the least. But now they’re very worried about their future 

and they will have no elevators left in their town. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mayor Rod Haugerud of Craik has worked very 
hard at different ideas and goals. The Craik Regional Park has 
been very successful, and the town of Craik has even developed 
their own TV cable system so revenue earned helps to maintain 
the town rather than leave the town. The mayor has indicated 
that the loss of elevators will hurt the roads and highways. And 
he believes that freight should be moved whenever possible by 
rail. 
 
Indeed it was Craik and this mayor that put forward the 
resolution at the recent SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) convention about our roads and 
freight being moved by rail. And there it was approved, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the concerns echoed by the mayor should be 
carefully listened to as they represent the views of so many 
small rural centres across Saskatchewan. These concerns, along 
with worries about the future of the health care service in most 
towns, are what communities such as Craik deem most 
important. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the citizens of Craik and 
their area for their continuing hard work to ensure their future, 
and thank the mayor for sharing his vision for the renewal of 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to welcome all the students to the 
legislature and I would just like to remind them that during the 
procedures of the legislature it is not customary for anybody in 
the galleries to participate in any way — cheering or yelling out 
or anything. And I just invite you to keep that in mind. 
 

SIAST Heavy Equipment Mechanics Lab 
 

Ms. Jones: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, as a former truck driver 
myself, I know the value of equipment being kept in top-notch 
repair. There is nothing more frustrating or costly than getting 
halfway to your destination. 
 
Truck drivers need mechanics and mechanics need training 
facilities. That is why I’m pleased to note that SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) in 
Saskatoon has officially opened a new $3.5 million facility for 
its heavy equipment mechanics program. 
 
This new 5,000 square metre facility will provide a work 
environment similar to that found in the heavy equipment 
industry. The building has nine classrooms, a computer lab, and 
office area, an industry training area, and a 6 tonne overhead 
crane — state of the art, Mr. Speaker. 
 
With this facility and with the experience that SIAST faculty 
has gained since 1963 when the program began, our heavy 
equipment and mechanics program is a leader in Canada and in 
North America. 
 
And as my colleague from Moose Jaw Wakamow said about 
another SIAST program last week, this one trains Saskatchewan 



706 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

students who take Saskatchewan jobs and raise Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
Currently 52 students are enrolled. Over the years, 1,700 have 
completed training. Mr. Speaker, this facility funded by this 
government is just one more example of how we are melding 
education and training with economic opportunity for the good 
of our young people and the benefit of our province. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Proposed Energy Rate Increases 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the minister responsible for SaskPower. Saskatchewan 
families are being buried under higher utility rates. They are 
growing faster than the list of hospitals that the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) are planning to close. 
 
Today SaskPower is warning that power rates will be going up 
again this year by as much as another 10 per cent. Mr. Speaker, 
that’s on top of residential power rate hikes of 6 per cent just a 
few months ago. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower’s utility rate increases are in addition 
to the massive increases announced by SaskEnergy. Just last 
December Saskatchewan families were hit with a 27 per cent 
increase in their energy bills and within the next few weeks 
SaskEnergy will be asking for yet another increase — as much 
as 50 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister finally admit that Saskatchewan 
families need some further financial relief from the NDP’s 
massive utility rate increases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, with a question like 
that I think the Leader of the Opposition must be still be taking 
his advice from Stockwell Day. And I have news for him, even 
Deborah Grey doesn’t take her advice from Stockwell Day 
these days, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to . . . The member gets up and says you know 
we’ve got money in the treasury to pay rebates out to people. I 
want to point out to the House and to the people, Mr. Speaker, 
that in the Humboldt Journal, April 12, we have another one of 
those members, this time the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. What is she saying? She’s saying the 
budget spending is not sustainable. They say we’re spending 
too much money. 
 
So one day, Mr. Speaker, they come in and say, you’re 
spending too much money. Today they come in and they say, 
spend some more money, Mr. Speaker. One day they say, the 
Crowns are making too much profit, that they’ve got too much 
money. The next day, Mr. Speaker, they come in and say, the 
Crowns are losing too much money. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, what I say is this opposition is not credible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
what the opposition has been saying is that SaskPower should 
not be hiring an additional 200 managers and then raising the 
power rates of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister for Crown 
corporations will not answer. My next question is for the 
Premier of Saskatchewan. 
 
Saskatchewan families are getting buried under an avalanche of 
NDP utility rate increases. I outlined all of them. Meanwhile, 
and this is fact, the NDP is sitting on a hundred and eighty-five 
million dollars in Crown corporation profits and $500 million 
— that’s a half a billion, Mr. Premier — in windfall oil and gas 
revenues. 
 
Unfortunately the NDP appears to be quite happy to grow the 
size of government, grow the size of SaskPower, while 
Saskatchewan families struggle. That’s the point we’re trying to 
make. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatchewan deserve better from 
their government. After question period today I will be moving, 
I will be moving a motion calling on the government to 
consider providing further financial relief to Saskatchewan 
families struggling to pay for massive utility increases. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier support the Saskatchewan Party 
motion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well here we go again, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve got the member from Kelvington-Wadena, the member 
from Lloydminster, the member from Humboldt saying to the 
media, the government is spending too much money. Then 
we’ve got the so-called Leader of the Opposition getting up and 
saying the government is sitting on too much money. He’s 
saying to the people that we’re not spending enough money, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the people have to ask, which way is it? The opposition 
cannot have it both ways. They cannot say in the media day 
after day that we’re spending too much money on health care, 
on education, on children, on highways. We’re spending too 
much, they say, and they vote against that, Mr. Speaker, and 
then they come in and they say we should spend more. And it 
doesn’t make sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They told us we should put money into fixing the roads. We’re 
hiring people to fix the roads. Now they tell us to fire the people 
that we’re going to get to fix the roads, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They told us to get more social workers to take care of children 
at risk. We hired the social workers, then they come in and tell 
us to fire the social workers, Mr. Speaker. It’s not a credible 
opposition. 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 707 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the senseless rhetoric that’s 
coming from the Minister of Finance — a Minister of Finance 
who is sitting on more money and is growing a government 
bigger and bigger than it’s ever been in our province; a province 
where the people are struggling as they never have before to 
make ends meet. They’re struggling to the point where they’re 
leaving the province of Saskatchewan and he doesn’t even 
recognize that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is that the NDP is sitting on nearly 
$700 million in a political slush fund while Saskatchewan 
people are buried under a sea of high utility rates. We could 
keep our utility rates lower and we could provide the people 
with some advantages in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, immediately after question period the 
Saskatchewan Party will be moving a motion to provide some 
relief for Saskatchewan families from massive utility rate 
increases. 
 
My question for the Premier and his government: Will the NDP 
finally care about people and support a motion to assist the 
families of our province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, here we go again, Mr. Speaker, with 
the Leader of the Opposition sometimes complaining that he 
says we’re spending too much money and we’re going to go 
into deficit; today he’s saying we’re sitting on a surplus. Well 
I’ve got news for the Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Speaker. 
The opposite of a surplus, which is what we’re operating at, is a 
deficit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And if we follow the voodoo Stockwell Day inspired economics 
of that member, Mr. Speaker, we will head back into deficit and 
debt. The people of this province, Mr. Speaker, have seen that 
kind of thinking before. They have been there, and done that, 
and we’re not going back to deficit and debt, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Revenue-Sharing Grants 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Government. Mr. 
Speaker, a few weeks ago the NDP voted to expand the size of 
government rather than hold the line on property taxes. We’re 
now seeing the results of that decision. 
 
Last night, Mr. Speaker, the city of Saskatoon was forced to 
raise property taxes by 4 per cent. This increase is a direct result 
of the NDP’s decision to freeze revenue sharing grants and the 
NDP’s decision to hike SaskPower rates. Mr. Speaker, this tax 
hike could have been avoided if the NDP had of only increased 
municipal revenue sharing, instead of increasing the size of 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the light of Saskatoon’s 4 per cent hike, will the 

minister admit he made a mistake and increase the municipal 
revenue-sharing grant? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the opposition 
continues to suggest that this government has not been listening 
to the people and the municipalities. We have been listening. 
There have been programs for municipalities to assist them with 
their infrastructure programs. 
 
And I have copies of letters here from municipalities that don’t 
agree with the opposition attacking those workers, Mr. Speaker, 
that will be working in Agriculture and Food, Energy and 
Mines, Highways, and social workers, and in health care — 
front-line workers. These people are attacking those folks and 
don’t want them out there working to fix our highways and fix 
the ills of this province. They are opposed to anything and 
everything in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, thanks to that minister and his temporary leader and 
the rest of the NDP, municipal taxes are going up all over this 
province — thanks to that government, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s not just Saskatoon. Virtually every municipal body 
in this province is raising taxes because the NDP chose bigger 
government over property tax relief. 
 
Last night, Mr. Speaker, Moose Jaw was forced to raise 
property taxes by 2 per cent. Once again this is a direct result of 
the NDP’s decision to expand the size of government and freeze 
revenue-sharing grants. Bigger government, higher taxes — 
that’s the NDP plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: does the minister really think 
Saskatchewan taxpayers should be forced to pay higher taxes to 
pay for the NDP’s plans to expand the size of government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, it would be great if we had 
that $750 million that we have to pay interest on in the debt 
that’s been accumulated as a result of the last administration. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment to municipal government 
remains strong. Two years ago there . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, order. Order. Order. The 
minister will continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll reiterate the 
fact that the commitment to municipalities remains strong with 
the $10 million introduced two years ago for the municipal 
infrastructure programs and this year marking the fourth year in 
the grants-in-lieu-of program to the tune of $13.1 million, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Municipalities now receive $97 million in unconditional and 
targeted programs. It’s the opposition does not want to see 
anything happen — creation of employment in rural 
Saskatchewan to help fix our highways, to help our young 



708 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

people that are in trouble, to help the education sector, and 
health care. They’re opposed to that. They voted against that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Closure of Lanigan Hospital 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Yesterday in response to the questions about the decision to 
close the Lanigan Hospital for three months, the Minister of 
Health said that the health district was working with the 
community and consulting with staff to see what could be done 
to best deal with the situation. Well this answer certainly came 
as a big surprise to the people in the Lanigan community. 
 
In fact, PCS (Potash Corporation of Saskatchewan Inc.), 
Lanigan, had to phone the health district themselves to find out 
what was going on. They had not been consulted with about 
how the hospital closure would affect them and they had not 
been told that the hospital would not be operating for three 
months. With over 360 employees on staff at the mine they rely 
on the fact that acute care services are just minutes away in 
Lanigan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: why is the Department of Health 
allowing the closure of this hospital in a major agriculture and 
mining community on the busy Yellowhead Highway in the 
summer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, in this particular situation 
the local community is working with the town council in 
Lanigan, with other people, and the district health board has had 
discussions. They are talking about June 15 as a day when they 
are looking at temporarily closing that hospital for the summer 
to deal with the fact that they don’t have sufficient nurses to 
provide the care over the summer. 
 
What we know is that they are continuing to talk with the 
people in the community. They’re continuing to try to find a 
solution in that particular area. The role that I have is to make 
sure that all people in the province have the appropriate health 
care services, and we will continue to do that through the 
Department of Health because we know and we are sure that we 
are going to be able to provide health care services for 
everybody. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I think the Minister of Health 
should really question who’s giving him his information 
because there was a meeting just six days prior to the 
announcement, with all the stakeholders, and they were not told 
that there was a nursing shortage. The nursing shortage didn’t 
just happen and the staff were also not told that this was going 
to happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when you work in a mining industry, emergency 
and acute care services nearby are necessary. In fact any 

workplace counts on these services being available when an 
accident happens. 
 
April 28 is the day of mourning for workers killed or injured on 
the job. And, Mr. Speaker, the government’s own press release 
says that more than 30 people died and thousands more were 
injured in workplace accidents in Saskatchewan during the last 
year and yet this very government is stripping health services 
away from these workers. 
 
PCS Lanigan is very concerned with the loss of acute care and 
emergency care services in Lanigan and may consider making 
their own arrangements. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is this what the system is coming to? Will the 
Minister of Health guarantee that PCS Lanigan will not have to 
make their own arrangements for emergency and acute care 
services while the Lanigan Hospital is closed? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what will happen in that 
particular health district and within that particular community 
will involve all of the local people. And I’m sure that the people 
who are involved with PCS can work with the health district to 
make sure that the appropriate arrangements for emergency 
service or what other services are necessary. 
 
We have a concern as the provincial Department of Health 
around the number of health care providers, around the number 
of nurses. We’re working very hard to make sure that we train 
more people, that we retain the ones that we have, and that we 
recruit more. 
 
We are going to continue to work with all of the people in the 
province on that particular issue but we’re also going to support 
the local communities as they deal with their own particular 
issues in their communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Psychiatrists Leaving Regina 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, two 
weeks ago I asked the minister about psychiatrists who had 
indicated they were leaving Regina. I asked what the minister 
and the Department of Health were prepared to do to keep these 
doctors here. The minister’s answer was that the psychiatrists 
would be receiving a 14 per cent increase in their salary and that 
the department was continuing to try to recruit new doctors to 
our health care system. 
 
But today in a letter to the editor of The Leader-Post six 
psychiatrists leaving the Regina Health District say they are all 
planning to leave the province because of poor administration 
and managerial decisions. They say they have expressed their 
concerns to the health district and the provincial department for 
the past two years but they have been ignored, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is this: why has the Department of 
Health not responded to these concerns and taken action in 
order to keep these doctors in Regina? 
 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 709 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Regina Health District is 
working very carefully to recruit more psychiatrists for Regina. 
And they’re working with a committee to make sure that they 
have the appropriate number of psychiatrists. We know once 
again it’s an issue of finding enough health providers to work in 
the area. 
 
Now the other side of this is that we are working right across 
the country to find enough psychiatrists for the whole of 
Canada. Part of the difficulty is that we are not training enough 
psychiatrists in Canada and so the recruiting ends up going to 
places like England to get more people to work. 
 
And what we will continue to do is work with our health 
districts, we’ll work with the other provinces, we’ll work with 
the Canadian government, so that we can get sufficient number 
of psychiatrists and other health care providers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to quote from the letter to the editor that these 
psychiatrists sent: 
 

It is no secret to the Department of Health and the Regina 
Health District that precisely those psychiatrists who are 
now leaving and the others who are very seriously thinking 
of leaving the province had formally and informally warned 
them well over two years ago of the grave structural and 
managerial problems affecting the psychiatric care of 
patients in Regina. 
 

Mr. Speaker, three of the doctors are going to Alberta, two are 
going to Ontario, and one is going back to the United Kingdom 
where he says he’ll be paid less, but he doesn’t have to put up 
with the problems that this system has created, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are problems of the minister’s own making 
and now what he wants to do instead of dealing with these 
issues is further delay and delay and delay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister announce to this House what he 
is going to do to attract new doctors to a system that is chasing 
doctors out? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to speak on behalf 
of government. I hear the critic of the Saskatchewan Party, 
health care, raising some significant issues in health care. I hear 
today in the House the member from Watrous raising 
significant issues in the House — the very day, Mr. Speaker, 
the very day this party refuses to participate in an all-party 
committee to deal with the challenges facing health care, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The day they refuse to participate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. 
 
(14:15) 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The member, 
the Health critic, wants to quote editorials today. I’d like to 
quote an editorial from The Estevan Mercury, Mr. Speaker, 
April 18, 2001. Quote: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Party decides not to participate (in the 
all-party committee), they will lose credibility and the 
opportunity to show the public their own political will, 
courage, and leadership capabilities in a public forum. 

 
Mr. Speaker, further on: 
 

When this one area of public expenditure takes up over 40 
per cent of the provincial budget, it demands more than lip 
service and question period one-liners from opposition 
members. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they are quickly losing their credibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment in IQ&A 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the CIC minister. Mr. Speaker, in 1998 the NDP 
lost millions of dollars in the Channel Lake fiasco without 
cabinet approval for the expenditures. Apparently they didn’t 
bother to read the contract before they signed it. Now SaskTel 
has gone one better — they didn’t even have a contract, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
SaskTel lost $2 million trying to buy and sell people’s health 
care information through IQ&A with no signed contract to 
ensure they could even get this information. As a result of the 
Channel Lake fiasco, the government made a number of 
recommendations, Mr. Speaker. We would like to know if the 
NDP followed these recommendations in the case of IQ&A. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: did the CIC Board approve 
SaskTel’s plan to collect and sell people’s health care 
information, and did cabinet approve of this plan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
First of all let me speak to the issue of due diligence. In no way, 
Mr. Speaker, in no way the opposition . . . And I think 
sometimes the public is, while understandably, believe that due 
diligence is a guarantee for success. Due diligence is not a 
guarantee for success, Mr. Speaker. It’s not. In every single 
case, Mr. Speaker, the Crowns and their subsidiaries will do 
their very best to ensure that taxpayers’ dollars are at minimal 
risk. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, and I tell the opposition this today, I bet — 
and I’ll put my job on the line — my guess is, Mr. Speaker, that 
we will lose money in the future, Mr. Speaker. When you invest 
money, you risk, Mr. Speaker. But the Crowns’ record will 
show, Mr. Speaker, that many more times, we have returned 
profits and dividends to the people of Saskatchewan than they 
have lost money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



710 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
throughout these questions, the minister often talks about the 
fact that he refuses to micromanage. He keeps saying he’s not 
prepared to do that. 
 
But according to the Channel Lake report, Mr. Speaker, what 
we’re asking isn’t micromanagement. It’s sound management, 
according to that government’s report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, recommendation 14 of the Channel Lake report 
says Crown subsidiaries should only be created and divested 
after clear completed and timely prior approval by the Crown 
board, the CIC board and, (Mr. Speaker), by order in council. 
 
That would be the cabinet of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t find an order in council either creating or 
winding down this company. So it appears the NDP is ignoring 
its own recommendations in the Channel Lake report. 
 
Again to the minister: who approved SaskTel’s decision to sell 
people’s health care information? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, we are always concerned 
when there’s public dollars lost, always concerned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer to a report by Deloitte and Touche. 
It says, “IQ&A Partnership, December 31, 1999.” It’s their 
annual report, Mr. Speaker, done May 18 of 2000. The 
document’s tabled in this legislature on June the 29, 2000. Mr. 
Speaker, in this legislature, June 29, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to quote from a couple of the notes in this public report 
that that member says they knew nothing about, Mr. Speaker. 
Note no. 2 says: 
 

Subsequent to December 31, 1999, the Partnership made a 
decision to suspend the operations of the Corporation 
indefinitely,” (Mr. Speaker). 
 

Public information, June 29, 2000. 
 
Note no. 6: 
 

Effective July 19, 1999, SaskTel Data Exchange Inc. 
acquired 40% of the partnership interest which, combined 
with their 60% interest purchased in 1998 gave them 100% 
partnership interest. 

 
Public information. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I want to thank the minister for 
basically reading the preamble to my next question. 
 
They knew this thing was going south a year into it. They still 
acquired the shares of the other partners and wasted even more 
taxpayers’ money, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister keeps talking about due diligence. You know, in 

the newspaper yesterday, he confirmed what due diligence is. 
Apparently Crown presidents come to him as the minister with 
plans to risk taxpayers’ money and he says, have you done the 
due diligence, and the president says yes, and he gets his cheque 
book out, Mr. Speaker. That’s the extent of his due diligence 
over there, on that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another lesson, another lesson from the Channel 
Lake fiasco is that Crown subsidiaries have to be constantly 
monitored. In recommendation 18, Mr. Speaker, it says, they 
must provide quarterly performance reports to the CIC board. 
 
The question to the minister is this: did IQ&A provide quarterly 
performance reports to the CIC board and if so, why did CIC 
board never identify that there were problems with this 
company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, in my estimation the real 
lack of due diligence occurred from the years 1982 to 1991. 
That’s when the real lack of due diligence occurred, Mr. 
Speaker, when we saw debt racked up of over a billion dollars a 
year on the operating side, increased debt on the Crown 
corporations side of over $2 billion. 
 
The fact is, Mr. Speaker, our Crown corporations, in 
investments, they will fail, Mr. Speaker; there will be 
investments where they will fail. But I could go through the list 
as I have before, Mr. Speaker. We’re just using SaskTel where 
they have lost, as an example, one dollar . . . for every one 
dollar they’ve lost, they have returned nine dollars profit to the 
people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The other private companies for the member’s information in 
case he didn’t read through the report, Mr. Speaker, was MTS 
(Manitoba Telephone System), MT&T (Maritime Telephone 
and Telegraph), MB (Manitoba) Telephone, BC TEL. They also 
participated in what, what they believed was due diligence at 
the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our Crowns serve very useful purpose for the 
people of Saskatchewan. They will continue to invest, Mr. 
Speaker, and they will continue to return dividends and profits 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 217 — The Accountability of Subsidiaries of 
Subsidiary Crown Corporations Act 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move first reading of 
Bill No. 217, The Accountability of Subsidiaries of Subsidiary 
Crown Corporations Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF CERTIFICATES 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day, I wish to inform the Assembly that the Clerk of the 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 711 

 

Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief Electoral 
Officer, certificates of the following elections and returns: 
 
Of Lorne Calvert, Esq. as member for Saskatoon Riverdale. 
Order. And of Warren McCall, Esq. as member for the 
constituency of Regina Elphinstone. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 14:26 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 208 - The Provincial Emblems and Honours 

Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 14:28. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 —Rebates for Utility Rate Increases 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to stand in the legislature, stand in my place today and 
speak to this issue, speak to this motion that’s before the 
Assembly. And I would encourage all the members of the 
Assembly to give it careful consideration in light of what we 
know has happened already with respect to utility rate hikes in 
our province and also in light of what we know to be coming. 
 
We heard earlier this day that SaskPower is contemplating a 10 
per cent rate hike in addition to the 6 per cent they just received, 
effective the first of this month I believe. And in addition to 
that, we also understand that SaskEnergy will be coming 
forward with a request to the rate review panel in the order of 
40 to 60 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And so we would, I would hope 
that all members would give this particular motion careful 
consideration. 
 
It doesn’t put a lot of limits in terms of each member’s 
consideration of the general concept of relief from these rate 
hikes. In other words, it doesn’t peg rebates as the only way to 
provide that relief, nor does it peg tax relief or any other use of 
the considerable amount of money that the government is sitting 
on to aid in this cause. It leaves it open. It simply asks the 
Assembly to consider this to support the providing of relief for 
Saskatchewan people who are suffering under the weight of 
these increases. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also timely not only because rate hikes are 
going up, Mr. Speaker, but it’s timely because it’s very, very 
clear that this government can afford to help Saskatchewan 
families, Saskatchewan small-business men and women, and 
the Saskatchewan institutions, school boards and health boards 
and other non-profit organizations that are really being crushed 
under the weight of these energy bills. The government can 
truly afford to help. 

It wasn’t long ago, Mr. Speaker, that this government and 
others across the province could simply say to people asking 
them for assistance, could say to them, we can’t afford it. And 
arguably they were telling the truth. They were in the process of 
trying to fight deficits and debt, and they simply couldn’t afford 
these sorts of one-time requests. 
 
But the truth of the matter today, Mr. Speaker, the truth of the 
matter in the province of Saskatchewan is that we can afford to 
help Saskatchewan families. This government can afford to 
assist people, to provide them some sort of relief be it through 
tax cuts or additional rebate help or some other means. The fact 
is the government can afford it today. 
 
And consider this, Mr. Speaker. There are only a few provinces 
in this country that actually benefit when the price of energy 
goes through the roof as it has. Certainly we’re all paying now 
higher utility bills, but we encourage the people of this province 
and this Assembly to remember that when we are paying higher 
utility bills because energy rates have gone up, so too are the 
coffers of the government filling up with the royalty revenues 
that they collect from oil and gas. That is a matter of fact. 
 
That is a matter of record as well, as we saw with the last 
budget. And despite the Department of Finance’s own 
underestimating of what those revenues will be in this particular 
budget year, that will be the fact this year as well for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So it’s unfair to simply tell Saskatchewan people, well you’ll 
have to suck it up and you’ll have to pay these higher energy 
costs while the government coffers are growing, while the 
government coffers are filling up from the very same fact — the 
fact that oil and gas now around the world is much higher than 
it was only months or a couple of years previously. 
 
The fact of the matter is this, Mr. Speaker, the government will 
be making more money off of the price of gas. If the president 
of SaskEnergy is right and SaskEnergy needs to increase its 
rates by 50 per cent to simply flow through his own cost for 
gas, then so too must it be right that the provincial government 
should be forecasting a 50 per cent increase in its royalty 
revenue from natural gas. 
 
I think the member for Regina South would agree. If the price is 
going up that we pay for gas, the royalty revenue is also coming 
up. And if it’s not coming up by 50 per cent, fair enough. It 
might be coming up by something less than that but it certainly 
is going up, the government’s revenue from this area. 
 
And so it’s very interesting to note, Mr. Speaker, that on one 
hand the people at SaskEnergy are forecasting the price of gas 
to go up 50 per cent but the Government of Saskatchewan, 
when it’s seemingly trying to lowball the revenue it’s going to 
get this year, said what about the price of natural gas in the 
budget? That it will decrease by over 40 per cent. 
 
Why would they say that, Mr. Speaker? Maybe someone in the 
Department of Finance should pick up the phone and call 
someone over at SaskEnergy so that they can get their story 
straight because someone’s not telling the truth. Either way . . . 
either way, Mr. Speaker, even using these underestimated 
numbers that the government had in its budget, it is sitting on 



712 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

between a half a billion and 750 to $800 million right now in its 
current account. It has it there in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
And why is it there, Mr. Speaker? Well it’s there because of the 
high price of oil and gas primarily. They made more money in 
royalties. It’s windfall revenue from the energy sector sitting in 
the bank account of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition to that we found out — although the government 
won’t confirm it and I’d argue that it’s their responsibility to do 
so — but we find out from very good sources that the Crown 
corporations of our province, the family of Crowns, is sitting on 
a family bank account of about $185 million. In addition to that, 
they didn’t have to pay their dividend to the government as was 
planned in the ’99 budget. 
 
And all of this means one thing, Mr. Speaker. It means that the 
Government of Saskatchewan can afford to help Saskatchewan 
people if it chooses to, if it has the courage to, if it has the 
fortitude to help Saskatchewan families and small business 
through a time of very high utility rates. And hopefully and 
arguably a temporary time of utility rates at these levels 
anyway. If it has the courage to do that, it has the resources to. 
 
So we’ve already settled the question as to whether the 
government can afford it. It can. Clearly it can. It could afford 
to provide some more meaningful help and still leave some in a 
Stabilization Fund and still leave room for some other 
catastrophic event that it might want to plan for. It could do 
those things. That matter is settled. 
 
What is not settled, Mr. Speaker, and why we present a motion 
like this is because this government does not seem to be 
prepared to help. It has the resources but it lacks the will. It has 
the money in the bank but it lacks the courage, or the 
compassion maybe, to at least consider . . . and that’s how we 
framed our argument in past weeks. That’s how we’ve really 
framed this motion. We’ve left it wide open. 
 
Will the government at least consider helping Saskatchewan 
families to a greater extent than they have already — the $25 
so-called pizza rebate? I think that’s what the people in my 
riding are calling it. Basically the pizza rebate except by and 
large, $25 doesn’t buy enough pizza to feed your family 
anymore. But apparently it’s enough. The minister has said 
several times, that’s enough for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Well Saskatchewan families, even without the 50 per cent rate 
hike coming from SaskEnergy and the 10 per cent hike coming 
from SaskPower, Saskatchewan families have had to live 
through — have had to live through 23 per cent increases over 
the winter months. 
 
And in my home and in many other homes in Swift Current — 
and by the way it’s a very small 30-year-old bungalow — my 
bill didn’t go up 23 per cent. That was the rate of increase. My 
bill doubled. I’m sure many members opposite saw their bill 
double. 
 
I know many constituents phoned and were confused because 
the government announced the rate increase of 20-some per 
cent but their bills doubled because they weren’t equalized or 
for any other number of reasons. So for four or five months they 

were paying excruciatingly high bills that had doubled, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so now we are talking about a potential 50 per cent 
increase in the price of natural gas. What will people’s bills do 
then, next winter, if the situation around the world hasn’t eased 
itself and we’re still looking at these rates? What will they do 
then? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope what they’ll do is continue to call 
their MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly). They’re 
calling us. I know they’re calling the government members 
opposite. Call their MLAs and ask them why it is that they are 
happy to sit on a huge bank account — a huge bank account in 
the Crowns, a huge windfall fund from oil and gas revenues. 
Why are they prepared to sit on that and leave Saskatchewan 
people out in the cold? That’s what we’re trying to answer 
today. That’s what we’re trying to answer today. 
 
And the member from Regina Qu’Appelle is chirping. But his 
constituents, his constituents’ bills doubled as well, and he 
doesn’t seem to care. He cares more about shouting some 
rhetorical comment across the way, some smart aleck remark 
than he does about the fact that the budgets of Saskatchewan 
families are breaking under the weights of utility bills while he 
and his government sits on a half a billion to $700 million 
worth of cash. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — That is sad, Mr. Speaker, it’s sad. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would just encourage members of the 
Assembly to take a close look at the wording in the motion that 
we’re using. Again we’re not tying the government’s hands in 
terms of talking about rebate. We’re talking about a general 
concept of relief — financial relief to people. 
 
I have tried to establish, I’ve tried to demonstrate to the House 
that the government has the resources to help people who are 
facing these increases and the rate increases to come. They only 
need the will. That’s all they need. And so we’re asking them to 
support our motion, to have that will to make that decision on 
behalf of Saskatchewan people. 
 
And so it is a pleasure for me to move, Mr. Speaker, seconded 
by the member for Arm River: 
 

That this Assembly urges the government to consider 
providing greater financial relief to Saskatchewan residents 
facing massive increases in energy costs, especially in light 
of growing profits to Crowns, rising levels of retained 
earnings in the Crowns, and the windfall for the provincial 
treasury gained through rising natural gas and oil royalties. 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to talk to the motion 
the member from Swift Current brought. I think it’s a very good 
motion. 
 
At times, you know, when Saskatchewan Crown corporation 
bank accounts are growing, the people of Saskatchewan in 
particular . . . our Saskatchewan families are seeing their bank 
accounts getting smaller due to never-ending stream of utility 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 713 

 

rate increases from this coalition government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, clearly we can see the trend is developing here. 
The recent announcement indicated the cost per family of 
Saskatchewan of natural gas costs may go up as much as $400 
per year. And just recently we also had an announcement that 
SaskPower, that there may be an increase in their rates very 
soon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I ask just how are we going to help these Saskatchewan families 
with these increased costs? These same people that phone, the 
same people that present us petitions, that I presented here from 
Regina, Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Bladworth, Davidson, Girvin 
— all the small centres and major centres from this province, 
they are very concerned about it. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, it’s always very interesting to hear the 
members opposite bragging about their alleged historic tax cuts. 
But in reality what they have done is raised our taxes. Let me 
explain, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In raising utility rates, they have raised our taxes. What we have 
here is another example of this government’s backdoor taxation 
policy which is to give with one hand and take with the other 
hand. And, Mr. Speaker, they are taking a lot more than they 
are giving out right now. 
 
We have seen profits from the major Crown corporations jump 
to nearly $300 million last year. This increase of nearly 36 per 
cent — 36 per cent increase in profits. But even with this profit 
increase of nearly 36 per cent, we have seen a steadily 
increasing utility rates over the past few years for Saskatchewan 
families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked with many of my constituents here in 
Arm River and there isn’t a one of them who would not state 
flatly that the cost of living here in Saskatchewan has gone up 
and that there are many factors that contribute to this. 
 
What is not acceptable though is the majority of the costs that 
Saskatchewan residents have incurred in the cost of living 
increases have gone up due to utility rate increases. SaskPower 
has increased their rates. SaskEnergy’s increased their rates, and 
incidentally, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy is looking for another 
increase of possibly 50 per cent, never mind SGI rates increase. 
SaskTel has raised their rates. 
 
I rarely talk with anyone who has not said this is going to be of 
any benefit to this province whatsoever, Mr. Speaker. Many of 
the people that I talk to have constantly compared what it was 
costing them to live in Saskatchewan even 10 years ago. 
 
And let’s look at that; let’s look at 10 years ago. Let’s look at 
from ’91 to ’99 at the major Crown utilities. They’ve increased 
their rates 18 times since ’91. In that time revenues and profits 
have also increased, Mr. Speaker. It’s even more disturbing to 
note that as the Crowns have taken in record profits at the 
expense of the struggling Saskatchewan families, they’re also 
taking in $150 million which is supposed to go into the General 
Revenue Fund and saving it for a rainy day. 
 
And how do we find a rainy day, Mr. Speaker? Well I don’t 
know, a rainy day could be when the next election for the NDP 

is possibly; we’re not sure. 
 
The opposite members keep tooting that they are supposed to 
have a new look, a new agenda, a new future, a new vision for 
Saskatchewan. And they talk about their commitment to 
revitalize rural Saskatchewan. Well I don’t see any rural 
revitalization going on in terms of what this government has 
done in real action to re-evaluate rural Saskatchewan. 
 
When we talk about these utility rate increases which are 
coming to bear on all the families of Saskatchewan, and 
particularly rural Saskatchewan, we see struggling farm 
families who can barely put it together to see another crop. And 
they of course have the increased cost of utilities added to this, 
never mind the extra cost of natural gas that’s gone into 
fertilizer costs, fuel costs. 
 
(14:45) 
 
I know that this government has taken a couple of steps to ease 
the burden on their Saskatchewan families. They’ve set out $25 
which I’m sure Saskatchewan families would find of some 
benefit, though many of them say it’s of what benefit, they’re 
not sure. 
 
We would like to see something a little more than $25. Because 
as we all know, Mr. Speaker, $25 nowadays doesn’t go very far. 
 
I would like to take a few moments here to go over the rate 
increases that we experienced in the last 10 years. When we 
look at SaskPower in February of 1999, we see an increase of 4 
per cent; ’93, January, an increase of almost 5 per cent. April of 
’94, another increase of close to 4 per cent. 
 
January of 1996, increases of between 12 and 14 per cent, 
including a $2 monthly reconstruction fee — reconstruction fee 
that was supposed to build power lines in rural Saskatchewan. 
And now they say that . . . they still charge that, but they don’t 
build any power lines. If you want power lines to your farm, 
you have to pay for it even though they still take the $2 off. 
 
Let’s look at SaskEnergy. February of 1999, increases of 4 per 
cent. January of ’93, increases of 2 per cent. December of ’93, 
increases of almost 10 per cent. June of ’97, increases of 2.3 per 
cent. January of 1998, gas prices rose 8.9 per cent. In November 
of 1999, increases of over 12 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I see a trend here. I hate to repeat myself, but there 
are constant increases here and no relief in sight. 
 
I must briefly talk a little bit about the other two Crowns here to 
show that a pattern has developed here. It seems to be 
continuing to develop. 
 
SaskTel, March of ’92, a 3 to 5 per cent increase in long 
distance. July of ’93, an increase of 15 per cent in line rental. 
January of ’98, an increase of 40 to 50 per cent in local service. 
 
SGI, ’92, increases of 10 per cent. April of ’93, increases of 4.7 
per cent. January of 1998, increases of 5 per cent; in January 
1998, increases of 40 per cent in deductibles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I talk to the mayors and reeves in our 



714 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

municipal government, especially in the rural areas, there is a 
general consensus that it is going to be extremely difficult for 
many businesses that are barely standing afloat to stay in 
business in the upcoming year. 
 
The costs in municipal government in Saskatchewan will be 
increasing dramatically, result of utility rate increases. When we 
look at the public facilities such as skating rinks, halls, 
swimming pools, all these utilities that it takes to running a 
town or an RM, what are these towns to do or the children to do 
when they might have to look at closing halls or skating rinks. 
 
Of course there’s only one option the municipality has, and that 
is to raise taxes. So again they will raise taxes and pass this 
burden unfortunately to Saskatchewan families and residents 
who have already been hit hard by high utility rates. 
 
And again you can see that’s almost like a double taxation. 
They’re getting taxed more on the municipal government side 
as well as the Crown corporation side. Of course this isn’t to 
mention PST (provincial sales tax) and the small-business tax. 
 
So what we have here is a growing list of higher and higher 
taxes that the average resident in this province simply cannot 
shoulder any more, Mr. Speaker. We must look at any and all 
ways possible to provide relief to the people of Saskatchewan. 
There is no way that they can continue to bear this unbalanced 
burden. 
 
As I had mentioned previously, when we look at natural gas 
hikes over the last basically decade and this latest proposed 
increase of almost . . . could be almost $400 per year per family, 
there are many experts who fear that this could go higher. We 
could be looking at an average family of four paying up to an 
extra $50 a month. This is an extremely large amount of money 
for a family on a fixed budget with all the costs incurred on a 
day-to-day basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this will affect families, especially the working 
class people in urban and rural centres. It is clear that this area 
of family living costs must be addressed by this Assembly. We 
are asking for commitment by this government that some form 
of meaningful relief in the area of high utility rates come 
directly back to the people that need them the most — the 
hard-working people of this province, Mr. Speaker. They 
simply can’t shoulder this burden any longer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the rural areas as well as the major cities, we 
have many people who are working in small businesses who are 
struggling to survive. And these small businesses are struggling 
with these high utility rates. And any hope of being able to give 
a wage increase to these hard-working employees is blunted by 
the fact that they have to pay these high energy costs. So while 
the person who is employed by this business is forced to stay at 
a low wage so that the business can continue on somehow, there 
is no hope that this business will be able to give a wage increase 
to a person who so justly deserves it. 
 
And businessmen also face of course these high rate increases. 
So what we have is, is we’re cutting the earnings of the business 
and we’re cutting the earnings of the employees that works for 
the business. This is a no-win situation for nobody out there, 
Mr. Speaker. Any way you look at it there is no way that is fair 

to these families to pass it on to them. 
 
And then you look at the farm families that are undoubtedly 
facing high input costs of fertilizer, fuel, and associated costs, 
including chemicals, repairs, equipment, and more. Now they 
also face these high energy costs with very, very little money to 
pay these high bills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve addressed this motion today simply because I 
believe that a line must be drawn. I believe that we cannot allow 
these increases to continue. I believe that the very viability of 
the province is now at stake, and that serious measures need to 
be taken to stop these increases in their tracks, and attempt to 
somehow get the economy of this province back on track. Any 
form of utility rate increases, in a form of taxation, that the 
residents of Saskatchewan simply cannot bear any further. 
 
We already have examples of how municipal governments and 
urban governments are dealing with these utility rate increases, 
and that by raising their mill rate, Mr. Speaker, that’s how 
they’re doing it, unfortunately. 
 
We have Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, and another smaller centre, 
Melfort, has already raised their mill rate to recover some of 
these higher costs. So it looks like the trend is developing that 
municipal and urban governments will have no choice but to 
increase their mill rates over the long haul, to absorb these 
utility rate increases. 
 
I cannot stress enough that this, you know, cannot happen, that 
increased taxes are not the way to go. And I would urge this 
government to look at the whole thing a lot more closely, with 
some sort of action on their part. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is also important that I mention that we look at 
all the aspects of alternative energy as we look at the future of 
utilities in this province. And I do believe that this government 
has begun to look a bit in that area of development. 
 
We see some windmill technology going up that would generate 
power through one of our most abundant resources, and that 
might be wind. We have a little bit of it out here, and a lot of it 
on the other opposite side of the House, Mr. Speaker. But that is 
something that this government will have to look at to help 
address the high costs. 
 
We also look at alternative forms of fuel, perhaps ethanol 
development, in a way that we can get these high fuel costs 
down. 
 
But getting back to the motion, Mr. Speaker, is the simple fact 
is that the Crowns are making a lot of money, and the Crowns 
were developed in this province just to cover costs and save 
taxpayers money. But when they are making costs . . . making 
profits of over a hundred to two hundred million dollars a year, 
and not passing them back to the basic people that are paying 
that, that is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that is why I am for this motion, and that is why I second 
the motion moved by the member from Swift Current. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 715 

 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am indeed 
pleased to have this opportunity today to respond to this 
particular motion, and in so doing address some of the issues 
that have been raised by members opposite over the past couple 
of weeks in this Assembly. 
 
There is a great number of myths that the opposition are 
building. A great number of myths that I think need to be 
examined very closely, and that we need to correct, that we 
need to make sure Saskatchewan people have a clearer 
understanding of what is in fact the reality, Mr. Speaker — the 
reality of what is happening within our Crowns, the reality of 
what is happening with our communities, the reality of what is 
happening in this government’s finances. 
 
Because the members opposite have moved from week to week 
to week with different issues as they have hit and missed . . . 
shot and missed on every single one of the opportunities 
they’ve had to stand in this House. 
 
They put up a . . . a straw dog is probably the best way to say it 
and they just take shots at it. And it lasts about as long as it 
takes for them to get outside into the scrums and have the media 
ask the tough questions whereupon it crumbles and they come 
back the next day with a new set of issues. 
 
This resolution in front of the House, Mr. Speaker, is another 
clear example of their strategy to lead Saskatchewan people in a 
direction that does not reflect the reality of Saskatchewan’s 
economy or the government’s finances or the government’s 
direction. 
 
Let me start, Mr. Speaker, by the big misconception that the 
member for Arm River brought forward today that somehow 
Saskatchewan’s people are bankrupt; they’re destitute; that they 
can’t afford the basic accommodation; that they can’t afford to 
heat their homes. That’s what the member opposite is saying. 
That’s what the member for Arm River just said in his speech, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well let me tell you something — the facts. The economists, 
and I would suspect most of the people in his riding, would 
disagree with him. I have in front of me a report from Sask 
Trends Monitor, March of this very year. It says here, in an 
examination of household spending and household wealth of 
Saskatchewan people, that Saskatchewan households — and 
I’m quoting from the report now: 
 

Saskatchewan households have a debt to . . . (equity) ratio 
of 11 per cent. 

 
Guess what, Mr. Speaker. This report goes on to say this is the 
lowest rate in Canada — the lowest rate in Canada — the debt 
to equity ratio. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report goes on to say: 
 

Some . . . more interesting information from the survey 
data (and I’m quoting) is obtained via a comparison with 
other provinces. 

 
Now the members opposite will like this because they always 
like to point to other provinces. 

Saskatchewan’s ranking is relatively high in terms of 
wealth (the report says, Mr. Speaker). 
 

It says: 
 
The median value of assets are the fourth highest in the 
country and median net worth is second . . . (only to) 
Ontario. 
 

It says: 
 

Saskatchewan ranks first in median RRSP holdings, bank 
deposits, and the value of vehicles, and second highest for 
bond holdings. 
 

The members opposite say people have no money. They say 
we’re bankrupt. I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that the people in 
this province that are bankrupt are the opposition who are 
bankrupt of ideas. They bankrupted the province and they will 
bankrupt it again if they ever get the chance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are 
not poor people. The people of the province are not being 
driven to destitution by this government. And I think it is 
irresponsible of the members opposite to stand as they do and 
accuse us of these things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me say very, very clearly . . . and I want to go through a 
series of the issues that have been raised by the members 
opposite in support of their argument, in support of this 
resolution. I should tell you right now that having listened to 
their rather sorry attempt to defend their resolution, that I’ll be 
moving an amendment at the end of my remarks to clarify a few 
of the facts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But before I get to that point I want to take a look at some of the 
arguments put forward by the member for Swift Current and put 
forward by the member for Arm River in their comments today. 
The member for Swift Current went on at some length about the 
government’s finances today. 
 
He went on to say basically that we have this Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund with half a billion dollars in it — $400 
million in it — saying that this is a terrible, terrible thing for the 
province to have. A terrible thing that the province would set 
aside some of its money from a windfall. That we would set 
aside some of our money that we earned in a resource-based 
economy that we know fluctuates up and down. That we would 
set aside that money so that we could spread out — spread out 
the spending to ensure that public services continue to be 
offered even when economic downturn happens. 
 
Now the members opposite don’t need to look to me to accept 
that I believe this. I can tell you this. They should take a look to 
the members to our south, the Americans. They should take a 
look at the Albertans who put money away into their reserves as 
well. 
 
I’ll tell you, when we were down in Minneapolis this past 
August, Mr. Speaker, I had an opportunity to sit in on a fiscal 
leaders’ round table at the Midwestern legislators’ conference. 



716 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

That round table focused in on the discussion about what was 
an appropriate level of reserve for governments to maintain in 
order to offset economic downturns. Now as it turns out, a 
rather topical issue, if you think about what’s been happening in 
the US (United States) over the past year. 
 
Legislators from across the Midwestern states and the Prairie 
provinces indicated that they were carrying somewhere between 
5 per cent and 7 per cent in their fiscal stabilization funds. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we will know that last year our Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund had more money in it. Roughly I think it was 
about 10 per cent. We laid out in the fiscal economic plan for 
the province that we would reduce that down to closer to 5 per 
cent. We would reduce it because we wanted to use the funds to 
offset some spending on public services. 
 
The same thing, Mr. Speaker, that goes on across every one of 
the midwestern American states, the same fiscal planning that 
goes on in every one of the western Canadian provinces. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And yet the members opposite would say to us that somehow 
what we’re doing is wrong, that somehow what we’re doing is 
in misstep with what’s happening in other jurisdictions. Mr. 
Speaker, once again the members opposite are wrong. The 
approach that we are taking is fiscally sound, it’s economically 
sound, and it makes a great deal of sense. 
 
I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that the one cautionary note I would 
put to this: while the members opposite say we should be 
spending out the Fiscal Stabilization Fund on things like 
rebates, what they are saying we should be spending out this 
money today on, I will tell you this. At the Council of State 
Governments in the US, through the midwestern legislative 
conference, tells us that if anything, state and provincial 
governments have underestimated the impact of an economic 
downturn on their revenues. 
 
If anything, they say that we should be setting aside closer to 10 
to 12 per cent of our revenues in stabilization funds to offset 
economic downturns. 
 
Now the members opposite will say, oh, and I heard the 
member for Swift Current say the government’s revenues are 
growing. Well isn’t that interesting? Not two weeks ago we 
heard the Minister of Finance stand and say to this House 
during the budget, and I don’t know whether the members 
opposite didn’t have their pens handy or didn’t have their ears 
open, but he said very clearly: revenues in this province for the 
government would drop by three-quarters of a billion dollars 
this year; three-quarters of a billion dollar decrease in 
government coffers. 
 
But the members opposite say the government’s bank accounts 
are growing. I say to them — and I encourage the next speaker 
who stands on their side to explain to me how this works — 
how is it the government’s coffers can be growing while at the 
same time we have indication in the financial statements that 
will be confirmed by the auditor that provincial revenues have 
dropped by three-quarters of a billion dollars. 
 

Now the member opposite, the member opposite — and I 
always like taking financial advice from the member for Sask 
Rivers — the member opposite will be interested to know, and I 
hope he’s got his budget out, a three-quarter of a billion dollar 
drop in revenue, the members opposite may wonder where that 
comes from. 
 
Well you know where it comes from Mr. Speaker. It came in 
part from a decrease in provincial taxes — a decrease in 
provincial taxes. You might just assume, you might just figure, 
that if the province has just embarked on the single largest cut 
to personal taxes in its history that you’re going to see a decline 
in revenue. Well sure enough we did. 
 
So the members on the one hand are saying, oh you’re allowing 
the government coffers to grow. Oh, you’ve got massive growth 
in your government revenues. Well on the other hand they’re 
saying but you’ve got to cut your taxes more quickly. They’re 
saying you’ve got to spend out the money that you’re sitting on 
in the surpluses, even though the economists tell us that we 
should be setting aside 5 to 7 to 10 per cent of that money in 
case of an economic downturn. 
 
Well this government has laid out a plan to reduce taxes to help 
Saskatchewan families that the member from Arm River spoke, 
I will say, eloquently of only moments ago. 
 
And here we have laid out, Mr. Speaker, a plan to reduce taxes. 
Here we’ve laid out a plan to help Saskatchewan families. Here 
we’ve laid out a plan that’s fiscally sustainable through the 
Fiscal Stabilization one of the members opposite want us to 
spend out today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is there anything, anything, that those members 
would not simply liquidate? 
 
I’ll tell you, I would say to my grandmother if she’s listening 
now, hide the silverware because when those members come in, 
they’re going to try and put it in the garage sale. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Let me tell you that, Mr. Speaker. And I 
would say that if those members ever get the opportunity, ever 
get the opportunity, that they will put the silverware in the 
garage sale. That’s what’s going to happen, because we saw it 
when they were in, in the ’80s. 
 
And the member for Swift Current — and I know didn’t have a 
very big role to play back when Grant Devine was here — but 
he was working, toiling away up on the third floor for John 
Gerich in the Liquor Board. And there he was, working on 
plans and we were seeing how those companies were managed 
then. 
 
Let me tell you, it doesn’t bode well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So for the members opposite to stand and present resolutions 
and to give us financial advice, I say thank you, we’ve seen 
your 10 years of track record and we say no thank you. 
 
The Speaker: — I’ll just remind the member to make all of his 
comments through the Chair. 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 717 

 

Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I have several other comments 
to make which I will be more circumspect in and address my 
remarks more directly to you. 
 
Let me say this in terms of government revenue, just to 
highlight this point once again, the members opposite have said 
to this Assembly that the government revenues are growing. 
 
The fact is the Provincial Auditor and the Minister of Finance 
are showing that the provincial revenues are decreasing. Once 
again, we’ve got a discrepancy. 
 
I say to the Saskatchewan people, who do you trust? Who do 
you trust, Mr. Speaker? Who do the people of Saskatchewan 
trust? The members opposite with their track record from the 
’80s or this government with its track record through the ’90s? 
 
Eight successive balanced budgets, nine successive credit rating 
upgrades. Mr. Speaker, that is a record of financial success. 
And I would say the people of Saskatchewan are more likely to 
trust the Minister of Finance than they are the member for Swift 
Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak very specifically to some of the 
issues that have been raised in relation to utility rates and the 
Crown Corporation sector. 
 
Over the past two weeks, we’ve listened to members opposite 
stand and ask questions about the Crown utilities. They’ve 
stood and they’ve asked questions saying, on one hand, your 
Crowns . . . only last Thursday I think we had them saying, your 
Crowns make too much money. How is it you could allow the 
Crown corporations to make this amount of money? How is it 
you could run them profitably? How is it that you could run 
them efficiently, that they were making this kind of money? 
 
And yet they missed this one point, the Crowns made money by 
offering the lowest utility rates in the country — in the country, 
Mr. Speaker. But we never hear the members opposite say that. 
We never hear the members opposite come in here and say, you 
know, Crown ownership has provided for that opportunity, for 
us to be able to have fair rates. 
 
Members opposite simply like to cherry pick the issues and say, 
no, in fact, what’s happened is the Crowns made too much 
money. Now, as if, as if they were just getting that line to catch, 
all of a sudden they come in three days later and they say, oh 
but wait a second, your Crowns are now losing money. 
 
So on Thursday the Crowns were making too much money. By 
Monday, the member from Swift Current is saying, well, come 
and explain to us, he says to the Minister for CIC, how one of 
your Crowns lost $2 million. 
 
Well which is it? Are the Crowns making too much money or 
are the Crowns making not enough money? Should the Crowns 
be making more money or should the Crowns be making less 
money? 
 
I would be very interested to hear, as this debate goes on, what 
exactly the members opposite have for a plan, Mr. Speaker, for 
the Crown corporations. Is the plan for the Crowns to make 
more money or is the plan for the Crowns to make less money? 

Because they don’t seem to have this clear. 
 
They criticize us for keeping the money from this year’s 
dividend in CIC. Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to be very clear 
about this point because I don’t think we’ve had a great deal of 
discussion on it in the Assembly to date. 
 
The decision to defer the dividend was made in part because we 
knew we had the windfall revenues. We didn’t need to transfer 
the money from CIC this year to offset expenditures this year. 
Instead what we’ve opted to do, is we have opted to spread that 
dividend over the next three years to allow us a more . . . a 
higher level of sustainable, public services. 
 
Now doesn’t that make sense, Mr. Speaker? Doesn’t that make 
sense that in a year when we have windfall revenues in the GRF 
(General Revenue Fund) that we would use those to offset 
public services. 
 
Well on the one hand, when we have the opportunity, yes, we 
could have taken another 200 million or 150 million out of CIC 
and moved it over to the GRF as a dividend. We could have 
done that this year. And yes, we could have moved it and let it 
be part of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. But what we had 
decided to do instead, Mr. Speaker, was we decided to leave it, 
leave it in CIC so that we could increase the amount of money 
that we were going to take over the next three years to offset 
those public service expenditures. 
 
This is a logical, sustainable, fiscally and economically sound 
approach to managing the Crowns, but the members opposite 
seem to miss this point. The Crowns make too much money on 
the one hand, but the Crowns lose money in some of their deals. 
The Crowns are sitting on too much money, but we shouldn’t 
go and pass on the rates. There’s no consistency on the part of 
the members opposite in their approach. I think I listened to the 
member for Estevan, who I know has a great deal of advice to 
offer this Assembly when it comes to the management of the 
Crowns. 
 
And I know that she’ll be interested to, Mr. Speaker, I think 
she’ll be . . . I will be interested to hear what she has to tell her 
constituents in Estevan who work for SaskPower, on what her 
approach to running that Crown corporation would be. Because 
let me tell you this, Mr. Speaker, when she worked for Grant 
Devine we know what their approach was. Their approach was 
the privatization, the privatization of these Crown assets. That 
was the approach they had and I don’t think it differed very 
much from what their approach is today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but as we take a look at what is happening around 
the province, and we listen to what the Leader of the Opposition 
is saying around the province, I can understand where 
Saskatchewan people would be just a tad bit confused by what 
the approach of the members opposite is. The members 
opposite on the one hand are saying, don’t worry we are not 
going to sell the Crown corporations. On the other hand they’re 
saying, you know what, we should sell the Crown corporations 
to reduce our overall debt. 
 
Okay, which is it? Which is it? My question is: are they going 
to maintain the Crowns like the leader says one day, or are they 
going to sell the Crowns to pay down the public debt, which 



718 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

they say the next day? I’m interested simply to know what the 
members opposite are going to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Because it seems to vary as we find out from what . . . And I 
think this is a very interesting comment, the Leader of the 
Opposition probably told us more than he wanted when he was 
talking about his economic plan. And he said his economic plan 
was dependent on what? The weather. It was dependent on the 
weather. So I guess if they wake up and it happens to be a 
bright, sunny day they’re keeping the Crowns. If they wake up 
and it’s a cloudy, gloomy day they’re going to sell the Crowns, 
because we don’t seem to have any consistent position from 
them as to what exactly they want to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What are they going to do with SaskPower? What are they 
going to do with SaskEnergy? What are they going to do with 
SaskTel? I would say to you not only will they privatize it, but 
they will give away those Crown assets for much less than 
they’re worth, because that was their attempt with SaskEnergy 
last time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our approach to Crown ownership is clear. Crown 
ownership when the Crowns are efficiently managed makes 
perfect sense. It makes sense for the Saskatchewan people to 
own the assets. It makes sense for Saskatchewan people to 
control the assets. It makes sense for us to have them 
accountable to this legislature. That’s our approach, and the 
benefits Saskatchewan people see are the lowest rates for 
utilities in the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say the Crowns constantly 
are increasing their rates. I think it may interest them to know 
that SaskPower has frozen the rates. There has been a rate 
freeze for now, from ’95 to 2000. No rate increase in 
SaskPower. SaskEnergy increased their transmission rates once 
— once — in seven years. That’s not to say that they haven’t 
passed on, that’s not to say that they haven’t passed on the 
increase costs. 
 
But I can tell you, if the members opposite are criticizing the 
civil servants that are working hard and our officials that are 
working hard in SaskEnergy I say to them, you are making a 
huge mistake. There is a reason why today we enjoy the lowest 
rates possible. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that SaskEnergy did that I think 
was very important was it ended up buying back some storage 
capacity for gas. This storage capacity enabled us to buy gas 
when it was relatively cheap and lock in the price. 
 
Now it will interest the members opposite to know that we had 
to buy these caverns back. We had to buy them back. Why did 
we have to buy them back, Mr. Speaker? Because in one of 
their great brain waves when they were in office, they sold 
them. They decided it would be much better if we just bought 
the gas on the spot market. 
 
Well I have in front of me information which was tabled in the 
Crown Corporations Committee last Thursday that shows 
consistently, consistently, that the gas prices charged by 
SaskEnergy because of their smart purchasing have been lower 
than what the spot prices were. The price that they are passing 
on to consumers, you and I, Mr. Speaker, as we buy gas to heat 

our homes, has been lower on average than what was the spot 
prices if they had just gone to the markets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that is what SaskEnergy is there for. That is how 
they make sound financial decisions on behalf of Saskatchewan 
people as a Crown utility. And you know, on top of it all, Mr. 
Speaker, they’re even making money. 
 
Now this should warm the capitalist hearts of the members 
opposite that even a socialist Crown corporation can make 
money. I have to take some exception with what the member 
from Arm River said on Thursday in the Crown Corporations 
Committee when he said, Mr. Speaker, he was saying to us the 
people in his constituency don’t mind being gouged by a private 
sector company, but it sure gets their goat when they get 
gouged by a Crown utility. 
 
I was quite surprised, Mr. Speaker, that the member opposite 
would advocate that we should give up the fair pricing policy of 
SaskEnergy and simply sell off these Crowns and allow his 
constituents to be gouged by the private sector. That’s what he 
says that they would rather do. 
 
Well I just find it incredible, absolutely incredible that the 
member for Arm River would even suggest such a thing. How 
can he stand in this House today and talk about the need for us 
to support the local rinks, the need for us to support the local 
schools, for the need for us to support our local families, and 
then turn around and say, but you know my ideology says to 
me, my common sense says to me, that this plan you socialists 
are working on makes some sense. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But the member opposite says my ideological blinders say that 
that is not possible, Mr. Speaker. He says instead that they 
should be gouged by the private sector companies — because 
you know what — the private sector is always right. That’s 
what he says. That’s the basis of their argument, and it is every 
bit as illogical as they lay it out as when I lay it out to the 
Assembly today on their behalf. That’s what the members 
opposite are talking about, if you can believe it. And that’s on 
SaskEnergy. 
 
Now the members opposite are talking about a gas rate increase 
this year. We know that today we are selling gas, SaskEnergy is 
selling gas to you and I as consumers, at about 4.50 a gigajoule 
— I think it’s about 4.52, 4.56, in that neighbourhood. We 
know that the gas that they are required to buy on the spot 
markets to refill the caverns, the gas that they are needing to 
buy, they are buying at 7-something a gigajoule. We have a $3 
variance in the amount that we are selling the gas for and the 
amount that we are buying the gas for. 
 
Now you’d have to ask, what is the impact of this? Well we 
learned on Thursday the impact of this was a deficit in the gas 
variance account . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The gas 
variance account. The member for Swift Current happened to 
write this down and he’s quite correct. There is a deficit in the 
gas variance account. 
 
Now the amount of that, I’m told by the president of 
SaskEnergy, was somewhere in the neighbourhood of 130 to 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 719 

 

$200 million depending on where the price goes. This is the 
amount, the variance, between what we’re selling gas to 
Saskatchewan consumers for right now today and what we are 
recouping the . . . what we are spending to replenish our 
supplies. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the uncertainty in this is that nobody knows 
exactly what the price of gas is going to be when we need to go 
and lock in the next set of contracts. It would be convenient if 
we could simply say today that it’s going to be 7.70. We don’t 
know that. We know that during the past four months, I believe, 
six months, I guess, going back to October, that gas has spiked 
as high as $14, 13-something a gigajoule. 
 
I say to the members opposite, it’s a good thing that we weren’t 
living in Alberta where we were having to buy that gas to heat 
our homes in the middle of the winter on the spot markets. I say 
to them that it is fortunate that we had SaskEnergy in place so 
that they could cushion the impact for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
But the members opposite want to ignore this point, and this 
resolution ignores the point of the work that SaskEnergy has 
done to date in support of cushioning our consumers. 
 
The members say that their gas bills have gone up by more than 
23 per cent, that it was passed on when we had to replenish the 
supply. SaskEnergy’s officials said it was very clear that one of 
the things ordinary consumers like you and I could do, Mr. 
Speaker, is equalize our accounts. 
 
Equalization is basically the principle SaskEnergy uses when it 
does its pricing. It buys and locks in. In each of the last — I 
have graphs here going back to 1996 — it shows that that has 
been a better deal for Saskatchewan consumers than if we had 
bought on the spot markets like they do in Alberta. 
 
Now I say to the members opposite and I say to Saskatchewan 
citizens that may be listening or hear of this, think in your 
individual households if you would not be better off equalizing 
your gas bill. I do it. It allows me the chance to have a very 
standard amount of money come out of my bills. 
 
Yes, you still see the increases as they come in, but those 
increases are balanced out over the year. We obviously, as the 
member for Estevan was kind enough to point out, obviously 
we don’t use a lot of gas in the summer to heat our homes. 
That’s the opportunity when you have to recoup the cost to 
spread it out. This is easier for consumers. You don’t see the 
shock. 
 
This is very much the same principle that SaskEnergy uses in 
their pricing, of benefit to Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. 
But the members opposite ignore that. They ignore the fact that 
today we have a $68 million deficit in the gas variance account. 
They neglect the fact that by the time SaskEnergy is able to 
recoup its gas, it could be as much as 130 to $200 million. 
 
Now what we do not know, Mr. Speaker, no member of this 
Assembly knows and no member of this government knows 
because it’s beyond our control, we do not know what the price 
of gas will be. And secondly, we do not know what the 
independent rate review panel will say when the application is 
made to them to pass on that additional cost. 

Will they say that the utility should eat the cost, current cost 
difference in the variance account? Or will it say it can pass it 
on. No member opposite is in a position to be able to tell us 
that, nor is any member on this side of the House, because we 
simply don’t know. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are big, big numbers — a $68 million 
difference, to date, in the gas variance account, because we’re 
selling it to consumers at 4.50 a gigajoule, we’re buying it at 
over 7.50 a gigajoule. This is where we end up with the 
variance. 
 
Now because of the way we set up the Crown corporation, we 
have a position that we can cushion this. We can cushion the 
impact to Saskatchewan consumers. But we should not expect 
that that would go on forever. We cannot simply believe that 
the Crowns are going to be able to eat the cost of this gas and 
sell it at a Utopian value of 4.50 a gigajoule. I wish we could. 
 
Now the good news is that the Department of Energy tells us 
that they believe the gas prices will stabilize and come down. 
The other good news is that SaskEnergy does not need yet to 
lock in the amount that they’re buying at. 
 
This is one of the reasons why we have some time, Mr. 
Speaker, to take a look at what the impact is. This is one of the 
reasons why this motion today is frankly, I think, premature. 
 
I think that the members opposite and I think this Assembly as a 
whole would be better off if we waited to see what the future 
action is of both SaskEnergy, of what the action is of the rate 
review panel and then made a decision of where we should go. 
 
But for the members opposite to say well, the spot price today is 
pick your number and that’s what we are going to figure the 
rate increase is, let me just say I’m glad we’re not having this 
debate back on January 1 when the spot price was well over $13 
a gigajoule. I say I’m glad that we are not sitting in Alberta 
today where we know that that cost is going to be passed on 
directly to your gas meter. 
 
But I say to the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, that the 
approach that they take towards our Crown corporations is 
illogical and not in the best interests of Saskatchewan people. 
 
The members opposite say the Crowns make too much money. 
They say we should eat the costs. We shouldn’t pass on these 
costs. Well let’s ask ourselves what would happen if we 
followed them down that path. Let’s think about what would 
happen if we simply ran these corporations, even if we ran them 
on solely a break-even basis. 
 
They’ve tried this. They’ve tried this in other provinces. They 
tried this in Manitoba. One of the best case studies of this — 
and if I ever have the opportunity to work on a master’s degree 
I think I would pick this as a topic — and that is what happened 
to Manitoba’s Crown management system, where they opted to 
work the Crowns as non-profit corporations versus how we’ve 
opted to operate them as business entities. 
 
I’ll tell you what happened. Take a look at MTS as the case 
study; MTS, the previous Conservative administration that 
Manitoba decided they were going to sell. They decided they 



720 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

were going to sell it in part for ideological reasons because they 
don’t believe in Crown ownership, but in part because of the 
management strategy they employed in that Crown did not 
allow them to recapitalize their investments. 
 
What we ended up with, Mr. Speaker, was we ended up with a 
Crown telephone corporation in Manitoba that was not able to 
have the same standard of service delivery that Saskatchewan 
did. Two sister provinces, relatively similar bases. Two sister 
corporations set up in the same way. One corporation operates 
on a relative break-even basis. One corporation operates on a 
relative profit. Interestingly enough, both offer pretty much the 
same rates. 
 
What’s the difference? The difference is that SaskTel, through 
its international arm, has other investments. The difference was 
that we were investing in other places around the country. The 
difference was we were diversifying out of simply lines. 
 
SaskTel, as an example of our Crowns, was able to set aside 
money to make big capital reinvestments, the major one of 
which was made in my riding only last year when they put in a 
duplicate switching station. As we all found out, Regina, 
unfortunately, had most of its major hospitals all on one switch, 
and all of its emergency services. This caused a bit of a problem 
when the lines went down. We were able to correct this because 
we had the money to recapitalize. MTS didn’t have the money 
to recapitalize, and as a result they were forced into 
privatization. 
 
I would say to you, Mr. Speaker, that I suspect whether it’s 
SaskTel, SaskEnergy, or SaskPower, that is very much the plan 
the members opposite have. Run the profits down. Allow the 
debt to grow. Create these Crowns so that they cannot 
recapitalize and thus the argument to the shareholder, the people 
of Saskatchewan, is we have to sell them off. That’s what the 
members opposite are putting forward. That’s their argument. 
 
Their argument today when they say that we should simply give 
out the money now even though we don’t know in SaskEnergy 
what that rate of gas is, we don’t know what the rate review 
panel is going to say, we don’t know what we’re going to lock 
in at, they say today spend all that money. They say today take 
every last cent that you can out of the Crowns and move it over 
and spend it over here — through the GRF. 
 
Well, I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that this is not a logical or a 
sound basis on which for us to run our Crowns and it is not one 
that this government will move on. 
 
In terms of support for Saskatchewan families, we have done a 
great deal. I point only to the great approach that we have taken, 
a rather visionary approach, and as we’ll know a somewhat 
controversial approach to undertake the single, largest personal 
tax cuts in Saskatchewan history over the last three years — 
three years of successive income tax cuts. I know that today 
people in my riding, families in my riding, are seeing this year, 
more than a $500 benefit from that. Where we have 
single-income families earning more than $50,000, that benefit 
will be more than twice that amount because we’ve built back 
in fairness into the system, because we’ve scrapped the high 
taxes they put in. 
 

The members opposite say Saskatchewan people cannot afford 
to pay a fair price for gas. I say to them they’re wrong. I say to 
them that the fiscal opportunities that we’ve had in front of us, 
our spending priorities, and our tax strategy ensures that 
Saskatchewan people today can afford to pay a fair price for 
gas. They can afford to heat their homes. They can afford to 
turn on the light switch. They can afford to drive their cars. 
 
Now it was only a few months ago that the member opposite 
said — remember this, Mr. Speaker — it was only a few 
months ago the member opposite, as gas prices for our vehicles 
was reaching 70 cents a litre — incidentally about what they are 
today — was saying we should spend the money that we have 
in the Crowns and in the GRF, Fiscal Stabilization Fund, in 
order to reduce the tax rate on gasoline. 
 
Well what if we’d done that? We could have done it. What if 
we had done that? Well we would have spent out the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. We would have gas that would have dipped, 
for a few months, down in price below 70 cents. And my guess 
is that gasoline would have gone back up to about 70 cents. 
 
Why do I say this? Well you know what? The people of 
Saskatchewan tried this little experiment not that many years 
ago when a certain party promised to remove the gas tax, came 
in, decided to remove the gas tax, and voila, what happened? 
The oil companies stepped in and corrected the price. Which 
made it even worse when the government decided what a 
booboo they had made and had to come back in and put the gas 
tax back on. 
 
So first they’d given the room for the companies to increase the 
base price and then they decided to apply the tax on top of it. 
 
Now what worries me, Mr. Speaker, about this particular 
resolution is it’s sponsored by the member for Swift Current, a 
member who unfortunately has a great deal of knowledge about 
what went on in that administration that had these hare-brained 
schemes. I’m not saying he was working on the hare-brained 
schemes but I say that he would have some knowledge of them, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And it worries me now that four months ago, five, six, seven 
months ago, he’s saying: reduce the price of gasoline that we 
pay by reducing the taxes; spend out the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund; don’t worry about it. 
 
Good thing we didn’t follow that because we wouldn’t be able 
to implement his plan today which says spend out the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund on support of energy rates. I can only 
imagine, only imagine what grand plan they’re going to come 
up with next week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say to the members opposite. I understand 
the members opposite have had enough. I would say to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview on her feet? 
 
Ms. Junor: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 721 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the other members of the Assembly the 
grade 4 class from Hugh Cairns Victoria Cross School in 
Saskatoon Eastview, my riding. 
 
The 40 students are here today with their teacher, Ms. Miller 
Racicot — I hope that’s the right pronunciation, I’m close — 
Joyce Braitenbade, Ryan Sproule, the chaperones, Mr. 
Borrowman, Ms. Kens, Mr. Dishko, Ms. Miller. Others with 
them are Ms. Newton, Ms. Michayliuk, and Mr. Couch. 
 
I’d like to welcome the students and hope they enjoy their 
observation of the proceedings. I’d also like to wish them a nice 
tour of the building, and I’ll be meeting with them in a few 
minutes to have a few . . . to answer a few questions and share a 
refreshment. 
 
I’d like to welcome them today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Rebates for Utility Rate Increases 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just want to recap 
some of the argument that I’ve presented . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well if the members opposite like, I can recap 
it in quite an amount of detail, Mr. Speaker. But I just want to 
summarize the points as to why I believe that this resolution 
should not be supported by our Assembly, why this resolution is 
premature, and why it does not reflect the true picture the 
Saskatchewan families have. 
 
The member for Swift Current has put forward an argument 
saying that this week we should spend out the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund and the CIC dividend on a rate rebate of 
approximately, as I understand the numbers, he’s talking 200 
million, or 200 . . . is it $200 I think per household, which is 
about a hundred million dollars. Spend out a hundred million 
dollars today. Don’t worry about tomorrow; just spent it out. 
And do it again on a regular basis. 
 
Of course last session it was to reduce the overall price of 
gasoline at the pump that we’re paying for our cars, which 
would have amounted to another loss of money for the 
government. 
 
The members opposite, the member for Swift Current says 
government revenues are growing at such a fast rate that we 
should use these additional funds that we’ve set aside to protect 
our social programs in case of economic downturn; they’re 
growing so fast we should just spent them out today. 
 
Of course the facts, presented by the Minister of Finance, 
endorsed by the auditor, show in fact government revenues are 
shrinking. Shrinking, why? Shrinking because we have 
introduced the single, largest personal tax cuts in Saskatchewan 
history. 

Now this isn’t money, this is not money that we are hoarding. 
This is not money that is simply being hidden away. This is 
money the Saskatchewan people are not sending into the 
government. Why? Because we reduced the tax rates. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the member opposite reminds me of a point 
that I love to raise in this House and that is that Saskatchewan 
enjoys the lowest dependence on income taxes for government 
revenue in the nation, in the nation. 
 
We are proud of the fact, Mr. Speaker, that we have the lowest 
dependence on income taxes in the nation, proudest that we run 
one of the most efficient governments in the nation. We are 
proud of the fact that we have some of the best social programs 
in the nation. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a balanced approach to government. And 
it’s something that the members opposite, I hope, write down 
because it would be a lesson well learned. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to the Crowns, let me highlight 
once again. The members opposite on one hand say the Crowns 
should make no money, the Crowns make too much money, no 
money, or that they lose money. It just depends on where we’re 
at in question period, to be quite honest. It usually starts out 
where they’re making too much and by the end of question 
period, we’re losing money. 
 
It’s amazing what the impact of 30 minutes and perhaps the 
cloudy weather outside may have on the members opposite 
perspective. This is the inconsistency. The so-called 
government in waiting seems to have this great strategy that the 
Crowns should make more money, less money, the same 
amount of money. But whatever money they’ve got, we should 
just spend it out. Drive these corporations’ debts up like we saw 
they did in the 1980s. Drive the debt up, drive the prices up, 
drive up the ability for them to put forward an argument to sell 
them off wholesale. Because we know that that’s what the result 
of these kind of decisions would be if we saw us spend out the 
reserves. 
 
So the economists tell us we shouldn’t spend out the reserves. 
The economists, if anything, in midwestern America and here in 
the Western provinces are telling us that the reserves, if 
anything, should perhaps be a little higher because of economic 
downturn. 
 
But we’ve agreed that a 5 per cent, 5 to 7 per cent Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund is fair. We’ve agreed this year to use our 
windfall revenues to increase social programs and reduce taxes. 
We agreed to set aside the dividend we were going to take from 
the Crowns because we know we can take that in another year. 
We agreed to spread that out to allow us to have a higher level 
of public services over a greater amount of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and the member opposite for Arm River says that 
part of this, what it really comes down to, is the strategy of how 
the ideology works, and that is that he says that the people in 
his riding — and I don’t believe it for a minute — that they 
would rather be gouged by a private sector company than pay 
the fair prices of a Crown corporation. That’s what the members 
opposite are saying and that I find very hard to believe. 
 



722 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

But this is the approach they take — run down the reserves, run 
up the debt, don’t worry about tomorrow, just keep spending. 
That’s the approach. It doesn’t make any sense and it doesn’t 
pay any attention to the facts that I’ve outlined today, either in 
terms of the wealth of Saskatchewan people, the relative wealth 
that we have compared to our neighbours across the country, 
and the sound financial management that our officials, both in 
the Department of Finance and the Department of Energy and 
Mines, as well as the officials that we have — some of the best 
I would say on the continent today — working for us in our 
natural gas utility to keep the prices down. 
 
I say that this resolution put forward by the members opposite 
flies in the face of the realities that we’re looking at. It is 
premature at best. That will be as kind as I will be about it and I 
would simply say that I think it ignores the facts. And as such, 
Mr. Speaker, I feel compelled to move an amendment: 
 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and substituted 
with the following: 

 
encourage the government to continue to provide 
Saskatchewan people the benefits of prudent management 
of the province’s finances, an approach to put an end to the 
deficit financing of the previous administration, creating 
instead eight consecutive balanced budgets, nine credit 
rating upgrades, and the largest personal tax reduction in 
the province’s history. 
 

I move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — In reviewing the amendment, I note that the 
amendment speaks directly to the province’s finances and tends 
to stress the finances of the province, whereas the motion — the 
original motion — tends to centre on the Crowns and Crown 
corporations. And I would invite the member to continue debate 
and to consider an alternate motion. 
 
I rule this amendment out of order. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was not my 
intention to move the focus by any means off of the Crown 
corporations. If I could have a motion paper, I would be quite 
prepared to reword it in a way that would fit both the intent of 
the remarks that I’ve made and more clearly tie in with the 
resolution proposed by the member for Swift Current. 
 
I would say, I think, Mr. Speaker, I will move that we 
encourage the government to continue to provide 
Saskatchewan’s people with the benefits of prudent financial 
management in our Crown corporations, an approach that has 
put an end to the deficit financing of the previous 
administrations, creating instead a series of balanced budgets, 
so on and so forth. I trust that that would be in order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you. The members opposite wanted to make 
sure that I was submitting a motion the same as I had read. I 
want to be very clear in what the amendment is that I wish to 
make: 
 

That all words after “Assembly” be deleted and substituted 
with the following: 
 
encourage the government to continue to provide 
Saskatchewan people the benefits of prudent management 
of the province’s energy resources, Crown corporations, 
and finances. 

 
I so move, seconded by the member for Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
second the amendment put forward by the member for Regina 
South, and I’m happy to remind this House that this government 
is indeed proud of its wise and prudent management of the 
province’s finances. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I don’t have to remind the members on our 
side of the House of the practices of the previous government, 
the deficit financing of the Tory administration, some of whose 
members are still sitting on the opposite side. And, Mr. 
Speaker, those practices left this province with a 15 . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . I know you don’t . . . I’m sorry, Mr. 
Speaker, I know that they don’t really like to be reminded of 
this but I’m going to do it anyway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those practices left this province with a $15 billion 
debt. Our province was nearly bankrupt, Mr. Speaker, and 
we’re still forced to spend an inordinate amount of money every 
day of every month of every year on interest payments for the 
debt. Payments that do not do one iota of good for this province 
and its people, Mr. Speaker. Not one service enhancement, not 
one debt reduction — just interest, interest only. 
 
Now the motion as put by the member from Swift Current is not 
explicit in what is meant by: consider greater financial relief to 
residents. However we’ve all heard in this House and many 
times before, and I believe that there’s some quotes from 
newspapers, that they’re considering and asking this 
government to provide further rebates. They also want us to 
somehow cushion it by not taking the proper payment on our 
utilities. 
 
Now we know from question period that the members opposite 
have a lot of trouble, Mr. Speaker, with profitable Crowns. 
They absolutely have a philosophical bent that does not believe 
in Crowns. They would have them sold. They would spend the 
money. And there would be no future dividends to their 
shareholders who are the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite call on the government for 
more rebates to offset rising energy prices. We believe that 
there are better ways to put money into the pockets of people. 
 
The energy credit announced by our government came at a price 
tag of $10 million, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, all that gave each 
customer a credit of $25. If I had my way, Mr. Speaker, we 
would have put that $10 million into an energy conservation 
program right now. And we will do that, Mr. Speaker, but not 
before we’ve used up $10 million to provide very little relief to 
natural gas consumers. 
 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 723 

 

Energy conservation measures, on the other hand, would 
provide permanent savings for consumers. I’ll remind the 
people of a little adage that says: give a man a fish and feed him 
for a day; teach a man to fish and feed him for a lifetime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Sask Party is playing the same old game as 
they did last year. Whenever they find a small surplus of money 
they spend it over and over again calling on the government to 
increase spending on this and that but always using the same 
money. 
 
Last year they called on us to spend around $350 million to the 
tune of 2.3 billion, Mr. Speaker. We added it up and they spent 
the same amount of money over and over and over again and in 
about, oh a week and a half or so, they had come to the grand 
total of about $2.3 billion all by spending the same 350,000 . . . 
or 350 million. Talk about voodoo economics, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I’m proud to say that under the leadership of our former 
premier, our province has made tremendous strides towards 
restoring our fiscal health. 
 
We’re all aware that the Sask Party would have us spend all the 
money as soon as it’s received. And we know that that’s their 
philosophical bent — spend it now, it’s gone, don’t have any 
for another day. If it comes in spend it; if you don’t have 
enough money later, too bad, cut the programs. That’s their 
idea. 
 
We know that that’s the approach that put us into deficit and put 
us into a $15 billion debt under that previous administration that 
some of those members, there, were part of. They say they’re 
tired of hearing about it; we say we’re tired of paying it. 
 
The opposition want greater rebates, Mr. Speaker, but they 
neglect to say that last year SaskEnergy saved Saskatchewan 
residents over a hundred million dollars by keeping rate 
increases low. And how did they do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? 
They did it by locking in prices and by passing on the savings to 
the consumer. 
 
In addition, SaskPower has had a rate freeze for the past five 
years. And the member from Arm River says people can’t 
afford to pay for it. Well I don’t know how they’d afford to pay 
for it if they lived in Alberta or in another jurisdiction where 
they’re paying much, much higher prices, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crowns use their profits for three purposes: 
that’s to pay down debt, to expand and improve their services, 
and to pay dividends to their shareholders. Crown sector debt 
has been reduced by $2.3 billion since 1991 when we took over, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The Crowns continue to provide top-notch 
services to Saskatchewan people at rates that are among the 
lowest rates in Canada. And the dividends to the General 
Revenue Fund continue to help pay for programs and services. 
 
This year the Crowns will pay a dividend of $200 million to the 
public treasury, and next year the Finance minister has 
estimated a dividend of about 300 million. This money is being 
spent on health, on highways, on education. What better way to 
spend it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

Yet in her MLA report, the member from Kelvington-Wadena 
writes, on April 12, and I quote: 
 

The budget spending is not sustainable over the long term. 
This would have been a deficit budget if the government 
hadn’t transferred $200 million from the Crowns and $312 
million from the slush fund. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they call it a slush fund, but we know it as 
a Fiscal Stabilization Fund — a fund that puts money away for 
a rainy day instead of having to borrow, or to slash programs as 
the previous administration did, supported again by some of the 
same members who are still sitting over there. That’s what the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena says. 
 
Now the member from Swift Current wants us to take even 
more money, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and blow it on what he calls 
a $25 pizza rebate. Meanwhile, the Leader of the Opposition, 
and the self-proclaimed commie suppressor, the member from 
Wood River, he wants . . . they want to sell the Crowns. Keep in 
mind, Mr. Speaker, that these are the same Crowns that are 
contributing $500 million to the people of this province over the 
next two years, Crowns that are keeping our utility costs among 
the lowest in Canada. 
 
The opposition, Mr. Speaker, increased Crown debt by $2 
billion, spent all of the retained earnings, sold off assets, and 
ran up a billion dollars a year in operating deficits. We, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, paid down the debt, have retained earnings, 
have brought in eight consecutive balanced budgets, have 
enjoyed nine consecutive credit upgrades. 
 
We and the people of Saskatchewan think that this is a much 
better way, a much better plan, because balanced budgets and 
credit upgrades also save taxpayers money. 
 
Now let’s talk about more ways that people are saving money. 
Effective January 1, Saskatchewan residents are benefiting from 
millions of dollars of provincial tax cuts. The new cuts 
combined with those of July 2000 add up to $317 million this 
year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $317 million. Now that’s a big 
saving and if you transferred that amount of money into a 
rebate, that might be substantial. 
 
But no, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re spending that money on 
sustainable tax cuts, money that will continue to be savings for 
the people of this province year after year after year. Mr. 
Speaker, our tax system is competitive, our tax system is fair, 
and our tax system is simple. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our prudent management of finances takes 
into account a reduction in revenue of more than $750 million, 
a fact recognized again by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena in her April 12 MLA report. If we had 
spent all of our revenue last year, and more, as demanded by the 
Sask Party, this would have meant cuts to programs, higher 
taxes, and even a deficit, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But we resisted their calls for more spending, for irresponsible 
spending, and we put it aside. We put it aside for the time when 
revenues were down so that we can provide stable funding for 
the critical needs of our province. 
 



724 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, happiness is never having to say you’re Tory. 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Swift Current can’t be 
happy because he can’t distance himself from the wild spending 
of the Devine Tories. When his leader said there’s so much 
more we can be, Mr. Speaker, what he really meant was there’s 
so much more debt we can be in, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But we’re not going back there. We will continue to manage 
our finances in a responsible way. Our Crowns will continue 
through good management to generate profits for the benefit of 
the people of this province. The boom and bust mentality of the 
opposition is what got us into debt in the first place. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I said, I’m proud to second the 
amendment of the member from Regina South, that talks about 
the responsible way in which our government intends to 
continue to manage our finances. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into this afternoon’s debate. 
And maybe for the people of Saskatchewan I think the first 
thing that has to be done is there has to be a clarification of 
some of the numbers that have been put forward over the course 
of this afternoon’s debate and over the last couple of weeks. 
 
Because you know, Mr. Speaker, since we received the 
information from the minister in the Estimates, the people of 
Saskatchewan have had a chance to look at the numbers that 
were put forward. They’ve had a chance to look at the amount 
of revenue that this government had last year and what they’re 
projecting to have for this year. And then, Mr. Speaker, last 
week we had the information provided by the Crown 
corporations of this province. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, when we look at the Crowns, and I’m 
going to look very specifically at two Crowns, Saskatchewan 
Power and Saskatchewan Energy, because, Mr. Speaker, I want 
to raise a point on behalf of many community groups in 
Saskatchewan, some very specifically from my constituency but 
I’m sure from all constituencies of members opposite and all of 
my colleagues on this side. 
 
When we start to look at the financing of publicly owned 
buildings — buildings like curling rinks and skating rinks and 
community halls and bowling alleys — all of those facilities are 
run by the locally raised dollar, Mr. Speaker. And when we see 
the tremendous rate increases in SaskEnergy and SaskPower, 
there’s a tremendous concern from a lot of these groups. 
Seniors’ groups, for instance, Mr. Speaker, who run clubrooms, 
they are having difficulty trying to figure out what their next 
budget will be. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, last week we saw the Crowns put 
forward their profits from the year before. And we note that the 
two Crowns, SaskPower and SaskEnergy, have $170 million of 
profit. 
 
Now the members opposite talk about whether that’s enough or 
not enough. I’m not going to get into that, Mr. Speaker; I’m 
going to just put forward the facts. The facts are there were 

$170 million worth of profit. That’s up $20 million over the 
previous year. So people have to look at that and say, if those 
two Crowns have that kind of profit, is there a reason why, 
number one, that the rate increases are being proposed; and 
number two, is there any relief that is going to be provided to 
the individuals in this province and/or the groups that I just 
mentioned? 
 
The second point, the second point, Mr. Speaker, was raised by 
a member from Regina South about the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. And he talked about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund as if it 
was something that has existed for years and years and years. 
And I want to read from the government’s budget and it says: 
 

It is expected that $775 million will be transferred to the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund at the end of 2000/2001. 

 
Well you know when that was, when that date occurred, Mr. 
Speaker? That date was March 31, some 24 days ago. Prior to 
that, the Fiscal Stabilization Fund had the sum total of zero 
dollars. So there isn’t . . . the member alludes to the fact or 
suggests to the people of Saskatchewan that there was a fund 
that has been sitting there and now all of a sudden the 
opposition is saying we should be spending that fund from 
years back. He has his facts wrong, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so 
that’s very, very critical. 
 
Now the other point to note, as was mentioned by the members 
opposite, where did the funds come to create a $775 million 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund? Last year’s budget, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, projected a $405 million fund to be set up. But again, 
the mid-year report by the Finance minister back last November 
yet suggested that there was going to be windfall profits in the 
oil and gas sector — some $440 million additional revenues. So 
now with taking those two amounts, we now have in excess of 
$700 million. 
 
But you know, Mr. Speaker, the other part that people in 
Saskatchewan are recognizing very quickly is that last year’s 
budget also transferred from the Liquor and Gaming Fund the 
retained earnings. You know, Mr. Speaker, what that number 
was? It was $699.8 million; $700 million was taken by this 
government from the retained earnings of the Liquor and 
Gaming Fund and put into General Revenue Fund. 
 
Now is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, why all of a sudden there’s 
700-plus million dollars for a Fiscal Stabilization Fund. The 
member opposite has already said: well, we didn’t have to use 
the CIC dividend last year. 
 
Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, we heard in estimates or in 
. . . yes, it was estimates when we talked to the member, the 
minister for SERM, (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) about the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. And he 
said well, you know, we didn’t set that up last year. We’re 
going to set it up this year using $40 million of this year’s 
revenue. 
 
(16:00) 
 
The opportunity was there last year, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They 
had huge numbers of dollars from oil and gas revenues, from 
the retained earnings that were found in the Liquor and Gaming 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 725 

 

Authority and they didn’t do it. 
 
So now, Mr. Speaker, we’re in a position where Crown 
corporations, after admitting to the fact that they have $170 
million profit in only two of the Crowns, are placing a severe 
burden on individuals and on corporations as to how they’re 
going to balance. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s take a look at what has happened with 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. And you know, Mr. 
Speaker, I want to read a letter. I want to read a letter for the 
hon. member from Regina Wascana Plains so she would listen 
to what reality is. The members opposite talked about reality. 
This is not reality. 
 
Well I’m going to read a couple of paragraphs from the 
secretary-treasurer of the Foam Lake recreation association. 
This is a real group, Mr. Deputy Speaker, along with the groups 
that are the same in the community of Preeceville and Sturgis 
and Norquay and Pelly and Invermay and Canora, Theodore. 
All of those communities have groups that are trying to run 
their recreational facilities for the enjoyment of the seniors and 
the youth of this province and all of the people that are still left 
that haven’t moved out, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The couple of concerns that the secretary-treasurer raises are the 
following: 
 

I have been the secretary-treasurer of our local recreation 
centre for 19 years, and in that time have continued to 
watch the rates for gas and power continue to climb and 
climb. 
 
Our last three bills have been astronomical. Over $6,500 
for the two combined for December; 5,800 for January; and 
$6,800 for February. 

 
She goes on to say, and I quote again from the letter: 
 

We will be faced with some very tough issues as we 
prepare our budget for the coming year. And one 
alternative may be (may be) to resort to natural ice, thus 
enabling us to cut our costs for running the icemaking 
plants. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve heard this concern from the 
communities that I’ve listed, that are communities in my 
constituency and I’m sure my colleagues have the very same 
concerns raised. 
 
There are groups in this province that are struggling with 
SaskEnergy bills, with SaskPower bills. They are struggling 
with the astronomical increases that have occurred. Yet, 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy have a combined profit of $170 
million. 
 
Now as the member for Swift Current put forward in his 
motion, we’re talking about some form of relief, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — relief to individuals to deal with high energy costs. 
And there are a number of ways to do that. 
 
And if the government wants to be creative and wants to look at 
all of the different methods, put forward some options for 

debate and for discussion. But that’s what is needed for not only 
individuals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but groups in the province 
who are struggling, groups that may decide to shut down their 
artificial ice-making plants and save money by reversing back 
to a natural ice situation. 
 
That’s not acceptable, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So I encourage the 
government to look very carefully at the resolution that says, 
consider options. Consider what might be relief for individuals, 
for groups. And as I’ve pointed out, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the 
revenue is there. The revenue is included in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. The Crown profits are high. 
 
And one of the other points to note, Mr. Deputy Speaker — and 
I think my colleague from Swift Current has briefly mentioned 
this — in the budget as put forward by the Minister of Finance, 
in the statement of revenue, he indicates that the revenue for oil 
and gas will fall by almost $400 million. I talked to an 
individual who’s involved in oil and gas exploration and the 
growth in this province, and his analysis of that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was there has to be a collapse of the system to drop 
$400 million. 
 
So the question that has to be asked, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is if 
indeed the numbers seem to be understated, will we arrive at a 
situation come November when the next mid-year financial 
report will be put forward by the Minister of Finance and he 
will report to the people of this province that there is another 
windfall in oil and gas royalties beyond what the budget has 
estimated? 
 
That’s a question that I think the Minister of Finance needs to 
answer as well when we look at whether or not there is an 
ability for this government to address the relief that we are 
putting forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I strongly support the resolution that was 
put forward, the original resolution, and I do not support the 
amendment that was put forward by government members. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
you to the member from Canora-Pelly for his very brief 
remarks. 
 
I’m quite happy to stand in support of the amendment and in 
opposition to the main motion. 
 
Before I begin I wanted to talk a little bit about some of the 
things that people outside of the Legislative Assembly have 
talked about. For example, the member from Swift Current talks 
about how he would like to have the government put more 
money into the rebates, spend taxpayers’ money into rebates 
and have the government interfere into the free market society. 
I’m sure the member from Wood River would have something 
to say about that. 
 
But there was an individual who says companies may have to 
look at doing things differently to deal with higher natural gas 
costs. Quote: 
 



726 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

They perhaps have to look at alternative sources of energy 
or different ways of conservation, so there’s going to be 
some pain in this process. 

 
Who said that, Mr. Speaker? That was the Saskatchewan 
Chamber of Commerce president, Casey Davis. In fact he said 
he doesn’t . . . 
 

. . . the Chamber doesn’t like the idea of rebates to cushion 
the blow of higher heating bills. 

 
So that begs the question, Mr. Speaker, who are the people on 
that side representing? They claim to speak for business. Well 
here’s the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce saying they 
don’t want the member from Swift Current to be standing up 
and saying what he’s saying. 
 
He goes on, Mr. Speaker. He says, quote: 
 

Casey Davis says subsidies don’t make it fair for all 
business. “One business that is energy efficient perhaps has 
spent money, doesn’t get the benefit of another business 
that hasn’t paid any attention to those sort of issues, it just 
tends to distort the marketplace.” 

 
It just tends to distort the marketplace. 

 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have individuals, we have 
businesses who are purchasing energy-efficient furnaces, who 
are putting money into insulation, who are trying to be 
energy-wise and conscious. 
 
Well the member from Swift Current wants to penalize those 
individuals and say, I don’t care; it doesn’t matter; if you’ve 
used a lot of natural gas and power we’ll just give you some 
more money. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that individual from Swift Current knows all 
about that and when the Minister of Energy and Mines was 
speaking in question period recently, the member from Swift 
Current said yes, it is true that I worked for a previous 
administration. I worked for a government in the ’80s that was 
clearly becoming tired, old, and out of touch with Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in 1982 when the government on this side 
lost, we said we knew we were becoming out of touch. We had 
learned our lessons. Well obviously the members on that side 
have not learned their lessons. They are still pulling up with the 
same tricks as they always did. 
 
“Soaring fuel prices threaten to eat up SaskPower profits.” 
That’s from a StarPhoenix article on April 20, only four days 
ago. This year we’re down to a break-even level point. What 
this article says, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the profits that 
SaskPower has are tenuous because the prices are going up. So 
the way the opposition wants to talk they want to put the money 
in, spend it now, forget about the consequences tomorrow. 
 
But there are some good news in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Some of the things that we heard today that the member from 
Regina South talked about. “Saskatchewan exports to grow.” In 
fact they are going to grow two times the national average. 

Healthy growth in export dollars flowing into 
Saskatchewan should give the provincial economy a 
“generally positive outlook” says the chief economist of the 
Export Development Corp . . . Stephen Poloz . . . 

 
Quote: 
 

Saskatchewan has got pretty good diversification there, 
despite its reputation. 

 
We hear, day in and day out, Mr. Speaker, the gloom and doom 
from the members opposite, talking about how bad things are in 
Saskatchewan, how the outlook is bad, how people are leaving 
the province, how we’re driving people out, how the taxes are 
too high. 
 
Well none of those things are true, Mr. Speaker. I represent the 
constituency of Saskatoon Sutherland. That’s probably the 
fastest growing constituency in all of Saskatchewan. I’ve got 
whole new neighbourhoods in the last 10 years. 
 
When I go up and knock on the doors and there’s concerns 
about which way we’re going, I said, listen you’re following the 
NDP plan for prosperity. Look at this wonderful home that you 
have. It’s probably a $250,000 home that they’ve been able to 
scrimp and save and have a good income to be able to afford 
this home. So I’m very proud to represent the members from 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
And I’m also . . . what the members opposite seem to forget is 
that I was born and raised about six hours northwest of here. I 
know rural Saskatchewan. In fact I probably know more about 
rural Saskatchewan than most of the members on that side of 
the House. 
 
Members who live in cities of Weyburn and Estevan and Swift 
Current, I’d ask what they know about communities of my size 
of under 500 people. So they don’t understand that, Mr. 
Speaker. They claim . . . they pretend to know all about rural 
Saskatchewan. They’re wannabe rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. But the people in rural Saskatchewan can see them 
coming. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have members . . . another city of 
Humboldt. Another part of rural Saskatchewan which is 
significantly larger than the town I grew up in. But the member 
from Humboldt is attempting to defend her vote against the 
budget, saying that we have not enough money, it’s not 
sustainable. There’s not enough money for it in the budget. And 
yet now we have the member from Swift Current talking about 
how there’s so much money that we can just blow it on energy 
rebates. 
 
Well you know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, perhaps what we should 
have done as a government is do what the Government of 
Alberta did. And what they did was they deregulated the 
industry. And then the cost went through the roof, they brought 
in the royalties, and they’ve had to spend almost $4 billion in 
rebates just to bring it down. And it’s still higher than what 
we’re paying in Saskatchewan. So again it’s the old, give with 
one hand, take with the other. 
 
Now some more good news . . . And that is the philosophy that 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 727 

 

obviously the members opposite seem to follow and that’s not 
the way of the members on this side. 
 
Oh, I’m pleased to see that the member from Rosthern has not 
left because I’m quoting from the Saskatchewan Valley News, 
and this is dated April 19. And when we talk about how taxes 
are going up in rural Saskatchewan, how this government is 
hurting rural Saskatchewan, how urban people . . . and the taxes 
are going up because of this province. Well, if you’re going to 
blame this government based on taxes when they’re going up, 
perhaps we’ll get a little bit of credit from the member from 
Rosthern when taxes are going down. 
 
Now the headline in the Saskatchewan Valley News of April 19 
says, quote: “Rosthern lowering mill rate for 2001.” 
 
So the town of Rosthern is lowering taxes, Mr. Speaker. 
They’re lowering taxes. Now perhaps the reason they’re able to 
do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is because this government 
listened when SUMA and SARM (Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities) and SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) came in January and said, we do not want 
you to increase the funding directly to taxes, we want you to 
provide relief for education so that . . . we all know that the 
taxes in our community is taxes from the community as well as 
the education portion of the taxes. And what they wanted, Mr. 
Speaker, the SUMA, SARM, and the SSTA, was they wanted 
this government to provide education relief. 
 
Now we have increased the education budget. It’s the largest 
increase in Saskatchewan history. In fact, not 10 years ago the 
amount that was paid on interest in this debt, the public debt, 
was more than we were able to invest in education. That’s the 
legacy, Mr. Speaker, of following the philosophy of the 
members opposite. 
 
What are we doing this year, Mr. Speaker? We are spending 
almost two times as much in education. Investing two times as 
much in education, as we are spending on interest on the Tory 
debt. It’s an incredible turnaround. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So anyway, back to the article on the Sask Valley News: 
“Rosthern lowering mill rate for 2001.” Quote: 
 

Rosthern town council set its 2001 operating budget 
Monday, and lowered the mill rate for a change. 
 
Council set the 2001 uniform mill rate . . . 

 
And it goes on: 
 

Council lowered the commercial property class mill rate 
factor . . . (and partly because of the) reassessment 
increased the value of commercial property to a greater 
degree than residential property. 

 
Incredible good news. But do we hear this good news from the 
member from Rosthern? No, we hear gloom and doom. 
 
Another article, Mr. Speaker, and this is in the Regina 
Leader-Post And this speaks a little bit about the philosophy 

that’s different than this side of the House. This side of the 
House talks about working with people, co-operating with 
people. The members opposite — obviously the philosophy is 
anti-co-operation. 
 
And this is a letter to the editor. I’ll just touch on a couple of 
points, and it’s the case for keeping the Crowns: 
 

What do we do next year when the money runs out? 
 
The members opposite talk about spending all of the profits that 
come in this particular year with the Crown profits. In fact, 
what happens if we sell the Crowns, as some of the members 
opposite have advocated in the past. Where will we get the 
$200 million the year after we’ve sold that? How will we 
replace the $200 million a year in profit? And I’ll quote a little 
bit from this letter to the editor: 
 

During the Devine government’s reign of terror, the 
Conservative government of Saskatchewan gave us a false 
sense of “rich” and became extravagant. 
 
It borrowed and spent because we were “open for 
business”. 
 
To make it easier to sell Sask Power, it split off Sask 
Energy. It would have sold all of the Crown corporations to 
pay down some of the debt it had run up in the previous 10 
years. 
 
How would . . . (the member from) the taxpayers federation 
solve the property tax under those conditions today? 

 
It goes on: 
 

Selling Crown corporations is a political philosophy not 
based on hard economics. There are many things that must 
remain in the public domain such as schools, roads, sewer 
and water, hospitals, river and lakes as some examples. 
 
Keeping money-makers such as the Crown corporations 
helps balance those tax-supported systems that don’t make 
money. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud to serve as a member of a credit union 
board in Saskatoon, and was also able to serve as its president 
for seven years as well. The one thing that I learned is that the 
numbers have to add up, Mr. Speaker. And some of the things 
that the members opposite have talked about just doesn’t add 
up. They spend the same money in three different ways and call 
it budgeting. Well if you spent the dollar, there’s no dollar over 
here to spend. 
 
Well if you’ve spent the dollar, there’s no dollar over here to 
spend. 
 
And one of the things we’ve also learned is that you need to set 
aside a little bit of money for the future. You need to have a 
loan fund so that if loans go bad . . . which will happen in a 
risky environment. For example, one thing I’ve learned with 
loans: that no loans officer ever makes a bad loan and yet we do 
have probably 3 per cent of delinquency on some of our loans. 
So what that means, Mr. Speaker, and I see one of the members 



728 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

opposite not understanding what I’m saying, which doesn’t 
surprise me. But when you are investing in a company or when 
you are making a loan to an individual, it’s a good loan. 
 
But circumstances change, the market happens, certain things 
occur that are not within your control. For example, the member 
from Big Muddy who owns a business knows that if the price of 
beef suddenly goes up because of the shortage of beef in foot in 
mouth . . . sorry, foot and mouth disease, that she’ll have to 
increase the price of her hamburgers. That’s just economics, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s the same thing with some of the 
investments that the Crowns have made. 
 
Now if individuals want to find out how low their taxes have 
gone, also along the lines of Swift Current, I invite them to 
check out the website www.taxcuts.sk.ca. And what they’ll find 
there is a tax calculator. You’ll be able to plug in the numbers 
that you earn, that your spouse — if you happen to have one — 
earns, and the number of your children. And you can click on 
each of the years over five different years, and you will see the 
savings that are there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that I heard in Saskatoon, someone from 
the Saskatoon Regional Economic Development Authority said 
we have in Saskatchewan the fastest-falling taxes in all of 
Canada. Now we don’t have the lowest taxes, but we have the 
fastest-falling taxes, and when fully implemented we will have 
the third-lowest tax rate in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. Not bad 
for a province that was nearly bankrupt 10 years ago. 
 
Now the member from Rosthern continues to talk about the 
debt and the deficit that Allan Blakeney ran up in the 1970s. 
Now I’ve looked; I haven’t seen any economist make mention 
to the debt that the Saskatchewan government in the ’70s ran 
up. I haven’t heard any of the banks or the people that rate our 
financial worth. I mean, the credit upgrades that were going up 
in the ’70s that suddenly went down in the ’80s. So I’d like to 
hear a little more about this so-called debt that the member from 
Rosthern continues to talk about. I think it’s the same old thing, 
that if you say something over and over again, you start to 
believe it. 
 
And I quote a little bit about the forecast for exports and I’ll go 
on a little bit more about it: 
 

An economist has a rosy forecast for Saskatchewan 
farmers. The Export Development Corporation in Ottawa 
predicts that Saskatchewan’s exports will grow by 7% this 
year. That is well ahead of the national (average) . . . 
Economist Steven Poloz says the province’s relatively 
diversified agri-food sector is the main reason. 

 
Now I quoted from a book last week, or the week before, called 
Don’t Turn Out The Lights, Mr. Speaker, from a friend of mine, 
Al Scholz. And he was giving success stories of the 
diversification in rural Saskatchewan, in particular in the 
agri-food business. Here’s proof positive, Mr. Speaker, from an 
economist in Ottawa: 
 

He predicts higher prices for wheat and other cereals. Poloz 
. . . 

 
Which is bad news for the opposition, Mr. Speaker, because 

they thrive, their energy source, what drives their engine is bad 
news, Mr. Speaker. Bad news. Gloom and doom. When there’s 
good news, it’s bad news for the opposition. 
 
But I have a message for the opposition, Mr. Speaker. When 
this government finishes its mandate this term, they will run 
into . . . the opposition will run into a brick wall, Mr. Speaker 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . There we go. 
 
Anyway Steven Poloz: 
 

. . . predicts higher prices for wheat and other cereals. (He) 

. . . says it will be another strong year for Saskatchewan’s 
energy and potash sales. 
 

Another strong year. 
 

Saskatchewan’s diverse economy will help it weather the 
uncertain conditions going on south of the border. 

 
Well the members opposite talk about the direction that we 
want to go in Saskatchewan and they keep quoting their George 
Bush, their Stockwell Day, that sentiment of how to implement 
this. 
 
And yet, when you look . . . When I drove down to Minneapolis 
last year and drove through the . . . Hardly any people in the 
states that we travelled through, that is not the recipe for rural 
revitalization. That’s not the recipe for growing this economy. 
And it proved positive again, Mr. Speaker. 
 
At least that is the word from one economist, Steven Poloz, 
with the Export Development Corporation in Ottawa, quote: 
 

Saskatchewan happens to be one of those provinces that 
doesn’t really get hit as badly as the others. They actually 
end up with 7% growth in exports, which is more than 
double the national average. Poloz says oil, potash, and 
agriculture will lead the way for Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, incredible good news for the members on this side 
of the House and for the people of Saskatchewan. Unfortunately 
not as good news for members opposite. 
 
Now a couple more points I wanted to touch on, some of the 
headlines that have been in the paper in the last month. 
“Opposition’s rash pledges trap for future.” That’s an editorial 
for The Star Phoenix, Thursday, April 5. I won’t go in about it, 
but it goes on and talks a little . . . talks about how the members 
opposite are planning to be in government but it’s not going to 
happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now here’s an interesting article that was just from within the 
last week and it’s from the Yorkton paper. And the headline 
says, “Sask Party searching for city candidates”. And I thought 
this was quite interesting the way that they approach it. The 
guest speaker is one Tom Lukiwski. And this is what he says: 
 

Top-notch, credible candidates are what will turn the trick 
(turn the trick, Mr. Speaker) for the Sask Party in the next 
provincial election, says that party’s executive director. 

 
Tom Lukiwski in an interview from Regina, says many 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 729 

 

voters still perceive the Sask Party as mainly a rural 
movement and that attracting quality candidates will do 
much to dispel that myth. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, what I hear from this story is that right now 
the opposition is perceived only as a rural movement and to 
dispel that they’ll have to get the quality candidates. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I was able to campaign in Regina . . . in 
Saskatoon Riversdale, and we came up against some of the 
tactics of the quality candidates that they had. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m feeling much more secure facing the next election 
if that’s the best that the members opposite can throw at us. 
 
Some other points. “High marks for Sask. budget”, “Bank 
bullish on Sask. GDP”, “Royal bullish on Sask.”, “Some rural 
towns diversifying well”. And this is from the . . . about a 
month ago, Thursday, March 24, The Leader-Post, and it 
dispels some of the myths that the oppositions like to propagate. 
And the quote goes something like this: 
 

There are a couple of myths about small-town 
Saskatchewan that Doug Elliott would like to erase: Not 
everyone who lives in rural Saskatchewan is a farmer and 
not all rural communities are dying. 

 
Further on in the article it says: 
 

He said that medium-sized towns of 750 to . . . (1,500) are 
growing more than smaller towns and larger towns. 

 
So the diversification that we have embarked on in the last 10 
years is beginning to work. Is it perfect? Of course not, Mr. 
Speaker. There’s much work to be done. There’s much work 
that needs to be done in the health care system which is why 
Mr. Fyke was asked to go and study the issue, which is why the 
members opposite were invited to participate. 
 
I have to say, and this is in all sincerity, the time I spent on the 
Special Committee on Tobacco Control, the member from 
Weyburn-Big Muddy I actually learned something from. And 
the member from Estevan I learned not quite as much but . . . 
And the member from Saltcoats as well. But no, in all sincerity 
and I mean this genuinely — but the member from Estevan 
likes to give me the gears so every chance I have a chance I like 
to give her the gears — but I actually did learn something. And 
I’d like to think that they also learned something from us. 
 
And I think we came up generally with a much better report 
than if they had not participated. And I think more people will 
be alive when this report is actually translated into legislation. 
So I encourage the members opposite to be involved. 
 
Another quote: 
 

Saskatchewan growth to outdo national average. 
 
The Toronto Dominion says: 
 

Saskatchewan’s energy sector will fuel GDP growth of 2.5 
per cent this year, outpacing the national average of 2.2 per 
cent. 

 

Another quote from the Ituna News from Monday, April 16. 
“Sask. Party Prepares” is the headline. Quote: 
 

The Melville Sask. Party held it’s (sic) annual meeting and 
dinner in Melville on April 5th . . . (the) Ex. Director of the 
Sask. Party addressed the sold out dinner. 
 
Lukiwski was pleased with the capacity crowd of 76 
(souls). 

 
Seventy-six souls, Mr. Speaker. I’ve had, I’ve had executive 
meetings that . . . I’ve had executive meetings that were almost 
that large, Mr. Speaker. And that was in the summer. As well, 
when I was in Hafford on the weekend, Mr. Speaker, we had 
almost . . . we had 200 people at the event and that was in the 
middle of April. 
 
It goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, quote: 
 

A new Executive was elected with Grant Schmidt (sorry 
. . . Grant Schmidt) moving (from Chairman) to 
Membership Chairman . . . 

 
But there’s no connection, Mr. Speaker. I’ll leave that, leave 
that unsaid. 
 
Now some of the quotes that we’ve heard in the past and in the 
far past, it just seems like it’s déjà vu all over again. We could 
mismanage this province and still break even — I remember 
hearing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I was quite concerned. 
And unfortunately it turned out that, that we could mismanage 
. . . the province could be mismanaged and we wouldn’t 
break-even. And we saw that experiment in the 1980s. 
 
(16:30) 
 
In fact, right now we hear day in and day out about the $2 
million that were spent here or lost there. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
$2 million is only about what we spend each day on interest on 
the debt — every day. In fact, it’s probably about 30 cents in 
the time that I’ve been speaking, it seems like. So that debt, Mr. 
Speaker, we have to remember that that 6 or $700 million that 
we pay on interest is just gone; it’s sent outside. 
 
Now I talked a little bit about the credit union that I was able to 
be a member of and serve as president and serve on the board. 
And one of the things that I learned with the credit union, why 
credit unions are so important, also covers why Crown 
corporations are so important. 
 
What a credit union does is provides a service, provides access 
to credit, that otherwise wouldn’t be available to the member. 
Now what it does is it provides competitive rates, good service, 
employs individuals at a high rate of pay, generally higher than 
what would be found in the . . . in often cases members of the 
union, in which case Saskatoon Credit Union was. And what it 
does, is it takes that profit, or the savings as they call it, and it 
reinvests it into the community. It reinvests it in putting money 
into higher wages. It reinvests it into taking higher risks on 
some loans because of some of the benefits. 
 
Now why am I talking about credit unions, Mr. Speaker? I think 
there’s a parallel with Crown corporations. Do we honestly 



730 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

expect that a private company other than SaskTel would come 
in and expand its cellular coverage to the locations that SaskTel 
has or SaskTel Mobility? 
 
Of course not, Mr. Speaker, because private companies are in it 
for profit. And there’s absolutely nothing wrong with that, 
because if we did not have private industry in Saskatchewan we 
would not have a strong Saskatchewan. Which is why in the 
budget we just introduced this year, why we’ve lowered the 
small business tax by 25 per cent and raised the ceiling by 
$100,000. 
 
So, however, Crown corporations play a role. When members 
opposite raise the issue that they want to extend natural gas into 
areas of the province that are sparsely populated, I’m in support 
of that. But then don’t turn around and knock the Crown 
corporations for investing in something where there’s no money 
to be made. It is meant to be a service. It’s meant to pay their 
employees larger than in some cases private sector, although we 
heard in Crown Corporations that that was not the same case for 
the management. And so what I’m getting at, Mr. Speaker, is 
the members opposite seem to want to criticize our Crown 
corporations. 
 
Now there’s lots of areas where we can improve. And I 
welcome their constructive criticism because I have my 
criticisms of some of the things that some of the Crowns, some 
of the departments . . . We can always improve. It’s always 
sharpening the saw. If you measure what you want to achieve, 
you will actually have a greater chance of achieving it. So I 
welcome some of the questions from many of the members. 
 
However, but when you attack the Crown corporations, they are 
fulfilling a very important public policy role. And what I would 
ask is, once we have sold them off, once all of those Crown 
corporations have been sold on the private sector, have been 
given away to some of their friends, what would we do the next 
day? That money is gone. 
 
Do we honestly think that rates would be lower, that the profit 
amount that is now being made by the Crowns that is being 
reinvested into the community by way of donations to the 
community, by the way of higher wages or fair wages, by way 
of dividends to the government so that we can pave the roads, 
so we can build the highways, so we can invest in education and 
health care, do we honestly think that a private company that’s 
providing this kind of service would actually turn and put the 
money into the government? I don’t think so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, in conclusion I want to thank the member 
from Regina South for amending the motion, and I want to 
support the motion which now reads: 
 

That the words after “Assembly” be deleted and substituted 
with the following: 
 
encourage the government to continue to provide 
Saskatchewan people the benefits of prudent management 
of the province’s energy resources, Crown corporations, 
and finances. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I support that motion and I will oppose the motion 
that was put forward by the member from Swift Current. Thank 

you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m very pleased to rise and speak in support of my 
colleague, the member from Swift Current’s motion urging the 
government to provide greater financial relief to Saskatchewan 
taxpayers who are facing massive increases in their energy 
costs. And I’m also very thankful that that social rhetoric is 
over, from the other side there. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, while I was attending a grand 
opening of a new store in Estevan last week I had the 
opportunity to speak with many people. Many of them have 
voiced their concern about how they find it extremely ironic 
that this government can form new positions, new portfolios, 
hire new people, and even pay someone to retire in British 
Columbia, all at the expense of the taxpayer. 
 
But when push comes to shove, the government can’t be 
bothered, or refuses to offer a substantial assistance even 
though they are sitting on a $500 million surplus which is due 
to the higher oil and gas revenues. 
 
And for those members opposite, Mr. Speaker, Estevan is a 
community very involved in the oil and gas industry. The 
people who work in this field are finding it difficult to 
understand why they should continue to work for the 
government and not themselves. And believe me, Mr. Speaker, 
the exodus of Estevan people leaving to pursue their careers in 
the oil and gas industry in Alberta is very high and apparently 
will continue with more regularity. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of the Estevan constituency and indeed 
this province have very grave concerns about their future 
well-being. The massive increases we have seen in energy rates 
and no doubt will again be seeing are having a devastating 
effect on every person in this province, whether it be the senior 
citizens, people with young families, or self-employed people. I 
have received a lot of calls from seniors on fixed incomes and 
also people with young families. They all ask, where will this 
end? 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people are saying that while the 
government is looking after its Crown family, perhaps it should 
realize that the citizens of this province would like to look after 
their families too. 
 
Last winter, Mr. Speaker, SaskEnergy had a snuggle up 
Saskatchewan program, telling citizens how to conserve energy. 
This program encouraged people to share their mittens and 
sweaters and scarves and blankets. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, 
this was the only hope some of those people had. The 
government had massive TV and newspaper campaigns which, 
I might add, are very costly to the taxpayers of this province. 
 
While we have members on the government side bragging 
about an historical tax cut, taxes have actually increased by the 
raising of utility rates. SaskPower and SaskEnergy have 
increased their rates at least a dozen times since 1991. Profits 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 731 

 

from the major Crown corps jumped to nearly $300 million last 
year. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is devastating to the citizens of this 
province. Not only do people have increased power and energy 
rates, they also have to contend with increased SaskTel and SGI 
rates. Record profits, Mr. Speaker. And while the people of this 
province struggle to pay these huge bills, the profits are saved 
for an election slush fund. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a gentleman contacted one of my colleagues about 
his last SaskPower bill. Now this meter is situated on a farm 
and it’s a vacant farm. His last bill stated that he used 57,131 
kilowatt hours on his vacant farm. His bill was 3,246.89 — no 
arrears — 3,246.89. When he phoned SaskPower he was told — 
and I’m paraphrasing this, Mr. Speaker — he was told if the 
meter says that’s what it is, that’s what you pay. Now isn’t that 
an attitude? 
 
Attitudes like this really show how serious this NDP 
government is about revitalizing rural Saskatchewan. Rural 
Saskatchewan is not being revitalized, Mr. Speaker. The only 
thing that is being revitalized is the NDP piggy bank. 
 
Mr. Speaker, energy and power hikes have made it extremely 
difficult for businesses. Many of them barely managing to keep 
their doors open now. School divisions and municipalities are 
also feeling the increases. The costs have to be recovered and 
that’s done through higher property taxes. We’ve already seen 
communities raise their mill rates, Mr. Speaker. And the list 
goes on and on — curling rinks, town halls, and other facilities 
cannot cope. 
 
This morning I spoke to the treasurer of a small church in my 
constituency, Mr. Speaker. He said the energy costs could lead 
to the church closing its doors. Their energy bill in February 
this year was over $600. Last year, Mr. Speaker, their highest 
bill was just over 300. Churches, Mr. Speaker, thinking about 
closing their doors. This is absolutely appalling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had phone calls and visits from several of the 
business owners in my constituency. They have confirmed that 
due to the increase of utility rates, some, and I might add quite a 
few of them, are contemplating closing up and moving out of 
Saskatchewan. Not all are going to Alberta. Some will be going 
over to Manitoba. 
 
If you can, please tell me again your plan of rural revitalization. 
If even one of these businesses close up and leave, that is a 
huge loss to my constituency. Small towns are like families, Mr. 
Speaker — hurt one, you hurt us all. 
 
Many of my constituents have asked with more regularity, just 
what is the future vision for Saskatchewan under this current 
government? It would appear that rather than progressing, we 
are regressing. And that is a very, very sad state of affairs, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are some 
myths that have come across the floor and I’d just like to clarify 
some of them. And I will do this in point form if I may. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina South talks about myths 

and realities. The myth is that the government cares about 
taxpayers. Reality is the figure that jumps out at the bottom of 
their energy bill. 
 
And a news flash for the member from Saskatoon Sutherland. 
He directs comments at my colleague, the member from 
Rosthern, about the mill rate going down. Well a hot tip for 
you, sir, is that the mill rate can go down and taxes can still 
increase. So that’s just a little bit of information for you. 
 
That same member goes on to talk about quality candidates. 
Well if your candidates in rural Saskatchewan were quality 
candidates, we must have been superior because we sure 
whipped them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — And in my own defence, he goes on to talk 
about the Special Committee on Tobacco Control we had, 
saying about how he didn’t learn too much from me. Well I did 
learn something from him, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and that’s 
never ever, ever do I want to be a socialist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — And then the same member goes on to talk 
about the low turnout at our meetings in Melville. Well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, at the post-budget meeting held in Estevan 
which was addressed by the Minister of Post-Secondary 
Education, nine people attended. Nine people attended the 
post-budgetary meeting and they could hardly get anyone to 
even sponsor it. 
 
And they went, the members over there, and there was a few of 
them, went on to talk about the debt. And I mean we know, like 
Grant Devine gets the blame for everything. I think he signed 
Confederation with John A. Macdonald because it goes back 
that far. 
 
Well I’d like to tell you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that big Al 
Blakeney, the debt was $6.86 billion. Interest rates in 1982 were 
23 per cent, and at that rate, a debt doubles every three and 
one-half years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it may sound like 
I’m really picking on the member from Saskatoon Sutherland, 
but I felt that he was picking on us, so I’m just making a few 
clarifications here. 
 
He claims he was born in rural Saskatchewan. Obviously he 
was born in the dark because he hasn’t seen the light yet. And 
he says he probably knows more about rural Saskatchewan than 
we over here. 
 
Then I would like to know what his excuse is for defending the 
policies that his government is initiating. There is an excuse for 
the rest of them over there because most of them have only 
been on a farm once during a visit. 
 
(16:45) 
 



732 Saskatchewan Hansard April 24, 2001 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, the member from Regina South talks about 
the SaskPower employees at Boundary dam which is in my 
constituency. He was warning me about where their support 
lies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these employees at Boundary dam and the Shand 
power station in Estevan did support me in the last election, 
despite the fact that a union steward was one of my main 
competitors and remember, members on that side, that is when 
they were locked out. 
 
So now that I’ve got that out of the way, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take 
this back on track a little bit. 
 
I’ve got some news here from people that have had their 
businesses assessed in hotels and motels. And Clairand 
Spalding, the biggest factor there is the gas bill. In Spalding 
alone it doubled to $1,692 a month. Add to that the 13 per cent 
PST and GST (goods and services tax) as well as the liquor 
consumption tax, and the government is forcing them out of 
business. Pleasantdale is much the same. Gas prices driving 
people out of business. They have the place up for sale. They 
don’t have table drinkers that make the business viable any 
more. If we have another gas price increase, they will have to 
shut their doors. 
 
In Weekes it’s much the same. Natural gas has doubled this 
year. Restricted on raising the price of drinks, so where do you 
get extra money to make ends meet? 
 
And the Blue Willow in Wadena. CTV (Canadian Television 
Network Limited) was in yesterday and they were asking a few 
questions. An assessor was out last week so they haven’t 
received their assessment, but their biggest concern is the 
natural gas. They are also very concerned about health care. 
 
Muenster as well is very frustrated. The assessment didn’t make 
a difference but the natural gas has doubled. For the past year 
they have been working alone, 18 hours a day, because they 
can’t afford staff. The hotel is paid for and is a busy place but 
they are not sure what they will do. 
 
They have worked in the industry for 25 years. This person is 
47 years old and the hotel was to be his retirement. He has 
$300,000 invested in this, and just before Christmas his VLTs 
(video lottery terminal) were removed. If he had that revenue, it 
would cover the cost of the current increase in SaskEnergy. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those things are all having a devastating effect 
on the price and just absolutely driving the people out of rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. I realize it’s a nice day and 
everybody would like to be outside and are a little 
rambunctious. But I’d just like to remind the House that the 
hon. member from Estevan has the floor. Everybody will have a 
chance to get into the debate. It’s a little difficult to hear the 
hon. member and her comments, and I’d like to do so. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I realize 
they do get a little bit vociferous when you strike a nerve, so 
that’s okay. 
 

But, Mr. Speaker, my constituents are very concerned regarding 
this latest tax hit by the government. And for that reason I 
strongly support my colleague’s motion and ask that the 
government take a long, hard look at the taxpayers’ request and 
provide more substantial relief to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m extremely 
happy to get up this afternoon to share a few comments about 
the motion before us in the Assembly. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have to start by talking about some of the 
comments made by members opposite. I have heard comment 
after comment about how this opposition party on one hand 
wants to spend more money on this, and then they don’t want to 
spend money on the same thing the next day. And then they 
want to give energy rebates, but yet, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, 
in this province right now, today, in this province we have the 
lowest . . . I should repeat that — the lowest — natural gas rate 
in the country. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have difficulty that they just can’t 
understand that. We have the lowest natural gas rate. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that rate right now is $4.52 a gigajoule, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I just want to give you a few comparisons so the members 
opposite, the members opposite may learn something. 
 
In Vancouver today, in sunny, warm Vancouver, they’re paying 
$8.82 — just about 50 per cent more, Mr. Speaker. In 
Edmonton, Edmonton they’re paying $8.77. In the opposition’s 
land of opportunity, where they all strive they want to be, and I 
hope they go soon, it is nearly double, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
understand. 
 
And listen to this. Their city — the city which they envy so 
much — Calgary, Mr. Speaker, in Calgary it is a shameful 
$9.81; more than 100 per cent more than in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, they can envy Alberta. They can envy 
Alberta every day of the week if they want, Mr. Speaker, but 
when it’s twice as much as it is in Saskatchewan, I don’t know 
why. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, they go ahead and they make a motion 
about what might happen in the future — talking about power 
rates may go up, energy rates may go up. Mr. Speaker, we like 
to deal with facts over on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
not on speculation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if and when we have rate increases, Mr. Speaker, 
they will go through normal processes. They’ll go through an 
independent rate review panel, Mr. Speaker. The independent 
rate review panel would make a recommendation. The member 
from Estevan is what? 
 
An Hon. Member: — Yelling. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Yelling. Oh, the member from Estevan is having 



April 24, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 733 

 

to hear some things she doesn’t like to hear. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we can talk all we want about what might 
happen, but on this side we deal with facts. And I have not seen, 
as a member of the government, any proposal for any rate 
increase from SaskPower, nor have I seen any proposal for any 
rate increase from SaskEnergy. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, when those things go before an independent 
rate review panel, they will evaluate whether or not those 
increases are justified. And then at that point, Mr. Speaker, we 
may have something to discuss. But at this point all they’re 
doing is speculating and talking about something that has never 
occurred. They’re fearmongering, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then they bring out every small community talking about 
how much their natural gas has gone up, Mr. Speaker. But 
never once did they indicate that we have the lowest rates in 
Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So natural gas going up isn’t a phenomenon in this province 
only, Mr. Speaker. It’s right across this country. But yet they 
want to talk about how bad off everybody is in the province of 
Saskatchewan when they have absolutely the lowest rates, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think that there’s a number of things that 
members opposite just totally want to ignore in this issue about 
rates. First off, Mr. Speaker, they need to understand that our 
Crown corporations are owned by the people, and the dividends 
and earnings of those Crown corporations go to sustain essential 
services in this province, Mr. Speaker — health care, education, 
highways. Mr. Speaker, programs for children — all things that 
we all should support. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, just one month ago we were talking about 
the budget, and lo and behold, the members of the opposition 
say we’re spending too much money. It’s not sustainable — not 
sustainable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then when the government puts away, then when the 
government puts away some money to make sure that the 
programs they implemented are sustainable, they complain, Mr. 
Speaker. So, Mr. Speaker, they want to spend on one hand; then 
they say they want to save on this hand; then they want more 
money back in this hand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they have one platform they’ve ever put forward 
— cut taxes. Mr. Speaker, I don’t know how the one platform 
they’ve ever put forward of any substance, Mr. Speaker, is 
going to save the province. So they’re going to cut taxes, yet 
they’re going to have money to spend on education and health 
care and social services. No, they’re not, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I think the people of Saskatchewan have seen economic 
plans like the members opposite have put forward in the past. In 
fact, we suffered through 10 years of those types of economic 
plans, Mr. Speaker, and those types of economic plans have put 
us in debt $15 billion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the members opposite continue to make noise. You know 
there’s an old saying: if you throw a stone in the dark and it hits 
something, if it makes a noise, you’ve hit something. And, Mr. 

Speaker, they know — they know — they know that their type 
of economics has put us in debt for more than 10 years. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, today they continue to talk about a set of 
economic plans that they don’t have. In the election last year, 
just over a year ago, Mr. Speaker, they talked about their plans 
for education — five-year freeze; five-year freeze for health 
care, Mr. Speaker. They didn’t talk about increasing 
investments in health care, education, or social programs at all, 
Mr. Speaker. In fact, they didn’t talk about anything but tax 
cuts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many, many more things I could talk 
about this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, but the members opposite 
continue to get upset. They don’t want to hear the truth, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t want to hear that we have the lowest rates 
in Canada. And I want to stress just one more time, Mr. 
Speaker, we have the lowest natural gas rates in the country, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
So Mr. Speaker, with that, I’d like to adjourn debate, Mr. 
Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Debate adjourned on division. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:59. 
 
 


