















































Hansard: June 18, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1883 
 June 18, 2001 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. This evening I have to my 
left, Ron Styles, who is the deputy minister for our department. 
Beside Mr. Styles is Terry Blomme, the executive director of 
the southern region. To my right is Carl Neggers, who is the 
assistant deputy minister of policy and planning. Behind me is 
Don Wincherauk, who is the assistant deputy minister for 
corporate services. And to Mr. Wincherauk’s left is Allan 
Widger, who is the executive director of engineering services. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good evening 
to the minister and her officials once again. I appreciate the 
opportunity to continue with our discussions on issues pertinent 
to the highways and transportation of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There is one question I’d like to start off with tonight, Madam 
Minister. The last time we met, I believe I asked you about the 
situation surrounding a bridge collapse in northern 
Saskatchewan. And at the time you went into some detail as to 
how that bridge was inspected, and the process by which the 
department inspects bridges on a regular basis, and how you 
categorize that. 
 
Part of my question at the time though was about liability. And 
I asked specifically if the department will have to assume 
liability or is prepared to assume liability in that particular case, 
and I think in the course of the rather lengthy response you gave 
me, you didn’t address that specific question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We are looking at the issue of liability, 
but it has not yet been resolved. And I would not want to 
respond in either the negative or the affirmative until we have 
had an opportunity to work through the issues. To respond in 
the House may put us in a position where we don’t want to be. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In studying the 
issue of liability, what kinds of issues are you . . . or I’m sorry, 
going to review in that particular instance? What is it that will 
concern you the most? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There are several issues that you have 
to look at. As you know we’re still reviewing what happened 
that led to that particular day. We have not yet received a report 
from the people that are doing the review, and then obviously 
the other issue is around the repair to the truck and trailer and 
Cat. 
 
That’s obviously an issue that we have to look at and work 
through, and the other issue . . . and the bridge has been 
reconstructed. I believe the bridge is now open. Those are some 

other issues that we’re looking through. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, I’d like to move to the area of new 
technologies. I indicated to the minister previously that I would 
like to discuss some of the things that are coming to the 
forefront in terms of new technologies, and see how the new 
technologies are being applied by the department in its ongoing 
efforts to improve the roads of this province. 
 
One of the specific areas of new technologies of course was 
something that we alluded to in some of our earlier discussions 
concerning asset management. I thank the minister for the 
detailed response she gave me. Some of the language is so 
technical I didn’t understand it. I did read through it. But I was 
wondering if, for the record and in terms of understanding this 
from a layman’s prospective, would the minister please give us 
a general overview on what asset management is and what the 
department achieves through the use of that particular 
technology? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Basically what we’re looking at is the 
life cycle of the asset. And the asset would be all of the 
highways, bridges, anything that has to do with transportation in 
the province of Saskatchewan that comes under public, I guess, 
ownership because they are owned by the public. 
 
And so what we do is we look at recapitalizing the asset. How 
do we make sure that we can apply proper maintenance and 
preservation to prolong the life of the asset in order to minimize 
the long-term costs of the asset? 
 
As well we do a conditioned rating of the asset. So you rate the 
condition of the roads in the province. Then you need to ensure 
that they’re properly preserved and maintained. And all of this 
is to minimize long-term cost in order to prolong the life cycle 
of the asset. I hope you understand that. But that’s basically 
layman’s . . . layperson’s terms for engineering . . . the way 
engineers approach our highways. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, I noticed in the written explanation 
you gave me that it isn’t always the worst highways that are 
fixed first. And I think that we can understand that in view of 
the importance of preserving what we’ve got and making the 
most efficient use. 
 
But is it ever the case where situations are deemed to be in need 
of attention, certain stretches of road, but that particular effort is 
overruled by somebody in the department? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can say to the member is that 
you’re trying to manage your long-term asset, but you have the 
basic public policy goal of trying to ensure public safety. And 
there will be times when it’s in the . . . is a benefit to preserve 
the asset which may not be as in rough a shape as some other 
particular part of the road system. 
 
On the other hand, there may be a safety question, and in terms 
of the long-term goal it would be best to look after the 
preservation and maintenance of a road. But one overrides the 
other, so it’s a matter of trying to balance the two. 



1884 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

Mr. Elhard: — As one of your officials, Mr. Blomme, would 
probably well attest, there was a stretch of highway north of 
Shaunavon, No. 37, that underwent a strengthening repair job 
last year. And most of the comments that came back to my 
office were: why in the world is the department fixing that 
stretch of road; it’s one of the best pieces of road we’ve got? 
Why didn’t they do this stretch? Why didn’t they do that 
stretch? So I can well appreciate that the department is under 
constant pressure to justify the efforts that they undertake in 
given areas as part of the asset management. 
 
The question I would like to pursue now, Madam Minister, is: I 
assume that it took a great deal of manpower and time in order 
to log all of the information to determine the various conditions 
of identified stretches of road and how they would fit into the 
system. Once that is accomplished, is there an ongoing effort by 
department people to inspect the highways? Is that done on a 
regular basis? Is it done on an annual basis so that new 
information can be put into the system so the whole procedure 
can be updated and new technologies applied in various areas of 
the highway system? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I understand it, all of our roads in 
the province are inspected on an annual basis and that 
information is put into the system, so we try and keep the 
system current. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Can the minister tell us roughly what kind of 
time that entails and what the cost would be to the department 
for the efforts put into updating that information? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The annual condition rating is done 
during the fall. It stretches over a six-week period. We do not 
. . . I can’t tell you precisely what it would cost. The department 
officials have talked about it in the past but it’s part of the work 
that people in the department do on an annual basis. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, I’d 
like to move to some of the other areas of new technologies that 
are currently being developed and in some instances are being 
applied by the department. 
 
At one point, Madam Minister, I asked a question, a written 
question in the House, and you provided me with a fairly 
detailed response again about the types of non-profit or external 
monies you spend, monies you spend on promoting and helping 
these agencies outside of the department directly. 
 
And I don’t recall from that list that I ever saw where the 
department has committed money to, say, the University of 
Saskatchewan or other technical institutes that are working 
toward the development of new technologies. I understand the 
Civil Engineering department at the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) is probably one of the leaders in Canada in 
working on new technologies. Does the department have some 
sort of informal arrangement with people like Professor 
Berthelet up at the U of S in developing new technologies that 
the department can put to use? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The department would, on a 
project-by-project basis, invest in research and development. 
The department might pay for something in its entirety, or the 
department might partner with some other group in order to 

advance research and technology in the province. 
 
And there are several arrangements that have been made with 
various groups to develop new technology. And we are working 
with Professor Berthelet at the University of Saskatchewan in 
developing a way to strengthen our thin membrane surface 
roads. And as a matter of fact, I was out at a project last week in 
the Plenty-Dodsland area where they are strengthening a TMS 
(thin membrane surface) around the inland terminal that’s been 
developed by the people in that area. 
 
(19:15) 
 
And the technology . . . we’re very optimistic about this 
technology. It looks as though it’s standing up. We’ve got . . . I 
think this is our third year of experience with some of the work 
that has been done in the province and we want to see where 
this takes us. But if this technology works, Canada and this 
province could become a leading innovator in the whole area of 
strengthening roads that were never built for the kinds of traffic 
that we’re presently experiencing. 
 
So we’re quite optimistic, but we have some more work that 
needs to be done in terms of seeing how these roads withstand 
the kind of wear and tear that they no doubt will receive over 
the next several years. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, is the chief obstacle to 
acceptance of this new technology just the fact that it is as yet 
experimental, that it’s only been available for a couple of years 
and you haven’t had that much experience with it? Or is there a 
professional and scientific obstacle that you’ve encountered as 
yet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I don’t think I would say it’s a matter 
of not believing in the technology. I think it’s a matter of 
spending public funds. You don’t want to go full tilt until we 
know whether or not it works. We’re quite . . . I think it’s fair to 
say we feel that it will work but we just don’t want to go full tilt 
into the technology until we’ve had some experience. 
 
The other thing is that this technology . . . it’s very scientific 
and so they have to test the soil conditions. It works in some 
parts of the province; it may not work in other parts of the 
province. We have, I believe, eight projects. And what this is is 
you’re amending the soil, depending on the type of soil, with 
certain ingredients in order to strengthen the roadbed. And you 
have to make sure that you amend it properly. There’s a lot of 
testing that goes on. The project I was at, I think there were two 
students, summer students from the College of Engineering that 
were involved in doing all of the testing. 
 
So it’s quite scientific. It’s not the old way of building a road 
because you have to keep amending the soil, the sub-grade, the 
bed of the TMS surface because it was never . . . basically it 
was never built to withstand this kind of traffic. And there’s 
cement by-product, there’s fly ash, and then there’s sand, and 
there’s gravel, and it just depends on the condition of the 
roadbed what you amend the soil with. 
 
And I think it looks positive, and I’m quite optimistic and I 
hope it works. But I don’t think we want to spend a lot of public 
money and go full tilt in this area if, you know, 10 years from 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1885 

 

now or 7 years from now it doesn’t work. And I don’t . . . I 
think it’s all part of trying to be accountable and responsible to 
the public and being careful. You know, I don’t want us to be 
overly cautious, but I think we need to be careful because we 
only have so much money and the demand is huge, as you 
know. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, for the sake of my colleague 
from Saltcoats, could you repeat that answer? I don’t think he 
understood it. He wants to know if you understood it. 
 
The new technology, as you can appreciate I’m sure given your 
position and the demands and the needs of the province is, as 
you indicated, promising. And not only — if my figures are 
right — not only will that technology have a dramatic potential 
savings, but it’s also an exportable technology. 
 
There is a huge potential for the entire highways building 
regime around the world, frankly, if that technology is proven 
out. So Saskatchewan has an opportunity not just to benefit 
locally but to set and establish a reputation around the world as 
sort of a leading-edge highways systems design that I’m hoping 
that will work out, frankly, and I hope that we can see the 
benefit of it as soon as possible in this province. 
 
Having talked about this particular type of technology, are there 
other projects? Are there other technologies that the minister is 
aware of that look promising, that look like they may have 
benefit for the province, and that the department is interested in 
supporting and pursuing? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well we have several projects, and 
we’re developing relationships with various 
Saskatchewan-based firms that have or can result in products or 
services that could benefit our department but also benefit 
markets around the world. And I’ll give you some examples, if 
you’re interested. 
 
One example involves a project from International Road 
Dynamics of Saskatoon to develop an automated, 
vehicle-monitoring system to collect truck movement and truck 
dynamics information. It’s using a global positioning satellite 
systems and geographical information systems. The system 
automates the collection of information and it audits vehicles 
involved in the province’s trucking partnership program. 
 
And I think that this system has a potential for a wide variety of 
uses in how we manage our fleets in the province. 
 
Another is the department is working with the Manitoba 
Department of Highways, the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Agri-Infrastructure Program, as well as Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool and other stakeholders, to quantify the benefits of central 
tire inflation systems — so reducing the inflation in the tire to 
see if that reduces road damage, tire wear, and vehicle 
maintenance. 
 
As well, we have a U.S. patent . . . this is our department, where 
we have some innovators inside the department that have 
developed a drum sand spreader which is used for sand sealing 
roads, and that looks very promising. The department has also 
developed two other pieces of equipment, a high-speed paint 
stripper . . . striper, and a side-dump box tarp system. And some 

of our employees in the department were recognized for their 
work this past month. 
 
We’ve designed a road-rail vehicle and the construction was 
contracted to Brandt Industries in Regina. And the vehicle can 
pull 15 loaded grain cars while on railway tracks and then it can 
lower to highway tires. And then it can raise itself to steel 
wheels. So it can travel on road and rail. 
 
And there are some other opportunities to develop and employ 
some new, innovative products, particularly using intelligent 
transportation systems. And there are opportunities to be 
pursued in the area of weigh-in-motion technology, road 
weather information systems, and an automated data collection 
that I think could improve the way we do business, and serve 
the public better. So there are a number of initiatives that we’re 
involved in in terms of new technology and we’re also involved 
in some research projects. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — To introduce guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thanks, Mr. Chair. Thanks to the critic 
and thanks to the minister for this interruption. It’s my pleasure 
tonight to introduce to members of the legislature the group of 
men and women who are seated in the back pew of the 
Speaker’s gallery, compromising the Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Rotary Club and some of their guests. Mr. Speaker, or Mr. 
Chair, the Moose Jaw Wakamow Rotary Club is a very active 
Rotary Club in the city of Moose Jaw, the younger, if I may 
say, of the two Rotary Clubs, and a Rotary Club that I have had 
the pleasure to be involved with, Mr. Chair. 
 
I would like to, while not introducing each one of them, but to 
point out the current president of the Moose Jaw Wakamow 
Rotary Club, Judy Vermette and the incoming president, Mr. 
Dave Orr. We’ll be touring the building, Mr. Chair, and 
observing the activities here in the House for awhile and then 
touring the building. 
 
So I’d ask all members present to give a very warm welcome to 
the Moose Jaw Wakamow Rotary Club. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — It’s not normally my duty to do this on behalf 
of the official opposition but we’d like to welcome the guests 
from Moose Jaw here as well. I hope that they’re interested in 
highways and new technologies. We’re going to be discussing 
that for awhile yet, and I appreciate their interest in coming here 



1886 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

tonight. 
 
Madam Minister, when you mentioned some of the projects that 
the department has a special interest in, I took particular note of 
two and I think that these two will probably represent sort of the 
opposite extremes of what are going to be strong potentialities. 
 
The IRD (International Road Dynamics Inc.) activities I have 
followed with some fascination. I’ve visited their plant; I’ve 
talked to their president; I read their press releases; and they are 
making sales on almost a monthly basis in the States. They are a 
very active and advanced technology company. 
 
I think it’s ironic, frankly, that we would have a company that 
can produce a certain level of capability, technical capability, 
that is so widely used in the States and so highly recognized, 
and yet we’ve had so little opportunity to put some of their 
technology to work here. 
 
Now if I could summarize what I see as the problem, we simply 
don’t have enough truck traffic here to justify the costs. Is that 
what the minister believes of this technology, and would you 
elaborate a little bit as to how you think IRD’s technology will 
be employed in Saskatchewan in the future. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The member is correct. We do not have 
enough truck traffic. And we’ve had the discussions with IRD 
with regard to that problem but we believe as we begin to 
replace some of our capital asset base in the province, that there 
may be an opportunity for us to partner with them on the 
technology. 
 
But I can tell you that we have a long-term partnership where 
IRD has developed the automated truck monitoring system at 
their expense and they’re leasing the working system back to 
the department over a minimum of a three-year period. 
 
We expect that the system will cost the department about 
$560,000, and we fully expect that the system will be 
implemented later this summer. We’ve to date paid about 
$104,000 to IRD for the system. And by the fall we are 
expecting to pay IRD approximately $15,500 per month for the 
remaining 24 months, at which time our department . . . our 
department’s partnership payment of $432,000 for the system 
development costs and the $70,000 cost for the committed 
purchase of 20 in-truck units will be completed. 
 
So we are trying to assist IRD with their development cost as 
much as we can, and we have entered into a partnership with 
them. And after the three-year period is over, the leasing costs I 
believe will be reduced to about $1,600 to cover administrative 
costs of the collection of data from the trucks. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — With leave, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And thank 

you to my colleague, the member from Cypress Hills, and to my 
colleague, the Minister of Highways and Transportation. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, you might recall a few days ago in this 
legislature I gave a member’s statement on volunteerism in one 
of the community groups in my . . . in my constituency, the 
Dieppe Community Association, who held a very important 
event a week ago Saturday in the recognition of the 
International Year of the Volunteer. 
 
And I’m very pleased to have to introduce through you and to 
all my members in the legislature some members of the 
executive who organized this event a week ago Saturday. I’m 
very pleased they took the time out to come down to the 
legislature here. 
 
Dieppe Community Association, for those of you who may not 
be aware or do not know the city that well — as you are jogging 
west on Dewdney Avenue just past the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police), you will hit McCarthy Boulevard, and once 
you hit McCarthy . . . (inaudible) . . . Courtney and all the area 
to your right up to the creek is called Dieppe Community 
Association. 
 
And I’m very pleased to have these members who I would like 
you to, if I could maybe just take . . . can bear your indulgence 
to introduce them individually. They are Jody Tetlock, who has 
organized the event, Jody; Patti Cossette; Irene Crossweller; 
Kari Siebenich; Tyler Tomlinson; Carol Biberdorf; Bonnie 
Kreklewetz; and Norm and Glee Chadwick. 
 
And I just, in concluding my remarks, would like to point out 
that Norm was the volunteer that was given a lifetime honorary 
membership for his years of contribution as a volunteer to 
Dieppe. And I would just like to ask all of you to recognize 
these very important volunteers from my constituency and 
representing the Dieppe Community Association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(19:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and once again on 
behalf of the official opposition I extend our welcome to these 
guests as well. 
 
You know volunteers are very important in this province. In 
small communities we find them exceptionally important. They 
are the ingredient that holds a community together in many 
cases and . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — And even fixes the highways. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — And we even fix the highways in some 
instances, that’s true, yes. 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1887 

 

However, moving along, Madam Minister, in view of your 
comments a few minutes ago about the partnership agreement 
you’ve got with IRD, would you indicate, for the record, does 
that partnership commit the department to any future activities 
with IRD? Are you anticipating being the beneficiary of some 
of the technology they’ve developed and will be selling around 
the world? And are there any other issues that this partnership 
agreement addresses but that you didn’t allude to in your 
response? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As I mentioned to the member, Mr. 
Chair, we enter into specific project partnership arrangements. 
Once the project is over then it’s over, so we don’t have an 
on-going relationship. But if other projects should arise, 
obviously our department is interested in supporting research 
and development in the province particularly in the area of 
transportation and we would be extremely interested given 
certain funds being available. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I think in your response 
earlier you alluded to 20 units and I missed some of what you 
said because of some of the confusion behind me here frankly. 
 
Would you describe that then as a test project that you are 
putting in place and are there things that you expect to derive 
from this project? Is there information you expect to derive that 
you think will be useable throughout the trucking industry? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re installing the 20 in-truck units. 
We’re going to see how that works for at least a year and 
depending on the outcome we may be prepared to install the 
in-truck units in other trucks. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I can understand the benefit 
to that type of technology. I think it has outstanding potential in 
terms of regulatory issues and damage, frankly, to our roads. 
 
There is a Big Brother element to that however that does 
concern a number of people. Have you weighed the pros and 
cons of that kind of technology as opposed to the limitations it 
would create on individual freedom, frankly? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can share with the member is 
that the issue has been talked about within the department and 
it’s been talked about at our trucking advisory committee . . . 
because the member raises an important point. But I think the 
other important public policy issue is that trucking is consuming 
our asset in a sense. We’ve seen a significant increase in the 
volume of truck traffic and also the volume of goods that are 
being transported over our publicly funded infrastructure, 
meaning our roadways. And so you have to take these things 
into consideration. 
 
And I think in terms of being accountable and responsible as we 
are to be as a department, we have a strategic plan in the 
department. It talks about accountability, responsibility. You 
have to weigh these matters. And then you have the whole issue 
of the life cycle of a road. And we talked about that earlier in 
terms of our asset management and how do you extend that 
asset as much as you can. And if this is a piece of technology 
that can assist us in extending our asset and helping us manage 
our capital asset, then I think it’s something that we want to 
pursue. 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, 
frankly if I get passed on the highway at 130 kilometres an hour 
by a big truck one more time, I’m going to be supporting that 
— that particular technology. Because I think there is a — 
while there are some issues around freedom and that kind of 
complication — I think that we have a larger issue in terms of 
public safety. Not just the debilitation of the roads themselves, 
but in terms of public safety. 
 
And I’m quite concerned frankly — driving the No. 1 Highway 
as frequently as I do at all hours of the day and night — the 
speed with which some trucks catch up and pass me. So I 
probably have done myself a disservice in terms of the trucking 
association, but I think that that is an issue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I just want to support the member 
because I drive the highways too, and I can’t believe the 
number of times that I’m driving at 109 kilometres an hour — I 
will admit I’m speeding a bit, but I’m told the RCMP don’t stop 
you until you’re at about 112 kilometres an hour — and these 
great big trucks . . . B-trains passing you. 
 
And I’m with you, and it’s something that I have raised. It’s 
unacceptable because speed does affect what happens to our 
road base; it does. So it’s not just a matter of having these 
in-truck units. But we know from the research that’s been done 
that it’s not only weight that affects the condition of our roads 
but also the speed at which those trucks carrying that weight go 
on our roads. 
 
And I’m committed to doing something about it because it’s 
unacceptable from a public safety point of view and also for the 
condition of the road to have these trucks speeding at more than 
100 kilometres an hour. So I’m putting it on the public record, 
so I guess we’ll both be in trouble with the trucking industry. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I want to digress just briefly 
from the new technologies subject that we’ve been pursuing 
here tonight, and in view of the fact that the minister mentioned 
the trucking advisory forum, I want to just talk about that just 
briefly if we might. 
 
I understand that that forum by press release was called together 
in October of 2000 and it was to address issues related to safety 
and economic benefits to the province that the trucking industry 
would be able to provide. 
 
I’d like to ask if I could, Madam Minister, how many meetings 
have you held to date, and what issues have come to the 
forefront as a result of those meetings? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The forum has had five meetings. I 
understand that the report is practically ready. They’re just 
sending it out for one more opportunity to have a discussion and 
then it will be presented to me. They have covered 
infrastructure, safety, and weights and dimensions. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Has the 
committee talked at all about what appears to be an increasingly 
severe shortage of professional drivers for the industry, not just 
in Saskatchewan but across the country? The papers are full of 
ads looking for drivers by any number of companies, and it 
appears to me that that might be a pretty negative factor when it 



1888 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

comes to the impact, the positive impact that the trucking 
industry will have on our economy. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The forum has dealt with the issue. In 
fact two drivers attended the forum, discussing how we might 
be able to promote trucking as an occupation for people in the 
province. And, as I understand it, there have been ongoing 
discussions between Post-Secondary Education and the trucking 
industry to try and see if there is a way that SIAST 
(Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and Technology) 
can address this issue. 
 
As well, I know that there have been some privately funded 
schools that have been developed in the province with the 
trucking industry to try and promote the industry and allow 
people to have access to training. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, through the chairman, to 
address this question. I’m not sure where I’m going here. It 
might be a bit dangerous. I might be treading on sacrosanct 
grounds, but would you tell me what the department does, what 
role the department plays, if any, in the regulation of or the 
approval of some of these private training programs. Is there 
any departmental involvement there whatsoever? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I can tell you as the former minister of 
Post-Secondary Education that the Department of Highways 
and Transportation would have no involvement in approving 
the private vocational schools for driver training or truck-driver 
training. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — As you may well appreciate, Madam Minister, 
the reason I bring that up is that when there’s a shortage of 
professional drivers like we are experiencing across the country 
right now, that is seen as an opportunity by some people, some 
less scrupulous people, to make a quick dollar. And I’ve had 
complaints brought to me about just that kind of a situation 
developing, where schools are offered . . . huge admission fees 
are charged, and the result is often not just disappointing but 
disastrous for the people who’ve laid out hard-earned money 
and sometimes tough to come by money for training. And what 
happens is their training is inferior and often these students are 
not even able to pass a regular driver’s test. So I would like to 
have on the record tonight some of those concerns that had been 
brought to me in that regard, and maybe we can take that to the 
appropriate department for review and consideration. 
 
Returning to the new technologies topic that we started with 
earlier, I want to ask about the central tire inflation program. I 
understand that there has been quite a bit of effort expended on 
this particular initiative, more or less with inconclusive results. 
Can you tell me what role the department has played, how 
much effort the department has put into this, and whether or not 
you’ve had anything positive come out of that whole process. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well your question’s very timely 
because I have had an opportunity to be briefed on this issue a 
few times by the department. And I have a number of tapes in 
my office, videotapes, if you’d like to look at this whole issue. 
And there are some people that would love to explain it to you 
because they have been quite involved with the project. 

There was a demonstration project that was conducted in the 
fall of 1999 near Wawota, Saskatchewan. And at that time it 
looked as though there could be some benefits associated with 
variable tire pressure technology. Then an experiment was 
undertaken near Dafoe, Saskatchewan during July to further 
quantify the results of the work at Wawota and determine if 
variable tire pressure could lessen the damage associated with 
increasing truck axle weights. 
 
The initial results seem to confirm that there are benefits. There 
are benefits associated with variable tire pressure, but there’s a 
lot more work to be done. And I — just as someone who comes 
from a social science background — you want to make sure that 
your experiment and the results are both reliable and verifiable. 
 
And I think there’s, just from an observer’s point of view, I 
think there’s some more work to be done. The work will be 
analyzed, the data will be analyzed, and then a report will be 
produced. But my own observation is that we need to do some 
more work in this area before we go full tilt. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, from the reports, the 
anecdotal reports I have received on that whole initiative, it 
would seem that at best the results are mixed. I am concerned I 
think about the cost associated with this particular experiment. 
And I am also concerned about the impact on the roads that 
were volunteered for this experiment by the various RMs (rural 
municipality). 
 
So would the minister confirm for us tonight the cost of this 
particular project; what the department has paid out and what 
other participants in the experiment have paid out; and assure us 
that the RMs that were involved, that volunteered their roads for 
this particular project, will be reimbursed for any damage done 
to those roads. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The total cost was $680,000. I should 
tell you the roads were repaired, so the damage was repaired — 
$380,000 came from the federal government, $300,000 came 
from the province. And Manitoba participated, the Government 
of Manitoba, participated with some in kind lab work and so on. 
So that’s what I can tell you. 
 
When you say that you’ve heard anecdotal evidence that it was 
mixed, the data is being analyzed right now and we expect a 
final report. But just based on what I saw from the videos, I’m 
not yet convinced. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I’m wondering, as part of the 
experiment, whether the issue of stability is going to be taken 
into consideration. If you have a truck weighted at maximum 
loads and you’re going to decrease the tire inflation to 
accommodate the weight, will that impact the stability of the 
truck and the fears or concerns of the shifting of the load while 
that truck is moving down the road? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can share with the member is 
that there was some initial work done with the National 
Research Council. It didn’t appear to have any impact upon the 
stability of the truck and the weights as long as they kept the 
steering axle at the same pressure. I hope you understand that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — At the same pressure, I assume means the 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1889 

 

normal operating pressure. Is that right? Okay. 
 
Let’s move to another area if we can for the time being. I want 
to talk about new pavements, new mixes of pavements, new 
design for pavements. 
 
And this particular issue was brought to my attention as a result 
of a paving contract west of Herbert on the No. 1 Highway in 
the Rush Lake area. As I mentioned earlier, I drive that stretch 
of road every week and I remember the project happening very 
clearly. I was often slowed down to accommodate that 
particular paving project. 
 
But within weeks of the job being done, rutting started to 
appear, and in some conversations with individuals who know 
this area of endeavour a whole lot better than I do, it was 
suggested to me that the rutting came as a result of a new type 
of pavement design and mix that was tried on that stretch of 
road. 
 
Would you please elaborate for us what that new mix or 
pavement design might be and why the rutting occurred? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Basically we’re using the same 
specifications. In the case that the member is referring to, the 
department advises me that we just didn’t have the right 
aggregate in the mix of pavement and that was the problem. 
The aggregate wasn’t as good a quality as it should have been 
and that caused the rutting. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well if that’s the case, Madam Minister, then I 
guess that leads me into a whole different line of questioning. 
Because as opposed to problems experienced by new 
technology as unexpectedly, what we have here is a problem 
that has developed as a result of error or misjudgement or 
something of that nature. I mean if we didn’t have the right 
aggregate there, there has to be a reason why it wasn’t there. 
We would normally not abide that kind of a problem. 
 
Could you explain to me exactly who’s at fault when it comes 
down to having the improper aggregate in place? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We’re still doing a bunch of lab work 
to try and figure out what happened. And it appears as though it 
was just a bad mix with the aggregate that was there and what 
was mixed with that aggregate. So we can’t . . . we believe that 
there was a problem with the aggregate, but there’s lab work 
that’s being done because the result wasn’t at all what we 
expected. And so we need to know exactly what went wrong so 
it doesn’t happen in the future. 
 
So I’m not prepared to say at this moment it was human error or 
it wasn’t human error because we don’t know. And that’s why 
we’re . . . there’s further lab work that’s being done in terms of 
taking test samples to try and determine why this particular 
stretch of road rutted. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. 
Madam Minister, in a situation like that, who’s responsible for 
quality control? I assume that that was a government-designed 
project that was tendered out and contracted by an independent 
contractor to complete the project. Does the government have 
their own quality control specialists in a situation like that or is 

that left to the independent engineering firm or construction 
firm that does the job? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well, we obviously would set the specs 
for the road. The contractor would be in charge of making sure 
the quality was there and then we would do the inspection and 
determine whether or not the quality was there. So we would do 
a final inspection. 
 
But, you know, this road started to rut after a certain period of 
time and we’re still in the process of trying to determine exactly 
what happened. We don’t believe it was a problem with the 
specs; we believe that it was a problem with the aggregate and 
the mix and it just didn’t work. 
 
And I should also tell you that there has been a similar problem 
developed in Manitoba and Alberta, so this isn’t something 
that’s peculiar to Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, also along that stretch of road 
I notice that there are a number of patches — small patches 
about the size of the table here — throughout the length of that 
particular project. Is that patching connected to the aggregate 
problem and the rutting issue that we’re talking about or was 
there some other weakness or failure in the roadbed that those 
patches were necessitated? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Well this is a very timely question 
because I am far more observant on new stretches of road and 
patches, because my question is why are all these big black 
patches, big squares on the road? You know, what did the 
paving contractor do improperly? And what I’m advised, and 
there are several surfaces in the province that I’ve noticed this 
with, but I’m advised is that when the department goes along 
and does an inspection, if the pavement is a bit porous you run 
the risk of water getting into your roadbed which then causes 
heaving because we freeze and thaw, freeze and thaw. And so 
what is done is there is a topping that’s put over those porous 
surfaces in order to ensure that water doesn’t get into the 
sub-grade and into the road so that it doesn’t heave. So it’s not a 
matter of someone going out and digging up the road and 
putting a patch on it. So it’s not patching, it’s a matter of trying 
to protect the pavement so that the water doesn’t get through to 
the sub-bed or sub-base and cause heaving. 
 
So that’s what . . . they go along, they inspect it. If it’s too 
porous they put on a basically like a water or a waterproofing 
surface on it, and that’s why you see these black patches on our 
roads. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister, the porousness 
that you’ve talked about on that particular site, is that related to 
the aggregate problem again or is that as a matter of fact of the 
process by which the pavement is laid? Is that something that 
comes out of the pavement layer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — It could be a number of factors. It 
might be the paver. It could be the temperature. I should also 
tell you because I asked this question: who’s paying for this 
waterproofing surface — are we paying for it as in the 
taxpayers of the province? And we don’t. As part of the 
contractor’s contract, he or she will pay for those porous 
surfaces to be basically waterproofed. 



1890 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. You have 
basically answered my next question. So I’m going to refer now 
to a question that I asked you in written form earlier in the 
session. It had to do with the newly-constructed interchange at 
Pasqua Street and Highway 11. 
 
And I asked about some repairs that were ongoing there and in 
your response you said the pavement repairs were done to fix 
minor deficiencies in the exit ramps. They were identified last 
fall but due to winter freeze-up the work could not be 
completed until this spring. And the repairs were completed at 
no additional cost to the department. 
 
Could you elaborate for us a little bit about those minor 
deficiencies? What were they about? What happened there? 
Was that an issue again of design specifications, or was it an 
issue of not actually getting the proper compaction in place? 
What is the specific there? 
 
(20:00) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Some of the work that was done on the 
ramps was basically the waterproofing. So there was some 
problems with the texture of the pavement. As well, the 
contractor had to haul his earthmoving equipment over the 
finished product, and they laid down these big steel plates 
which caused some denting or divots in the roads so they had to 
come back and repair that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Through the 
chairman, again to the minister, if there are any other new 
technologies that we haven’t discussed tonight, I’d be pleased 
to come back to the subject at another time but for now I think 
we’ll move on to a different area. 
 
I want to talk about the strategic rural roads partnership 
program. As you’re probably aware, that is one program that 
your department has pushed rather extensively in areas where 
there’s a considerable amount of highway failure. It is also one 
of the programs that has raised the ire of rural politicians and 
residents, more so than almost anything else that the department 
has proposed. 
 
Now I understand that you have nine existing agreements, if I 
remember a comment you made earlier, and I’m wondering if 
those nine agreements that you eluded to represent the $4 
million that was spent last year in the budget, and will the $6 
million allotted in this year’s budget give us an additional 12 or 
13 agreements or will they, will this money be ongoing as part 
of some of the earlier agreements? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We now have 12 agreements. We’ve 
been at these estimates for so long that we’ve been able to 
conclude three additional agreements. These 12 agreements will 
now keep 337 kilometres of TMS dust free. As I said, the 
program targets funding towards maintaining and improving 
our dust-free surfaces as much as possible. 
 
As I said, that there is $6 million in the budget this year. That’s 
a $2 million increase over last year’s budget. And as I also said, 
we want to work with local governments to develop these 
initiatives and partnerships so that we can manage traffic as 
much as we can on a regional basis. 

We are not interested at all in entering into partnerships if the 
RMs don’t want to. And we have the example of Vanguard 
where they initially entered into a partnership, they received a 
lot of pressure from their local ratepayers, and two out of the 
three RMs decided they no longer wanted to be in the 
partnership. So it’s not something that we’re forcing on people; 
it’s something that we support because we’re trying to keep as 
many of our TMS surfaces as dust free as possible given the 
budget that we have. 
 
And I recognize that it’s controversial in some quarters, but it’s 
one of our tools to try and manage our provincial highway 
system with the resources we have. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, does that program achieve 
any practical purpose other than to just postpone the repairs that 
are necessary though? 
 
You know one of the reasons for carrying out this particular 
initiative, I believe, by the department is that they’re trying to 
address the ongoing problem of too much grain moving down 
those roads, too much weight, too many tonnes. But the 
assumption, when you go to one of these strategic road 
initiatives, the assumption always is that the bulk of the traffic 
is grain. On the other hand, it ignores the other traffic that needs 
the use of that road, and as a result of the weight limitations, 
doesn’t have access to that road. 
 
And I’ll give this as an example. I know that you just entered 
into an agreement with the RM in the Richmound area — I 
forgot the exact number of the RM — but you have an 
agreement there which takes all of the grain traffic off of the 
TMS road that runs from No. 21 past Fox Valley and out to the 
community of Richmound. But in talking to some of the 
business people in that small community, they’re very worried 
by the fact that trucks that deliver groceries to their community 
for instance, will not come there any longer because they’re not 
going to put a grocery truck on a gravel road. 
 
And there’s a small General Motors dealership that operates in 
that community. At least has until just the other day; I believe 
they announced that they’re closing. But one of the, one of the 
issues that concerned them the most was that auto haulers 
wouldn’t bring in their new car and truck product over a gravel 
road, in effect, strangling that dealership for access to product. 
 
And while there might be some sympathy for moving the 
grain-related traffic to an alternate route, that doesn’t 
satisfactorily serve the needs of other businesses that also 
depend on trucks. 
 
So while you might win on one hand, you’re really losing on 
the other hand in many respects; affecting, of course, the other 
part of your particular portfolio and that is Rural Revitalization. 
So, Madam Minister, I would appreciate it if we could look at 
this initiative in the light of the entire economic needs in rural 
Saskatchewan, not just specifically the issues raised by grain 
traffic. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — As you know, the RM can permit them 
to go onto the TMS, so arrangements can be made. And I would 
make this observation, and this is just an observation that I’ve 
had in terms of travelling on some of the gravel roads in 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1891 

 

northern Saskatchewan. There are grocery trucks that go over 
those roads to get to communities to provide groceries to people 
who live in northern Saskatchewan. Your member for the 
Spiritwood area would know that there are communities that are 
serviced by gravel roads and there are trucks that go over those 
gravel roads that carry groceries to those communities. 
 
The second point that I would make is that these are partnership 
arrangements between the RMs and the department. And we 
have many more RMs that are wanting to enter into agreements 
with us than we have money, so it’s not as though we’re busy 
promoting these agreements. My observation is that there are 
many RMs that are very worried about the future of their TMS. 
Their residents want to have a dust-free surface and they want 
to enter into partnerships. 
 
And I would just make this observation from my experience on 
the Vanguard road. Now that trucks are back on that road, we’re 
trying to maintain that road as best as we can, and there are 
citizens that are upset that the alternate truck route arrangement 
was not kept by the three RMs in that area because they’re . . . 
With the rain that happened about a month ago or six weeks 
ago, parts of that road are beginning to fail again. So it’s a 
matter of trying to balance things. 
 
The other thing is that, you know, weights . . . vehicles can 
travel over those roads if they’re under a particular weight. And 
I’m sure that if the business is talking to the RMs that they 
could be permitted to travel over those roads. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I’m glad you brought up the 
area of the No. 43 Highway from No. 4 through to Vanguard 
and points east. That highway has caused me a considerable 
amount of concern and I have had people approach me on both 
sides of the equation as well, as recently as yesterday in fact. 
 
But I do want to deal specifically with some of the issues 
related to No. 43. As you are aware, your department decided 
that it should have an 8-tonne weight limitation imposed on it. 
There were a number of people in the area who felt that they 
couldn’t live with that particular situation and others who 
thought that it was an acceptable alternative. And I know you 
were lobbied pretty intensively by some individuals who felt 
that it was so onerous that their businesses wouldn’t survive 
frankly. 
 
But I’ve learned recently that when the Department of 
Highways went out there to erect the signs, they sent a sign 
crew out there, they spent quite a bit of time bolting the signs to 
the posts and actually drilling the holes so they could put the 
signs in place. They also found out that there was not an 
acceptable alternative route usable for that truck traffic. 
 
Now, Madam Minister, I might not like the alternate route 
program that the department has implemented, but certainly if 
the local RMs agree to it, I think that I am the last person that 
has a right to criticize it. But I do have a right to ask questions 
about why the department would go to the expense of having 
the signs mounted and erected without a suitable alternative in 
place for that truck traffic to even use. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — There were basically two phases to the 
alternate truck route and the signs were put up on the municipal 

road that was going to be the alternate truck route. But we knew 
that there had to be additional construction and that was going 
to be the second phase. 
 
So I guess our officials would say that the signs were only on 
the municipal road that was going to be used as the alternate 
truck route. And we recognized that in order for the alternate 
truck route to be where it was going to be into the future, that 
additional capital construction needed to occur. But no signs 
were put along that part of the grid. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I understand there were three 
RMs involved in that entire project. Can you tell us for the 
record tonight how many kilometres of road were in place that 
you felt were usable, and in which RM that particular stretch of 
road existed? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — The area that needed to be constructed 
was approximately 13 kilometres and it was in RM 106, but the 
alternate truck route took us from 4 to Vanguard, and that was 
in the other two municipalities. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I think I was a bit troubled, Madam Minister, 
by the assertion that we could get an alternate truck route there 
at a very minimal cost. I think somebody threw out a figure of 
$5,000 a kilometre at one point, and I don’t know any roads that 
can be built that would be suitable for truck traffic of any kind 
for that kind of money. I mean $5,000 a kilometre might just 
get your machinery started and a few men out there, but it’s not 
going to build much road, and especially if you’re going to put 
a lot of heavy grain-related trucks on that particular piece of 
road. 
 
I can’t imagine a $5,000 road standing up to that kind of use 
and abuse, frankly. And in view of the exceptionally low 
estimate of the cost, I’m wondering maybe whether the local 
people didn’t have some sober second thoughts about the 
wisdom of even getting involved in this particular project. 
 
Going back to Highway 43 though, I understand just recently 
the department went into some of the areas that were most 
broken up, areas that had basically gone back to gravel, and in 
an effort to improve the road did some milling and mixing of 
the product that was there, bladed it, graded it, and had it in 
really quite nice shape. But they omitted one small step that 
could have made that investment much more practical and 
long-lasting. They had an opportunity at that point to try some 
of the fly ash cement mix that would have prevented moisture 
from allowing damage to that road to become excessive. And 
for the sake of a few dollars, a whole lot of dollars were wasted. 
 
And, Madam Minister, I would like to ask you if this is the 
approach that is commonly used by the department — save a 
few dollars here because we don’t have it, but ultimately ending 
up squandering or wasting a fairly significant amount of money 
on any given project. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell you is we’re doing the 
design work right now on that road to see whether or not this is 
the kind of technology that could be used on that particular 
road. 



1892 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, it seems that my questions 
are awfully timely tonight. That’s the third or fourth instance 
that you’ve been right on top of it. I appreciate the effort you’re 
putting into this particular exchange tonight. 
 
I understand that again with Highway 43 that there was a 
directive sent out just last week I believe that several crews 
from the southwest — probably including Cadillac, maybe 
Swift Current, Maple Creek, and Shaunavon or selected people 
from those particular sites — will be going to Highway 43 to do 
some patching and sealing again. Now can the minister confirm 
that and is that the most economical and prudent way to spend 
money on that particular highway? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t believe three crews are going 
over to that particular stretch of road. We’re sticking to our . . . 
we have a schedule of maintenance in the southern part of the 
province. We made a commitment, I made a commitment, to 
those RMs that we would try and maintain that road as best as 
we could given that the truck traffic is now back on the road. 
 
As I said, we’re doing the design work right now. We can’t go 
and do capital construction on that road this year because we 
already have done our winter tendering and our spring tendering 
and this was not part of the mix. We had an alternate truck route 
in place when we did our spring tendering so I can tell the 
member that. 
 
I want to make a correction, too, as well, member. I said that 
that 13-kilometre stretch of road was in 106; it’s also in 107. So 
it’s not just in 106. 
 
So what I can tell the member is there will be no capital 
construction on that road this year because our tendering has 
already been let but we are doing the design work. So that gives 
the people some cause for hope that maybe next year, you 
know, with resources we might be able to use the technology 
that’s been developed at the University of Saskatchewan on I 
think it’s a 10-kilometre stretch of road that is really . . . needs 
some work. 
 
And I should also tell you that when we had the meeting here at 
the legislature with the RMs, I said that I . . . you know let’s 
enter into a partnership. Let’s each bring our money to the table. 
And I fully expect the RMs to honour that commitment. That 
we had so much money to spend and they had some money to 
spend on the alternate truck route; let’s all bring our money to 
the table and try and fix that road. And I expect them to keep 
their commitment to me because I’ve kept my commitment to 
them. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, will the commitment the 
RMs make to this particular project be a one-time-only effort or 
do you anticipate it to be, do they believe it to be, an ongoing 
commitment that you’re expecting from them? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No, it’s not an ongoing effort. It’s a 
commitment that we made in this building that we would all 
bring our money to the table in order to service the public along 
that road in order to deal . . . in order to deal with the political 
issues that they were grappling with at the local level and the 
political issues that I was grappling with at the provincial level. 
 

And I’ve honoured my commitment. And I expect them to 
honour theirs. My word is my bond and I expect their word to 
be their bond. And we’ll see what happens. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well I appreciate that, Madam Minister, and 
I’m not questioning your word or theirs for that matter. What I 
am asking though is if they have the money to come to the table 
for this particular agreement now, would the provincial 
government suggest to them that, well you’ve had money to do 
this, why don’t you contribute a certain amount of money on an 
ongoing basis for the maintenance of this particular highway? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — No. I don’t expect ongoing money. But 
we had a discussion in this building to try and solve a problem. 
We had an agreement. And I am honouring my word. We’re 
doing the design work on this road right now. I expect them to 
honour their word and it’s about next year. It’s not about 
ongoing maintenance. Our job is to maintain the roads. That’s 
not their job. 
 
But we were going to construct 13 kilometres of grid road 
together. I said okay, you don’t want this agreement. Let’s take 
our money and put it into this highway. And that was our 
agreement. I’m honouring my side of the bargain and I expect 
them to honour theirs. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, to the minister, I’m sure 
that everybody involved in the agreement are honourable 
people. I expect they will keep their word as well. 
 
Madam Minister, in view of the effort that was made to repair 
the broken parts of that road where the milling happened and 
the grading . . . and the blading and the grading . . . that was 
accomplished, but before it was sealed we had some wet 
weather and of course truck traffic went through there and 
vehicles of other sizes went through there and cut it up badly. 
 
What is the plan now for those particular pieces of road? What 
does the department plan to do to make those broken stretches 
driveable? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Before we entered into the partnership 
agreement with them we knew that there were parts of that road 
that were failing and that’s why we wanted the alternate truck 
route agreement. 
 
When the agreement . . . when the RMs were under enormous 
political pressure from their citizens to get out of the agreement, 
we indicated that . . . Our position didn’t change. There were 
parts of that road that were going to fail. And with the rain and 
with the truck traffic that went back on that road, there were 
parts of the road that did fail. 
 
We . . . I mean it has to dry out. It’ll be bladed. It’ll be gravel 
until we get there, next year hopefully, with our agreement to 
fix parts of that road, to rebuild parts of that road. 
 
So we’re not going to be going in and patching it if our 
intention is to have their money and our money start to rebuild 
that road. It would be a waste of money. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, there are similar kinds of 
questions associated with other roads that I won’t take time to 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1893 

 

pursue tonight. I think that if your agreement is firm with the 
RMs in that case, I have no reason to disbelieve that your 
agreement wouldn’t be equally firm with other RMs if you’re 
prepared to enter into those agreements. 
 
I do have a few questions, though. I wanted to ask about 
equipment. I asked you for a list of equipment that the 
department was planning to purchase this year. And I recently 
found out that some equipment that was bought by the 
department in years just recently past appears to be inadequate 
for the job. And I’m referring specifically to single-axle oilers 
that were bought for oiling use in road construction projects. 
Prior to that, I understand that the department always used 
tandem-axle oilers which could carry a large volume of oil. 
 
Now all of a sudden somebody in their wisdom has decided to 
go to single-axle oilers, which on primary-weighted roads can 
carry a full load, but on secondary roads have to cut their load 
back about 3,000 litres. Now while that in itself may not be a 
problem, what you’ve got is two or three or four tandem gravel 
trucks backed up waiting to dump their load for use with an 
oiler that can only accommodate maybe one truck at a time. 
And there’s a lot of time lost, a lot of inefficient use of 
personnel and equipment as a result of that. Would the minister 
explain for us whose idea it was to go to single-axle oilers? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — We don’t have the people here that can 
help me answer the question, so what I will do is I will respond 
to you again in writing if that’s acceptable to the member. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I appreciate your offer to 
answer our question in writing. You’ve been very prompt with 
most of your other promises in that regard and I appreciate that. 
 
The reason I raised this, Madam Minister, is that this is a real 
faux pas. I mean this is a big issue. Because when you have 
trucks a long ways away from their source of oil, and you have 
gravel trucks that are handling much larger loads of material 
than the single-axle oilers can accommodate, you have a 
tremendous loss of productivity. And frankly with the jobs and 
the amount of work necessary for the department to complete, 
we can’t afford that kind of lost productivity. 
 
One individual I’ve talked to recently suggested to me that, 
basically, he worked four hours a day because of this particular 
change, and that is just unacceptable. So I think that when those 
kind of decisions are made, it might look practical from a paper 
point of view, but the implications in the field — especially 
when there are long distances to travel for replenishing the oil 
supply and the gravel supply — you simply can’t afford to have 
trucks sitting there hours on end waiting to be put to work while 
some guy is off getting another supply of oil. 
 
Madam Minister, one other little issue that was brought to my 
attention recently was the excess oil that was purchased by the 
department last fall. If you recall, the former minister of 
Highways indicated that the weather was — well let me go back 
a little bit. The department had found an extra $12 million to 
spend on roads because of extra oil and gas revenue that the 
government had accumulated. That was put to a variety of 
projects and helped get the government or the department a 
jump-start on the winter tendering schedule, if I recall. But it 
was only a matter of a couple weeks later, maybe a month, that 

the minister announced that the weather had been so good that 
they’d spent another $12 million. 
 
Now I have reason to believe, Madam Minister, that that $12 
million was spent quite unexpectedly. It wasn’t a planned 
expenditure at all — that lots of oil was bought in anticipation 
of the good weather and the projects, but unfortunately more oil 
was bought than could be used in the time that the fall season 
allowed. When you buy that servicing oil or that patching oil, it 
has a tendency to freeze when it’s stored in bulk containers and 
the temperature hits minus 25 or minus 30. 
 
So I’m wondering if that additional $12 million was well spent 
or did the department, in a panic to get rid of that oil, go out and 
use it on every possible road project they could find? 
 
(20:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I could tell you is that we used 
the majority of the oil last fall because of the lateness of the fall 
season. There was some oil that was moved from the eastern 
part of the province down to your part of the province because 
you had an extended fall season. There was some oil that was 
stored over the winter, and my understanding is that oil is being 
used or has been used. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, thank you. I understand from 
my conversations with individuals involved with roadwork that 
that particular oil, if applied in haste and not properly applied, 
will result in bleeding when the weather warms up. And I think 
that was exactly what happened this spring. We had a couple of 
days where the temperatures went up quickly, plus 30 degrees, 
and that water . . . I’m sorry, that oil started to basically ooze 
and seep. And as a result, the department personnel had to go 
out and spread sand on it to, you know, kind of hold it. 
 
I’m wondering, you know, in view of the kind of haste with 
which a lot of that work was done, whether it was really the 
best use of resources as a result of what transpired there? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that my 
department officials vigorously disagree with whoever you’ve 
been talking about . . . or talking to. They believe the money 
was used effectively. It helped us with rutting, it helped us with 
some of our TMS roads, and there were very few incidences 
where this whole issue of bleeding occurred. 
 
So I guess I can just tell you that I’ve got vigorous discussion 
on this side of the House, and they disagree with whomever 
you’ve been speaking to. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, this is probably the first 
instance of disagreement tonight, so it’s not too bad. I see that 
our time is quickly drawing to a close. I have one final question, 
I believe, depending on the answer I suppose. 
 
I understand, Madam Minister, that the day after tomorrow, 
June 20, the union representing personnel that work for the 
Department of Highways are planning a strike vote. Would the 
minister confirm what she knows in that regard and what 
contingency plans the department has. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — What I can tell the member is that I’m 



1894 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

aware that the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union is 
involved in negotiations with the Public Service Commission. 
We have the assistance, as I understand it, of a mediator who’s 
been brought in to try and assist the parties in concluding a 
collective agreement. 
 
I understand that the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ 
Union has been conducting a strike vote, I believe last week and 
part of this week, all across the province. And this is, from my 
experience in the legislature and my experience as an employer 
and an employee, that this is one of the tools that unions use in 
order to conclude collective agreements. So I would see this as 
part of the way the union has decided to proceed but I fully 
expect, with the help of the mediator, that the two parties will 
be able to conclude a collectively bargained collective 
agreement. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Minister, I hope you’re right, because 
otherwise it will put in jeopardy your statement there’s going to 
be so much road construction happening in this province this 
year that people are going to be sick of it. So I do hope that 
you’re right. 
 
Having concluded our conversation and our question and 
answer period tonight, I’d like to thank the minister and her 
officials for attending, and I look forward to doing this again in 
the near future. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Before we conclude, just in case we 
don’t do this again, I also want to thank the officials from the 
Department of Highways and Transportation for the work that 
they’ve done to assist me in answering the many members’ 
questions in this our fifth session of estimates. 
 
I would recommend that we report progress and ask for leave to 
sit again. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Research Council 

Vote 35 
 
Subvote (SR01) 
 
The Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. 
 
With me this evening seated immediately to my right is Dan 
McFadyen, the Acting President and CEO. To my left is Crystal 
Smudy, the Chief Financial Officer, and seated directly behind 
me is Bryan Schreiner, the Acting Chief Operating Officer. 
 
And if I could take just a moment I would like to do a very brief 
overview of what SRC’s (Saskatchewan Research Council) role 
is. 
 
SRC is a leading Saskatchewan technology and 
knowledge-based focus . . . and knowledge-focused Crown 
corporation and employs more than 200 scientists, engineers, 
technologists, and administrative staff in facilities in Saskatoon 
and Regina. 
 
This past year has been a year of significant change for the 

SRC. The new board, the management and staff of SRC has 
responded with exceptional professionalism to these changes 
and have ensured that the SRC has continued to serve and meet 
its clients’ needs with a business as usual approach. The SRC 
has delivered on its mandate of helping to strengthen and grow 
the Saskatchewan economy through the application and transfer 
of research and technology to help Saskatchewan entrepreneurs, 
small and medium businesses, and our large industries grow 
and prosper in a global economy. 
 
The staff and management have contributed to another 
successful financial and operational year at the council. The 
SRC services are broad and diversified but I would like to 
highlight just a few of their many successes this past year. 
 
The home retrofit project: during the past year energy has been 
a big issue not only in Saskatchewan, but across Canada. SRC 
is working on several projects related to energy, to improve 
efficiencies, and reduce environmental impacts. 
 
For example, last fall SRC signed a contract with Canada 
Mortgage and Housing to retrofit six houses ranging in age 
from 1910 to 1986 to reduce energy consumption by 40 per 
cent. Building performance scientists at SRC continue to work 
on this project and expect to achieve at least 40 per cent energy 
reduction in each of the houses. This research will benefit 
homeowners who wish to reduce their energy consumption in 
their existing homes. 
 
Saskatchewan Research is also actively engaged in work with 
alternative energies. SRC has further expanded its research in 
ethanol as an alternative fuel. We work with the Prairie 
Adaptation Research Co-operative. 
 
And lastly, one item that I would like to draw attention to is that 
SRC’s commitment to its mandate goes beyond its day-to-day 
projects. SRC also tries to ensure sustainable human resources 
for the future by supporting and encouraging youth programs 
related to science and technology. 
 
In February, SRC launched a new program for Saskatchewan 
post-secondary students. This program awards $10,000 
annually to the major post-secondary institutes for student 
projects that have real application and benefit for 
Saskatchewan. The existing program not only encourages youth 
to think about sustainability in Saskatchewan, it also encourages 
them to get involved with Saskatchewan industry. 
 
This is just a small sampling of the many exciting areas of 
research and technology that our SRC supports. 
 
Thank you very much to allow me those brief remarks. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you, Minister. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair and Mr. 
Minister, welcome to your officials. I’d like to ask just a couple 
of overall questions if I could to begin with. And I appreciate 
the statement that you read. That covered a lot of the objectives, 
what is being worked on. 
 
And one of the things that I must concur is that money . . . 
usually money spent on research is money well spent because 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1895 

 

the return on investment is usually very significant. And I think 
the research component is where we look into the future and try 
to adapt. And if we can capture the economic activity that we 
hope we can from that that is certainly money well spent. So I 
certainly don’t have any problem with the things that you talked 
about and research in a general way. 
 
I guess, Mr. Minister, the first question I would have is looking 
over the reports, the annual report of Saskatchewan Research 
Council, and then also looking at the budget for this year, there 
is an amount of money that is generally allocated to the 
Saskatchewan Research Council from the General Revenue 
Fund. And if I’m reading this right, it’s tending to go down. Am 
I reading those numbers correctly? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I’m informed you are reading it 
correctly. Last year there was some one-time money that was 
allocated for moving to the PTRC (Petroleum Technology 
Research Centre), and in fact there is a reduction this year. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Correct me if I’m wrong again, Mr. 
Minister, but it would appear that the money that is allocated 
for the Saskatchewan Research Council is a grant from general 
revenue. The Saskatchewan Research Council takes that 
revenue along with other revenue that they generate themselves, 
and they, under the direction of their board of directors, pursues 
the initiatives and the programs that they feel needs to be done. 
 
I guess what I’m saying is the government, once they allocate 
the money over to the Saskatchewan Research Council, do they 
then virtually stand back and let the board operate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You said that I should correct you if you 
were wrong again. You weren’t wrong the first time; you were 
right the first time, and you’re generally correct again. 
 
The board though . . . Once the money’s been allocated, the 
board has . . . its mandate is to operate under The Research 
Council Act and of course is responsible to the public through 
that Act. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What then is the 
role of the minister and through the minister to the president 
and CEO (chief executive officer) and through that to the 
board? Can you give me an idea of how all that works, comes 
together in allowing the Research Council to do the things that 
need to be done either from the board’s vision or from other 
inputs? 
 
(20:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Much of that will be, much of that will 
actually be laid out in the Act, as I refer to The Research 
Council Act. But of course we are . . . the minister is the one — 
as I’m doing here this evening — the one that is responsible for 
speaking to the issues in the legislature and to the public of 
Saskatchewan on the more general issues. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — You talked about a year . . . it was an 
awkward year, it was a year of transition, there was adaptations. 
I’d like to get to the question of the dismissal of the Research 
Council board of directors. Could you get me, for the record, a 
bit of a background as to what events developed and why that 

very drastic action had to be taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all I would take again the 
opportunity publicly to thank the members of the former board 
of directors for the good work that they have done. 
 
I think largely it came down to a fundamental policy difference 
or difference of opinion, and we worked very hard to try and 
find resolution. I’m advised that some three to four months was 
spent in trying to find a common ground. We simply couldn’t 
find common ground, and as a result found this unfortunately as 
the only solution to the problem. But considerable time was 
spent in trying to find some common ground. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, what I have read in the media 
and some other reports would indicate that there was a 
difference of opinion as to where the location of the Research 
Council should be. Also there was a difference of opinion as to 
the value of making that transition. And I think one of the 
accusations that I remember reading was that there was never a 
business plan shown to the board at that time why the move 
should be made and on what basis. 
 
And I’m sure that because they are considered to be an 
arm’s-length board had to make sure that the right rationale was 
in place, at least satisfactory to them, why this move had to be 
made. And from my understanding that was never presented to 
them, at least not from what we were led to believe from media 
reports. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all just a small correction. I 
think there was not an issue as I am advised over the location of 
the Research Council. It was more an alignment of research 
interests relating to the Petroleum Research Technology Centre. 
 
And again there was just fundamental policy differences that 
couldn’t . . . they couldn’t find reconciliation on, as again . . . 
and having spent I should say some three to four months in 
trying to find resolution to that difference the only option that 
seemed to be available was the changing of the board. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you for the correction, Mr. Minister. 
In that particular move, although we’ve heard time and time 
again that ministers are reluctant to micromanage situations, 
that one to me seems to be a real example of micromanaging a 
situation where the board, which is a board appointed from the 
industry and pretty highly respected from my understanding, 
wasn’t able to grasp the rationale for doing this, and I think very 
unceremoniously got notice, my understanding is by a fax, that 
their position on the board had been terminated. Is that not an 
example of micromanaging and maybe in the worst possible 
way of rendering advice to the board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In changing the board of directors, I 
think it’s important to say that there wasn’t any intent to be 
malicious or in any way be disrespectful of the work they had 
done. We were required, as I’m advised, to give legal notice. 
And perhaps things could have been done better. I don’t think 
there’s any doubt about that. Things might have been able to be 
done better in terms of getting a better notice. But we did have 
legal obligation to provide notice. 
 
I think I do want to comment briefly, though, with respect to the 



1896 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

issue of whether it’s micromanaging or not. I have always 
believed that it’s the role of the minister and the government to 
generally lay out policy and the framework for whether it’s . . . 
for whatever Crown or department. And if there appears to be a 
difference of opinion between the board and the minister or the 
government over the laying out of that . . . the rolling out of that 
policy is probably a better way to put it, then I think I would 
describe that not as micromanaging. There is a fundamental 
difference that has to be resolved. And again, as I’ve said 
several times, we spent some three to four months in trying to 
find resolution to that difference in the view of policy. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, could you tell us who the 
new, or the interim board was, how long they served, what was 
their first role? I understand that their first role was also to 
terminate the employment of the CEO. I may be wrong there 
too. I’m going from memory and from what I read. And is that 
board still in place? If not, has the new board been appointed, 
and who are they? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The interim board was Dan McFadyen 
who was the Chair; Mike Monea who was the Vice-Chair; and 
Doug Kelln who was just a member of the board. They acted 
from October 5 of 2000 to January 18 of this year. And you are 
correct, their first order of business was to dismiss the past 
CEO. 
 
And I believe you also asked what the makeup of the new board 
is now? Currently, Mr. Jim Hutch is the Chairman. Mr. Mike 
Monea is the Vice-Chairman. Mr. Doug Kelln is the secretary. 
Mr. Larry Cooper we have, Mr. Craig Zawada, Mr. John 
Bennett, and Mr. Keith Hanson. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — How many was that, Mr. Minister, by 
count? And it’s considerably less than it was before. Is that 
correct? I think there was 14 if I remember right. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There is . . . there was 7. The old board 
had 12. And we will be looking to add some more members in 
the not-too-distant future. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, can you give me an idea of 
the process that you go through — I assume you go through — 
to locate and appoint members to this board? What are the 
parameters? What are the conditions, the qualifications of these 
people, to come onto this board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Generally the names are usually 
recommended by the board itself. I’ve been in discussion 
personally already with the CEO about this just knowing that 
we’ll be needing to add some more names. 
 
What we’re looking for is strong business skills, someone or 
people who understand research and technology. Obviously 
we’d be looking for regional and gender balance. And of course 
as well we want some diversity I should say within the different 
sectors as well into which much of the research is actually 
taking place. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are any of the old 
board going to be re-evaluated and re-appointed? Are they in 
the . . . are they able to be in the short list? 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There would be nothing . . . I’m advised 
there’d be nothing preventing them from being put into the mix. 
And as well I’m also advised that we do have ongoing 
relationships with a number of the former board members in 
terms of customer and client relationships between the 
Saskatchewan Research Council and some of the businesses 
that I’m sure that they continue to operate here in the province. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, was there any exceptional 
costs involved in dismissal of the previous board or the 
previous CEO? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — There would have been transitional 
costs. Probably the most outstanding cost, although I wouldn’t 
describe it as exceptional because it would have completely 
conformed with years of experience and years of service to 
government, would be the severance costs related to the 
president and CEO which I think were included in your globals 
at 284,000. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Mr. Minister, we would appreciate seeing 
some updated figures, including the globals, so that we’re able 
to have a look to see what you are referring to there. 
 
I’ll maybe just . . . would they be available — those numbers? I 
do have another question about this situation that happened last 
year with the board. 
 
One of the positive aspects of the Research Council has been 
the confidence that people in the industry have placed in this 
over the years. You’ve talked about, in your opening statement, 
some of the long-term trends that . . . and projects and 
initiatives and moving into some of the new areas of research 
— all of that adds a confidence from the industry in this. 
 
From what I have read in some of the clippings as I was 
glancing through this in preparation for tonight, I noticed a lot 
of clippings that gave a rather scathing condemnation of the 
way the board was dismissed and for the . . . at least on the 
speculation of what the reason would be. 
 
And it would appear at that time the confidence was quite 
shaken in the SRC in trying to be an unbiased arm’s-length 
research facility from outside interference. Now do you feel that 
was a justified criticism in the paper? Do you think there it was 
sending out a signal that SRC was going to become stronger or 
the transition was going to be better? 
 
Personally I’ve hadn’t seen that signal coming out of this 
exercise at this time. Could you comment on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — In the transition, I am advised that we 
did not lose a single client. We had a very strong year as it 
relates to third-party funding. There continues to be excellent 
relations with our customers and clients. The transition, while I 
know it’s been difficult in terms of difficult internally to 
actually go through the transition, but in terms of what has 
happened with the clients there hasn’t, I’m advised, been any 
adverse impact at all. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Good evening, 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1897 

 

Mr. Minister, and to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, you indicated that the globals had been handed in 
to someone last week and we had looked forward to receiving 
them so that we could go through them and ask additional 
questions. In fact this evening we had thought that we would be 
able to vote this department or this area off, but I’m sure that 
we’re going to need the globals before we can do that. 
 
Is there any way that the minister can get us a copy of the 
globals here this evening? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — That’s what I was advised before I came 
in here. I’ll undertake to find out what exactly happened and 
determine what we can do for you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that my 
previous time with the SRC we had . . . we were excited that 
there were a number of donations that had been given to the 
SRC over the years was increasing. Can you give me an idea if 
the donations are still increasing and if it’s the type of enterprise 
that people are still excited about with the changes in the SRC 
this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again I’m advised that there was a 
donation received on behalf of the Ian Wahn estate of some half 
a million dollars. And we continue to have excellent 
relationships with the Wahn family, although there aren’t any 
other donations last year that would be, as I understand, of any 
significance. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I think the donation from the 
Wahn family was something that was received a couple of years 
ago or it was actually looked at a few years ago. So when I look 
at page 28 of the annual report, we go from $25,000 in 1999 to 
$352,000 and some dollars in the year 2000 to the Technology 
in Action Fund. Is that actually this donation from the Wahn 
family? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The half million dollars was not a 
one-time donation. He was donating $25,000 a year, and when 
Mr. Wahn passed away they donated the balance of the half a 
million dollars which was the $352,000. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I also believe, if 
my memory serves me correctly, that this amount of money 
wasn’t to be spent all at once. I believe it was the interest on the 
money that was going to be spent. Can you update that for me 
as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — You are exactly right. They only spend 
the investment earnings each year to a maximum of $25,000 
and the principal stays as a donation. The principal stays intact. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you give us some ideas of 
some of the projects that the money was spent on in the last 
year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — As an example, last year there was 
$10,000 put into a dust-catcher mask that is used largely in the 
mining industry, and the inventor is a Saskatchewan 
entrepreneur and of course this is what we try to do, is create 
development here in Saskatchewan. 

Ms. Draude: — I have two questions. First of all, who gets the 
royalties for those? And the second one is who makes the 
decision on what project is going to be approved . . . that will 
receive the money from the one contribution each year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, with respect to your royalty 
question, this one was just a straight grant by the SRC so there 
wouldn’t be an issue of royalties related to SRC or the 
government. 
 
You had asked, in addition, how the projects are approved. 
They go through the director of business development, who 
then is in consultation with the board of directors, and 
ultimately the board of directors then approves the projects. 
 
Ms. Draude: — The new board of directors or the old board of 
directors? Mr. Minister, are there any projects right now that the 
SRC does receive royalties on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, the SRC is collecting some 
royalties. Again I’m advised that these are very small. And you 
had also asked where these originate from. Again I’m advised 
because of confidentiality we won’t be able to provide that level 
of detail. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, when I’m looking at the annual 
return, the net income from operations — actual ’99-2000 — 
shows that there is a decrease of some . . . I’m not exactly sure 
what the number is but I understand that it looks like there’s a 
decrease in operation funding this year. Can you explain that 
please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If you’re referring to the net income 
from operations there is a small decline but if — I’m referring 
to page 28 — if you’re looking just a little further down, the net 
income, there’s actually a substantial increase from the year ’99 
to 2000. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, on page 36 we have the pension 
plan increase or decrease in surplus. Could you explain that to 
me? Is that an unfunded pension plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The pension plan, if I understood the 
question correctly, is actually fully funded. I think the number 
you might be looking at on page 36 is a small surplus that exists 
in the plan. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, has the number of clients that 
you’re working with increased in the last year or so? And also 
can you tell me what’s happening with the joint ventures you 
were working on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The number of clients, I’m advised, 
would be similar but the actual revenue, the dollar amount, will 
actually have gone up from industry, from the federal and from 
the federal government. The only joint venture that I’m aware 
of is with Bova-Can. It’s a strong productive partnership in 
which the partnership is a 50/50 split. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell what the SRC’s 
relationship with PAMI (Prairie Agricultural Machinery 



1898 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

Institute) is now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Apparently at one time we used to 
manage them but there’s no relationship with PAMI right now 
other than we occasionally keep in contact with them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the dollar 
amount of assets are now by the SRC and how it’s changed 
from last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The total assets are, to the end of 2000, 
just over 11 million and that would be up about just roughly 1 
million from last year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, when you started our discussion 
this evening you talked about money, the $10,000 I believe that 
was given to post-secondary institutions. Can you give me an 
idea of what . . . of how this money is spent and how the 
determination is made on who will receive it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The funding comes through the 
Technology in Action Fund. These are obviously grants for . . . 
or goes to scholarships. The institutions are the ones that 
recommend the candidates and it’s the director of business 
development that does the final approval, I guess. But the 
scholarships are recommended by the different institutions, and 
those institutions are largely the universities and technical 
schools . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . or FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) I should say. And also the 
projects are all technology-based projects here in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Why is the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle Valley on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wartman: — To help out friends, thank you. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Thank you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
can you tell me how many of these $10,000 grants were given 
out last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — This is the first year there have not been 
any given out yet and we’re just determining how that $10,000 
will be split up for the awarding of the scholarships. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then I guess one of 
your objectives right now will be to let the institutions know 
that it’s available so they can make the determination on who 
will receive it. This is always exciting news for post-secondary 
institutions because they’re always looking for money for their 
students and I’m sure it’ll be well received. 
 
Also, Mr. Minister, a year or so ago, the SRC had determined 
that there was probably other projects around the province that 
were worth investing in or worth helping to improve and many 
times people weren’t even aware of the good work of the SRC. 
Are you doing any work to make sure that businesses around 
the province are aware of what is available through the research 
council? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the member, we work very closely 
with small- and medium-sized businesses here in 

Saskatchewan. There’s many strong partnerships that have been 
developed and we continue to try and grow those. 
 
We are also working to try to improve and enhance our 
presence in the province through, I guess I would describe them 
as more aggressive forms of media release . . . in the form, I 
should say, of media releases, public events, just generally 
trying to raise the profile of the Saskatchewan Research Council 
so that small businesses and medium-sized businesses are aware 
of what the Saskatchewan Research Council has to offer here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, the previous board members had 
expertise in various fields and I’m aware that the interim board, 
at least, was interested mostly in the PTRC. I’m wondering if 
your . . . the new board members will have expertise in different 
fields, and also what the relationship is with the PTRC at this 
time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The new board has a very wide range 
. . . or broad range of skills, I should say. We’re obviously 
looking to add more people, as I’ve just described, with even a 
broader sectoral representation. 
 
You asked about the relationship with the PTRC. We worked to 
continue to build a stronger relationship with the PTRC. In my 
estimation, that relationship is growing and developing. We see 
it as integral here in Saskatchewan that the PTRC remains 
strong and viable and I think our relationship with them is 
obviously critical to that development and therefore we want to 
continue to ensure that that relationship does grow. 
 
And I’m repeating myself a little bit but from my vantage point, 
if you will, not intimately involved with this, we clearly see that 
that relationship has been flourishing. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I would imagine that since this 
was one of the contentious issues with the firing of the last 
board that the relationship with the PTRC should be growing. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are three areas that I’m just going to ask you 
to briefly outline the status of around the province. I know that 
at one time the Research Council was very involved in the work 
with diamond drilling, and I know that there is a lot of interest 
in the North right now with the potential for billions of dollars 
worth of diamonds, and I’m wondering if the companies there 
are working with the SRC? 
 
And also the concern with water in the province. I know also 
that the SRC is working with some of the water problems 
around the province, and what is happening on that front as 
well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — With respect to diamond drilling, our 
geological labs, I am advised, are amongst the leading-edge 
assessment labs in North America and in fact provide some of 
the most . . . we do most of the research with respect to 
diamonds in Canada and they’re recognized as having some of 
the best labs in Canada with respect to diamonds. 
 
On the issue of water, we continue to provide obviously water 
testing on a fully cost-recovery basis. And you may or may not 
be aware that the Saskatchewan Research Council was 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1899 

 

involved, along with the Department of Environment and Sask 
Water, in the water framework, in the development of the water 
framework strategy. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I wasn’t aware that 
they were involved with SERM (Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management) and working on the framework 
strategy for the water problem in the province. 
 
Mr. Minister, I think that you’re probably aware that I have a 
lot of faith in the Research Council, that I was very much in 
favour of all the good work you are doing. And it was a 
disappointment not only to me, but to many people in the 
province, when there was a problem with the board and the 
CEO that happened last year. 
 
I guess I am pleased that there doesn’t seem to have had a 
negative effect on the SRC because with all the good work the 
board and the employees have done over the years, it would be 
terrible to have that all brought to an end because of some 
action by a minister or whatever did happen at this time. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I have just one question left before I turn it 
back to my colleague. I know that there used to be a lot of work 
done with IRAP (Industrial Research Assistance Program), 
through the Research Council, making sure that any grants that 
could be available for your clients would be referred to them. 
I’m wondering if the SRC is still doing that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — We still deliver the IRAP program on a 
contractual basis and we’re in discussion with the National 
Research Council as it’s going through transition — it was their 
decision, by the way — to determine how we will continue to 
deliver that program, whether it be through the Saskatchewan 
Research Council or directly through the National Research 
Council itself. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair and Mr. 
Minister. I just have one quick question to finish up here. And 
there’s been . . . I’m puzzling over this pension thing. And I just 
wished . . . if you could give me some assistance here. 
 
I notice that the pension fund . . . there’s an increase in the 
surplus in the pension fund, rather substantively from ’99 to 
2000; about a half a million dollars difference. I have trouble 
understanding that increase. And the terms that I see on the 
explanatory pages 32, part of the fund is a defined benefit plan 
and part of the plan after 1991 is a defined contributory, 
contribution plan. 
 
I guess I’m wondering if one of those is an unfunded pension 
that we’ve referred to earlier with other estimates. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — If I understand your — if the member 
from Lloydminster — his question correctly, the defined 
contribution plan is the new plan as we would describe. And it’s 
fully funded. And the defined benefit plan is the old plan with 
. . . it’s the one that has the surplus in that I referred to earlier. It 
is also fully funded. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. There’s no, 
there’s no unfunded pension liability that the government has to 
pick up on that, then I understand. 

And I wondered why the discrepancy from 1999 to 2000 in the 
surplus in the pension plan. I’m referring to page 36 of the 
annual report under the note no. 13. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I think better for clarification I would 
refer you to page 32. And page 32 in fact is a slight reduction in 
the pension surplus, and in fact that is attributable to the 
enhancement of the old defined benefit plan. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — I’m going to ask the minister, in the echoes 
of that; did you complete your answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Let me try that again. 
 
I would refer you to page 32 actually for clarification. You will 
note on the very bottom the numbers, the comparisons from 
1999 to 2000, there’s an actual reduction from just over a 
million dollars to 766,000. That is as a result of a pension 
enhancement to the defined benefit plan or the old plan, as I 
would describe it. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Minister and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I wish through the minister to thank your officials. I 
don’t have any further questions at this time. 
 
We would appreciate a copy of the globals as you had promised 
and I would request that you ask for progress and we’ll continue 
on. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and thank the 
members for their very good questions. I thank you for 
reminding me as well. I wish to table the globals and I do 
apologize for the misunderstanding. I was of the view that you 
had the globals. I would like to table those if I could. 
 
Given that then, I would also take the opportunity while I’m on 
my feet to report progress and ask for leave to sit again . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . No? Report progress. Thank you for 
the correction. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Education 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (ED01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. To 
my immediate right is Craig Dotson, deputy minister of 
education, and to his right is Don Sangster, executive director, 
school finance, and to his right is Gerry Sing Chin, grants 
manager, school finance. To my immediate left is Michael 
Littlewood, executive director, legislation and school 
administration. Directly behind me is the associate deputy 
minister, Ken Horsman, and beside him is Frances Bast, 
director of finance and administration, corporate services. And 
at the back of the room we’ve got John McLaughlin, executive 
director, teachers’ superannuation commission, and Cal Kirby, 
director of facilities planning. That is the group this evening. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome, Mr. 



1900 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

Minister, welcome to your officials. Mr. Minister, on June 6 we 
had a short session and discussed some issues that some of my 
colleagues were interested in, and tonight I have some questions 
that are pretty well jumping all over the page. So I’d like to start 
by asking how many people the Department of Education has 
added to their staff in the last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, there was an increase of 
16.6 full-time equivalents within the department, an increase of 
5.8 per cent. 
 
(21:45) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, can you tell me what the cost 
was of the additional staff? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I don’t have the exact 
breakdown in terms of cost. We can get that to her though. 
Certainly, I can give the breakdown in terms of the overall 
changes in FTE’s. Nine of these new full-time equivalents were 
with regard to student diversity, which is community education 
and aboriginal education. There were six new FTEs for the 
e-Learning resource. They were two additional FTEs for 
information technology, and there was one additional FTE for 
early childhood development. There was also a transfer out of 
the department to post-secondary education and skills training 
as a result of the implementation of the shared services split 
which amounted to 1.4, and that’s what we arrived at in terms 
of the overall increase of 16.6. So there was an increase of 18 
overall and then a loss of 1.4 over to post-secondary education. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I apologize for 
not thanking you for the globals I received just when you came 
in. We appreciate and we’re going through the information 
we’ve received right now. 
 
Mr. Minister, given the shortage of teachers and the aggressive 
recruitments of other provinces, I am wondering what initiatives 
your government is taking to ensure that Saskatchewan can 
compete with the other provinces in attracting and recruiting 
and maintaining their teachers. I’m aware that . . . I believe 
there’s a $1 million fund that has been set up in order to recruit 
teachers, and can you give us the status of your work in that 
area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly she is correct 
with regard to the one million allocation with regard to new 
initiatives in recruitment and retention. And we have notified 
the chairpersons of all boards of education in the province of 
Saskatchewan and what we’re talking about in terms of year 
one of the teacher recruitment and retention initiative is 
primarily a pilot year. And the funding will be directed towards 
developing support systems in northern Saskatchewan, projects 
arising from work done by the inter-organizational committee 
on the recruitment and retention of school-based administrators, 
teacher education in certain specified areas, funding to school 
boards to provide bursaries to teachers for further teacher 
education and for professional education in shared services 
areas, and also funding to school boards to provide bursaries to 
education students who have a major in mathematics, physics, 
chemistry, technology, practical and applied arts, Aboriginal 
education including native studies and language, and special 
needs. 

So that basically is the program and it covers several areas 
where the department has identified particular shortages, and 
enhances areas with regard to Aboriginal and special needs 
education as well. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The bursaries to 
students that are being trained in specific areas that there’s a 
shortage of teachers is interesting. I’m wondering if you can 
give me an idea of how much money is spent on that area, and 
if it means that these students are going to be asked to stay in 
the province if they receive this bursary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I can’t give the member 
opposite a concrete number in terms of allocation specifically 
for bursaries. It’ll depend on the number of applications that 
come forward with regard to the various school divisions who 
are hiring new teachers or potentially new teachers for the 
future. However I can indicate to the member opposite that for 
these bursaries that in all cases there is a return for service 
involved. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, I have been contacted by a number 
of school boards who are concerned about the policy on urban 
bussing. And the problem is usually that there’s no consistency 
amongst different school divisions. In some school divisions it’s 
over 800 metres and in some it’s over 1,200. 
 
Can you give me an idea if your department is determining if 
they’re going to make a stand on this and make this a consistent 
policy across the province, or if it’s something you’re leaving 
directly in the hands of each school board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the policy of the 
department is to have recognized assistance with regard to 
transportation for primary school students to the point that any 
student that is greater than four kilometres will . . . that school 
division will be provided assistance to provide for that 
transportation. We don’t have any similar policies with regard 
to secondary schools. 
 
And I think I’d mentioned this the last time we were in 
estimates with regard to the policy, for example, in a large, 
urban school division where access . . . there are no boundaries 
between schools. So that certainly any student can attend any 
high school, for example, in Saskatoon and it has not been a 
policy to provide transportation funding for the transportation 
of those students in the secondary school level. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m aware that there 
has been no . . . there’s no costs provider . . . no funding 
provided for high school students, but the concern was for 
elementary school students, that there was no consistency. And 
I was asking if your department was determining if there should 
be some area where a school division could bank on receiving 
funding. 
 
Now I know you said that anything over four kilometres they 
would receive funding, but there still is a variance among 
school divisions. Have you heard this concern? Is it something 
that’s brought to your office often? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, the provincial 
policy is consistent with regard to the four kilometre rule. There 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1901 

 

are some minor variations, for example, in that distance. For 
example, if there was a major highway that was blocking the 
obvious transportation and required a further route. And also 
there is a choice involved by school divisions if they wish to 
enhance their transportation initiatives, then certainly that was 
within their purview to do that. 
 
But the policy of the department — which has been recently 
checked as recently as a week ago by all regional directors — is 
that the policy by the department is applied consistently 
throughout the province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, there was an article in the 
Saskatoon paper awhile back talking about French enrolment 
decline. And the first sentence says, as French immersion 
enrolment numbers continue to dwindle province wide, 
administrators from the city’s two school divisions say that the 
program’s days could be numbered. And yet at the same time I 
notice in the estimates that there has been an increase in the 
official minority language office. Could you explain this to me? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly the member opposite’s 
question was specific with regard to French immersion, but we 
also recognize that the department of OML (official minority 
language) is basically one that also deals with French 
immersion, core French programs, and the francophone 
community. 
 
And there has been increases within the francophone division 
even though there may be some decreases in French immersion. 
It’s necessary to look at the global picture in terms of core 
French, French immersion, and the francophone boards 
themselves. And that’s why there was an increase with regard to 
the funding on the minority languages office. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
notice also in the budget there is money now available for early 
childhood development. 
 
When the budget was released in March, we noted that there 
was a joint news release from the federal government talking 
about funding that was going to be coming from the federal 
government for early childhood development. And when I 
looked through the budget book I found it was divided between 
education, social services, and health care. 
 
Now I understand that there is probably different areas that need 
the funding, but at the same time I know that some of the early 
childhood development offices are wondering if they’re going 
to be getting more money and how the money is going to be 
broke down, do they have to apply for it? Could you give me 
some idea on what’s happening in this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, certainly we’re quite 
proud of the initiative in early childhood development and the 
co-operation between the three departments — Education, 
Social Services, and health care. 
 
As indicated, the allocation for the Department of Education is 
part of the $10 million that have been allocated totally for early 
childhood development this year. And we’re looking at a total 
of roughly $73 million over five years with regard to this 
program. 

With regard to community groups who may be interested in 
participating in the early childhood development programs, the 
coordinator is within the Department of Health and the 
Department of Health does serve as the coordination of the 
early childhood development program. So that’s where the 
contact would be made. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I would imagine then your 
department is trying to get information to the various school 
boards to let them know that there is . . . that there could be 
money available for this program. And I’m sure that there’ll be 
many of them looking forward to it. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the big issues that many school boards talk 
to me about is integration of services and the fact that there is a 
lot of duplication and there is a need to be able to work between 
government departments, mostly Health, Social Services, 
Justice, and Education. 
 
(22:00) 
 
I also know that a resolution that has been brought forward by 
the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and 
STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) to ensure that your 
government starts working on this issue. The Role of the School 
is in some ways trying to deal with this issue but I’m wondering 
what steps you are putting forward to make sure that this real 
obstacle is being overcome when it comes to the problems the 
school boards are having to try and mostly get information 
about a student from various departments and ensure that we’re 
looking at the children’s needs and not the department’s needs 
when it comes to spending money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, the point made 
by the member opposite is well taken and certainly it is the 
philosophy of this government to look and accept the 
recommendations from the Role of the School Task Force and 
to take those recommendations very seriously. 
 
When we talk about the SchoolPLUS environment and integrated 
school link services, it talks exactly to the question raised by the 
member opposite. When we refer to the co-operation and the 
information transfer between school boards, the Department of 
Education, Social Services, Justice, and health boards, we have 
models in existence now where that co-operation has developed 
and protocols have developed. And certainly I’ve talked in the 
past about the example of Nutana Collegiate and of course Scott 
here in Regina as well. So the point is well taken. 
 
That is the philosophy. We are moving. We have developed 
protocols but we’re not at that end point in terms of how this 
information with regard to children, especially at-risk children, 
are transferred between these various departments. But the 
process has improved dramatically over the past several years 
and it certainly is an objective and a goal as itemized by the 
Role of the School Task Force that we improve the information 
transfer to create that SchoolPLUS environment where we truly 
do have integrated services that are school linked. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I know that many of the school boards that I’ve talked to 
are frustrated with the protocol that’s there because it seems to 
be meetings and chatting but nothing really is coming of it yet. 



1902 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

I want to talk to you about the Role of the School, but there are 
some specific areas and one of them is the Wakaw School 
Division. They’ve asked about the community school that’s in 
St. Louis, and I believe there is one at this time in the town of 
St. Louis. I’ll ask you that question: is there a community 
school in the town of St. Louis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it is my 
understanding that there isn’t a community school designation 
with regard to St. Louis in the Wakaw School Division. But it is 
also my understanding that there is a community education 
project through IMED (Indian and Métis Education 
Development Program) at that particular location. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I apologize, Mr. Minister. I received some 
information from a colleague who just asked me to ask the 
question. 
 
The Wakaw School Division is frustrated because they have a 
number of foster students that are going to school in St. Louis, 
but the fact that the foster children are often transient and they 
aren’t at school maybe at September 30, the time for 
designation of students at a community school, there is not the 
funding available for them. 
 
It is an issue that is of great concern to the school board because 
I think we’re all aware of the benefits of being in the 
atmosphere of a community school. Is this an issue that you’ve 
been hearing about in your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the member 
opposite really does identify an area that has been an area of 
frustration for school boards as well as the department. 
Oftentimes we see foster children arrive in communities out of 
sync with the school year, so they may come in mid-year or late 
in the year, obviously past the time of the budgeting cycle 
where there hasn’t been grant recognition. And this is one of the 
areas that the Role of the School Task Force and those 
integrated school link services will provide those 
enhancements. And certainly it is a very good point and we are 
looking at this very seriously. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, could you explain to me what 
the difference is between a community school and the facility 
that is available in St. Louis at this time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, with regard to a 
community school designation within a school division, it is 
based on very definite criteria and it’s demographic criteria. 
Areas for example — core neighbourhoods in Regina, 
Saskatoon — where they have high unemployment rate, higher 
welfare rates, those sorts of things that that then would qualify 
for them for the special recognition as a community school. 
 
Where we have specific projects as the one referred to in St. 
Louis, which is an IMED project, this is very specific. This is 
the Indian and Métis Education Development. And just to give 
the member opposite some idea with regard to some of these 
projects that would qualify as community development or 
integrated services programming, for example in region 1, in 
Potashville, school counselling liaison program amount 
approved was 45,000. In Yorkton, amongst the school divisions 
there, there was a community education project where each of 

the three school divisions received 40,000 in recognition. 
 
Alternative high schools in Weyburn and Weyburn Central for 
example are part of the region 1 totals. In region 2 for example, 
the Red Coat Trail, Borderland, and Golden Plains, there’s a 
community school based family support worker program with 
approved amount of funding of $54,250. In region 3 just as an 
example, Buffalo Plains and Cupar School Division there’s 
recognition for an early childhood behaviour specialist to the 
tune of 40,000. 
 
So those are examples of integrated service programs that are 
project specific to a particular community where that 
community would not qualify as a community school in terms 
of the demographic and the clear criteria that are identified 
through community school initiatives. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Specifically when it 
comes to students that are foster students and are moved from 
one school to another, I would think that in a lot of cases they 
would start school in one town and be considered eligible under 
funding through the community school. If they move from that 
school then does the school lose that funding or does the school 
continue to receive funding even though the student may have 
moved on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, with 
regard to the budgeting cycle and how the grants on the 
operating side are provided to school division, they’re really 
based on the enrolments as of September 30 in any given year. 
So if there is movement in or out of a school division, there’s 
really no way in the budget cycle to recognize that at this point. 
 
So certainly, it’s a very good question and I don’t know if there 
is a better way of trying to deal with that situation. Certainly if a 
school division had a massive influx of foster children then they 
could make application with regard to some of these special 
projects that are available. 
 
We don’t, we haven’t been seeing a lot of that or a lot of 
requests with regards to this particular issue, and recognizing 
that there are 99 school divisions and 185 . . . 190,000 students 
enrolled in the province of Saskatchewan, that there will be 
transfers in and out of every school division at some point in 
time during the school year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I would like to talk for a minute 
about CommunityNet. I know that there is $33.7 million 
increase in the budget this year, and $3.7 million of it been set 
aside for CommunityNet. 
 
I’m wondering if there is more employees required because of 
it, and how long it will take to implement CommunityNet? And 
over and above the $3.7 million the department has set aside, 
will the school divisions be required to pay to top up this 
amount within this fiscal year? 
 
(22:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, first off there is 
no incremental staff required with regard to the CommunityNet. 
The 3.7 million is the total amount. There is no extra charges to 
school division. And in fact as of April 1 of this year, all school 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1903 

 

divisions, their charges for their high-speed Internet was 
eliminated, which is a saving to school divisions to the tune of 1 
to $1.5 million. So they are not paying any charges now with 
regard to their Internet access. 
 
The CommunityNet is a three-year rollout which has begun this 
month and will continue over the next three years. The rollout 
has been identified in terms of an announcement made about 
approximately three weeks ago into the communities that will 
be receiving CommunityNet first and the high-speed Internet 
access that they will receive. 
 
And in addition to the 3.7 million, the department is providing 
$2 million per year for the next three years as part of the 
Centenary Capital Fund for in-school distribution and 
connectivity at that level. 
 
And also as the final piece of the package, the e-learning 
resource is maintained within the department. And I think I’ve 
mentioned that part of the increase in the full-time equivalence 
will be related to the enhanced e-learning resource within the 
department. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, when we talk about integrated 
services we normally talk about the health care, education, 
social services, and justice. But one area that I think is missing 
in here is economic development. 
 
And when I talked to a number of school divisions about the 
fact that CommunityNet was coming into the smaller towns — 
and I’m going to use Annaheim as the example — the 
businesses in town were saying yes, we’re going to have this 
high-speed Internet in town. We’ll be wired within the school. 
It should make it readily accessible for some of the businesses. 
They were very disappointed to find out that it’s not going to be 
there for them. Now I know that integrating services and 
making sure that the economy works and works within different 
departments is supposedly an important issue for your coalition 
government. 
 
Have you talked about this? Is this something that you can see 
would be able to be working within the business sector as well 
since the initial costs will already be made by bringing it into 
the school? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, recognizing that 
CommunityNet has the involvement of many groups, and when 
we made the announcement the Minister Responsible for the 
Information Highway, the minister responsible for SaskTel, 
when we talk about that involvement to the partnership 
involved with providing CommunityNet to schools, to regional 
colleges, to libraries. I mean this is all very important. But 
SaskTel is the operator of the infrastructure, and of course this 
enhancement to communities throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan will have an impact on the business community 
and SaskTel is assessing these commercial aspects as the roll 
out occurs, and I would suspect that this will provide for 
enhancement for these businesses in rural Saskatchewan 
particularly. 
 
Ms. Draude: — I’m sure the minister is doing everything he 
can to push this issue with SaskTel at this time. Mr. Minister, I 
have a number of questions that I wanted to ask you for the 

school boards, the issues that they have been dealing with for a 
number of years. And I’m going to start with the problem that 
they have with permanent residents who reside within 
provincial parks paying property tax. Is this an issue that you’re 
looking at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Chair, there are issues 
that have been brought forward with regard to this. The 
department has had discussions with the department of SERM 
on this issue. They are reviewing the policies with regard to 
permanent residence within provincial parks as well as seasonal 
residence. 
 
Some of the issues that have come forward, for example, in 
terms of resolving some of these issues, for example, is that 
many of the properties within these provincial parks have never 
been assessed so it’s difficult to determine where they would fit 
in. But this is an area that the department is having discussions 
with the department of SERM and hopefully we’ll have a 
resolution on these issues. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Mr. Minister, one of 
the issues that I’m sure that you are hearing about frequently, 
because I do, is one on fetal alcohol syndrome and the fact that 
we have many, many children — too many children — in this 
province born with this effect. 
 
I know that SSTA has brought forward a resolution or a 
recommendation that labels be placed on alcohol containers 
talking about the dangers of drinking . . . that drinking would 
have on an unborn child. 
 
I know that the government, the NDP government, four years 
ago brought forward the recommendation for signage within 
liquor establishments talking about the harm to fetuses. And 
I’m wondering if your government and your department is 
urging the government to make changes that there could be 
additional education and information available on this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, when 
we look at the programs announced with regard to early 
childhood development and the $73 million that will be applied 
over the next five years, that the approach is to look at a 
continuum from the time of conception to the time of starting 
kindergarten. And so the initiatives are provided to cover the 
high-risk communities, which would involve education, which 
would involve community outreach. 
 
We recognize that fetal alcohol syndrome, fetal alcohol effect, 
and alcohol-related disorders have a huge impact on society. 
Fetal alcohol syndrome, for example, it is estimated anywhere 
from 1 to 3 per 1,000 births. When you factor in fetal alcohol 
effect that bumps it up again. 
 
And when you look at all of the alcohol-related disorders that 
could have an impact on children, it may be as high as 9 or 10 
per 1,000 births. And when you look at the actual impact on 
society in terms of resources required to deal with the damage 
done by alcohol in developing children, then certainly it is very 
much preferential and certainly the direction of this government 
that we get into education and prevention as much as possible. 
 
And these early childhood development processes are currently 



1904 Saskatchewan Hansard June 18, 2001 

 

being developed. They are coordinated through the Department 
of Health. That is where the coordinator is located and there has 
to be involvement of numerous departments as well as 
community groups if we really are to get a real good handle on 
this issue and have an impact on society. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I know that your professional 
background gives you information on fetal alcohol syndrome 
but I believe some of the latest figures shows that between FAS 
(fetal alcohol syndrome) and FAE (fetal alcohol effects), the 
figures are actually much, much higher than 9 or 10 out of 
1,000. It could be, especially when you take into consideration 
the Aboriginal population. So I think that anything that we can 
be doing, whether it is through the Department of Health or the 
Department of Education, is very important and you should be, 
though your department, pushing it because as the department 
that’s dealing with all children, especially now with early 
childhood development, the issue is in your hands. 
 
Mr. Minister, the . . . one of the issues that we saw last year 
when, with the potential strike with the teachers was the 
concern in the government trustee bargaining committee with 
the structure with 5 and 4, or an equal number . . . not an equal 
number of representatives. Is your department looking at 
changing that number so there is equal representation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly the collective bargaining 
process, Mr. Deputy Chair, that has developed in the province 
of Saskatchewan, goes back to the early 1970s. And if we look 
at the track record in terms of collective bargaining between the 
Department of Education, the School Trustees Association, and 
the Teachers’ Federation that has developed over the past 30 
years or so, I would think that the last go-around is one of the 
most successful we have seen, where all three parties signed the 
agreement — consensus was reached. I think you’d be hard 
pressed to find a better model anywhere in North America in 
terms of the track record over the past 30 years. 
 
There was some toying with the protocol agreement that was 
rejected by the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and I think 
that if there were to be a new model developed that we would 
need to have consensus amongst the three groups involved. And 
certainly we haven’t found a better arrangement at this point in 
time, but obviously if something came forward that would be 
considered an improvement in how collective bargaining is 
done in the province of Saskatchewan, the department would be 
willing to look at that. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I dare to suggest we don’t have 
the consensus right now on the bargaining. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you explain how your department could 
spend $1,192,169.89 on travel in-province last year and an 
out-of-province of $128,876.96? 
 
(22:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, when 
we look at in-province travel we have to recognize that 
Saskatchewan has 99 school divisions, it has 7 regions. There 
are regional directors, there are special education coordinators, 
there are facility planners within these region, and they travel to 
schools. We’re close to 800 schools in the province of 

Saskatchewan — 99 school divisions, 7 regional offices — and 
that’s where that travel occurs; most of it of course in rural 
Saskatchewan. And that’s to meet the needs and their mandate 
for service delivery in the province. 
 
With regard to out-of-province travel, certainly this would be 
. . . primarily, we’re looking at well over 300, roughly 300 
full-time equivalents within the department. We’re looking at 
staff that will attend professional development seminars in other 
jurisdictions. And if you look at that overall — and we certainly 
have the breakdown in terms of each staff person within the 
Department of Education — but most of these would be 
involved in travelling to participate in seminars, professional 
development experiences of that nature. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you tell me, is 
this number up or down from last year . . . the number for 
travel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — We don’t have the numbers for the 
previous year available at this time, but we can get that 
information and provide it to the member opposite. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The issue of school 
bus safety is something that school divisions and teachers and 
parents right across the province are concerned about all the 
time. I know that there has been recommendations for 
additional signage and material to ensure that buses are visible 
and that children are safe while they’re on the bus. Has your 
department looked at changing any of the signage or any of the 
information around school bus for additional safety? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is the regulator for all 
public service vehicles. And it is my understanding that the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association has had 
correspondence with SGI on behalf of all school divisions with 
regard to these safety issues. And that they are working on 
policies for example, with regard to signage, with regard to 
empty buses for example. But there is the discussion occurring 
and methods in terms of how we can improve the safety around 
school buses. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that also 
there has been a request to your government to introduce 
legislation regarding campaign spending limits, which are 
reasonable, and election financing and expenditure reporting 
mechanism. Could you tell me what the status of this request is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it’s my 
understanding that there has been some discussion with regard 
to how campaign spending and spending limits are to be 
determined. 
 
The legislation that covers school boards is the same legislation 
that covers urban municipalities. And there has been discussion 
between the School Trustees Association and the department 
and also Municipal Affairs in terms of how this should be 
included or worked on. 
 
But it is my understanding that if . . . as these discussions move 
along, that school trustees and the School Trustees Association 
will be involved and whatever policy is developed that there 



June 18, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1905 

 

will be recognition and certainly consensus from the groups 
involved. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — It now being past 10:30, the committee 
will rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:38. 
 
 


