















































Hansard: May 02, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 867 
 May 2, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
afternoon I stand to present a petition on behalf of the people of 
southwest Saskatchewan, some specifically from the Cypress 
Hills constituency and others from constituencies surrounding 
the region and the city of Swift Current. It is a petition that 
draws attention to the condition of health care and facilities for 
health care in the city of Swift Current. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 

 
And specifically the petition is signed by constituents from 
Pennant and the city of Swift Current and other communities in 
the southwest. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
which is regarding Saskatchewan’s EMS (emergency medical 
services) development project calling for provincially run and 
centrally operated ambulance services. And, Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from the 
community of Biggar, and I’m pleased to present the petition 
on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present 
today regarding the EMS report: 
 

Whereas your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Rose Valley 
and Quill Lake. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the increasing costs of energy. The 
petition reads as follows: 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, in addition to my 
home community of Melfort, are from Bjorkdale, St. Brieux, 
and Star City. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
on behalf of citizens concerned about the cuts at Assiniboia 
Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary actions to ensure that, at the very least, 
current levels of services and care are maintained at 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from Shaunavon, Rockglen, 
Assiniboia, and Wood Mountain. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from the southwest part of our province concerned about 
the state of the hospital in Swift Current. And the prayer of this 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from my 
home community of Swift Current as well as Hodgeville, 
Herbert, Morse, and Vanguard, as well as Wymark. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too present 
petitions on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan regarding the 
EMS service. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance service as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people in the 
Antler-Redvers area. 



868 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition dealing with the Redvers health care centre. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service, at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to the users from our district, 
southeast Saskatchewan, southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, these petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, they come from the Redvers, Bellegarde, 
Storthoaks, Wauchope areas of the province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition concerning the retention of the Hafford 
Hospital. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Hafford 
Hospital remains open. 
 

Signed by the good citizens of Hafford, Speers, and Richard. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
signed by the good citizens of Saskatchewan concerned, 
worried about the high rates — SaskEnergy, SaskPower 
increases: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by good citizens from Davidson, Girvin, Saskatoon, 
Elbow, Borden, Glidden, and Regina. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the energy 
rate rebate program: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the services at 
the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at very least, current 
levels of service and care are maintained at the Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I rise 
with a petition from concerned citizens, reference the cuts at the 
Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signators on this are from Gravelbourg, 
Assiniboia, Verwood, and Willow Bunch. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
received as addendums to sessional papers nos. 3, 4, 10, 58, 65, 
and 121. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 33 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: which 
non-profit and/or community-based organizations received 
funding from the Department of Highways in the 
1999-2000 fiscal year, and how much did each of these 
organizations receive? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a similar 
question for the upcoming year: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: which 
non-profit and community-based organizations will receive 
funding from the Department of Highways in the 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 869 

 

2000-2001 fiscal year, and how much will be dedicated to 
each of these organizations? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 33 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: how 
much was spent on travel by CIC strategic development 
officials during the 1999-2000 fiscal year; who were the 
officials; where and when did they go; and who 
accompanied these officials on these trips? 

 
And while I’m on my feet, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
33 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: did Information Services 
Corporation hold a retreat for its executive management 
during the last week of April 2001; were any consultants 
brought in for this retreat; where were these consultants 
from; and which company or companies did they represent; 
what was the cost for bringing these consultants to the 
retreat; and what was the cost for the entire retreat? 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 33 ask the government the 
following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Municipal Affairs: (a) what is the total 
amounts of grants in lieu of to be paid by the province to 
the city of Regina for all provincial government-owned 
properties in the city; what is the amount paid or to be paid 
in grants in lieu to the school systems in Regina for the 
provincial government-owned properties within the city for 
the current fiscal year; did the provincial government 
receive a tax notice or a grant in lieu notice from the city of 
Regina or the school divisions in the city for the current 
fiscal year; and, if so, what is the amount for each; if the 
provincial government was subject to property taxation, 
what amount would it owe individually to the city of 
Regina and the school divisions in Regina for the current 
fiscal year? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
privilege to introduce to you and through you to the Assembly 
the man who scared the NDP in the Elphinstone by-election, 
Mr. Morris Elfenbaum and his wife, Giselle, along with a 
friend, sitting up in your gallery. I’d ask all members to 
welcome them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to all the members in the House, 38 grade 7 and 8 
students who are seated in your west gallery. The students are 
from M.J. Coldwell School in my constituency. And they’re 
accompanied here today by Ms. Fiorante and Ms. Wood. 
 
And I understand the group is going to take a tour of the 
legislature after they’ve taken in some of question period here 

and then we’ll meet for a photo and some refreshments 
afterwards. 
 
I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, that all the members will agree with me 
that we’re always pleased to have school students visit us here 
in the legislature because we all know that the students of today 
are the leaders of tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask all members to offer them a very warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I wish 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of the hon. 
Assembly a young lady seated in your gallery, Ms. Kristie 
Ridgeway of Regina. 
 
Kristie is enrolled in Thom Collegiate. She’s in grade 12. She’s 
in the advanced academic program, a special program where 
she will be studying the respective roles of government and 
opposition. Only 25 students from Thom are chosen for this 
project. 
 
Kristie will be asking the co-operation of various members on 
both sides of this Assembly to complete her course. And I’m 
sure Kristie will do well. She always does in school. 
 
She’s seated with her father, Lorne Ridgeway, a constituent of 
mine from the community of Avonlea. Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

School Safety Patrol Week 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me great privilege today to rise in the House on behalf of 
the Saskatchewan Party in recognition of School Safety Patrol 
Week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, safety patrollers are a familiar sight around many 
school grounds with their familiar reflective vests, stop-sign 
paddles, and well-known sounds of their whistles. They stand 
on guard and they are on a mission to keep their fellow students 
safe. 
 
There are many reasons why kids become safety patrollers but 
most importantly, Mr. Speaker, it gives them a sense of purpose 
in that they are contributing to the well-being of the students in 
their community. 
 
For over 60 years school patrollers have helped students get to 
and from school safely. I would like to congratulate all the 
school patrollers on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party. 
Regardless of what type of weather they seem to have to put up 
with, they’re there on duty getting their fellow students to and 
from safely. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, and while I’m on my feet I would also like to 



870 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

congratulate one of the driving forces behind — if I can use that 
term — driving forces behind the school safety patrol program, 
Ms. Maureen Murray, who is in charge of the public and 
government affairs for CAA (Canadian Automobile 
Association). Job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina School Boards Reduce Mill Rates 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, more good news for the people 
of Regina. Courtesy of the excellent budget presented by the 
Minister of Finance — a budget by the way which the 
opposition members voted against — his budget continued the 
largest personal tax reductions in the history of our province, at 
the same time increasing the contributions to health, highways, 
and, Mr. Speaker, education. 
 
Because of the 15.5 per cent increase in the provincial grant to 
the Regina public school system and because of the 7.7 per cent 
increase in the Regina separate school system, both reduced 
their mill rates which will reduce further . . . decrease the taxes 
to Regina ratepayers. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, of Saskatchewan’s 90 out of 99 school 
divisions which have reported so far, 63 have lowered their mill 
rate, 27 have kept it the same. That is good news for Regina and 
the whole province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Bethlehem Lutheran Church Celebrates 90th Anniversary 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I rise in the House today to talk 
about a celebration which took place in a community in my 
constituency. 
 
On April 22 the Bethlehem Lutheran Church in Outlook held a 
special service to celebrate the occasion of the church’s 90th 
anniversary. The day’s events included a special service in the 
morning followed by a noon luncheon. After that, an 
anniversary program took place in the afternoon and special 
invitations were sent to previous pastors as well as many former 
members of the church that returned to celebrate the special 
anniversary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the church’s history began back in 1911 when 
initial foundations were laid and the church was formed, 
although the actual building itself was not constructed until 
1939. For several years after that the church members 
worshipped in the church basement until construction of the 
main level was completed. 
 
Pastor Daryl Olson is quoted as saying: 
 

That part of our history should reinforce to us that the 
church is not only just a building, but rather is a group of 
people who are on a journey of faith. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this event wrapped up a year of preparation by the 
planning committee. The community and the church members 

should be proud of a successful event to celebrate the church’s 
90th anniversary. 
 
I ask the members to join me in congratulating the Bethlehem 
Lutheran Church and the community of Outlook in their 
achievement. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Premier’s Business Luncheon 
 
Mr. Yates: — Well, well, well, Mr. Speaker, more good news 
for Saskatchewan. Over the lunch hour nearly 600 Regina 
business people, community leaders, and a couple of MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) were treated to good 
food, good fellowship, and great leadership. 
 
The Premier hosted his first Regina business luncheon. And, 
Mr. Speaker, the message the Premier delivered was simple, 
timely, eloquent, and essential. He said that things are going 
more than well in Regina, and in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He gave the facts and figures of which we in the legislature are 
very familiar. And he reminded us that the main reason we do 
live in a blessed province is because our people have 
demonstrated in the past, and are showing us now, that we have 
a can-do attitude, Mr. Speaker. A can-do attitude; not doom and 
gloom. 
 
There are opportunities galore in Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan people are taking advantage of them — 
economic opportunities, educational opportunities, and social 
opportunities. 
 
A good lunch, Mr. Speaker, and the message made the food 
even better, Mr. Speaker. A good day for Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Southwest Region Volunteers Recognized 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, recently 
Mrs. Margaret Bykevich, on behalf of the Vidora Archeological 
Society, received a certificate of appreciation from the 
Saskatchewan Archeological Society. Now this group has been 
recognized for advancing archeology in southwest 
Saskatchewan for a number of years. The Vidora chapter 
actually has been active in public education activities including 
presentation to area schools, tours to sites, and organizing 
festivals of ancient technology in a variety of communities. 
 
As I mentioned, it’s a small group, active since 1987, but 
they’ve got some of the most enthusiastic and committed 
volunteers in the province. And I wish to extend my 
congratulations to the society on receiving this certificate. 
 
And then on April 28, Mrs. Bev Dolgopol of Consul received a 
Skate Canada, Saskatchewan Recognition Award at the awards 
banquet held in Moose Jaw. This award was presented to her 
for her devotion as a volunteer in the promotion and 
development of skating in southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
Now Bev has been judging skating for many years and travels 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 871 

 

extensively throughout the province, and I’d like to offer my 
congratulations to Bev on being chosen to receive this award. 
 
Now in this year when we have seen many auspicious 
ceremonies honouring volunteers, southwest Saskatchewan 
residents continue to assume their usual leadership role in this 
province. It is through the hard work and dedication of these 
very special citizens that our communities and the entire region 
insist on surviving and even thriving. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Highway Improvements for Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday I rose to 
speak about the 70th anniversary of our provincial parks, and 
today I rise to speak about the new surface roads we can use to 
get there. 
 
Surfacing begins on Highway 23 near Tisdale, improvements to 
Highway 40 near Battleford, and resurfacing is already 
underway on Highway 13, east of Stoughton. Mr. Speaker — 
these improvements are just a sample of the many 
improvements to come on our road network. 
 
The total cost of these three projects run in the neighbourhood 
of 5.1 million. Let me remind the members opposite of the 
budget for Highways and Transportation this year is a record 
$311.7 million which will help resurface and upgrade 550 
kilometres of rural and northern highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, connecting Saskatchewan to the future means 
providing our communities and our economy with a safe, 
reliable, and efficient transportation system. With a $900 
million investment over the next three years, Saskatchewan 
people will see the twinning of Highway No. 1 West and 800 
kilometres of the province’s thin membrane surface highways 
will be upgraded to granular pavement. Safety improvements 
and hundreds of jobs will be created from engineers to summer 
students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a plan. A plan that results in a prosperous 
future for all people in Saskatchewan. By accelerating our 
twinning program, rebuilding rural highways, and repaving 
provincial highways, we will ensure a transportation system that 
connects our province to the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Most Valuable Defenceman at Air Canada Cup 
Midget Championships 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
hockey season has all but drawn to a close except for the NHL 
(National Hockey League) playoffs on TV now. But before it 
does, I want to make reference to an outstanding hockey player 
who played his final game this season last weekend in Prince 
George, BC (British Columbia) at the Air Canada Cup. 
 

Justin Cruz played defence with the Beardy’s Blackhawks who 
competed for the Air Canada Cup National Midget 
Championships. Under the management of head coach, Dale 
Grayston; assistant coach, Jim McComas; staff, Brad 
Tomporowski; and Travis Laycock, the team played 
exceptionally well but not good enough to win the cup. But on 
the other hand, Justin Cruz was voted the Most Valuable 
Defenceman in the tournament. The team played phenomenal 
hockey. They had a great work ethic and it was demonstrated 
by the play of defenceman, Justin Cruz . 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to send congratulations to 
coach, Dale Grayston, assistant coach, Jim McComas, Brad 
Tomporowski, and Travis Laycock, the entire Beardy’s 
Blackhawks hockey team, along with Justin Cruz — a great, 
great defenceman — on a great, great season of hockey. 
 
The fans in and around Duck Lake thoroughly enjoyed the past 
year, and they also want to say thank you to the Beardy’s 
Blackhawk’s hockey team and Justin Cruz for a sensational 
year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prince Albert Women Honoured 
at Women of Distinction Awards 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’m very pleased to stand in the House today and talk 
about five women in the larger constituency of Prince Albert 
that have been acknowledged by the community for their 
contributions to it. 
 
Five Prince Albert women were honoured at the YWCA’s 
Women of Distinction Awards banquet on Tuesday night in 
Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Teena Polle took the award in arts and culture. 
Teena has sung in choirs all her life and is noted for her 
recommendations at music festivals. 
 
Linda Louise Kasko received the business and professional 
award. And it’s noteworthy to say that she has been very 
instrumental in bringing together resources for students with 
learning disabilities. 
 
Orpha Mary Hunt received the award for community 
enhancement. As a teacher of over 35 years, she was 
instrumental in establishing the Prince Albert Reading Council. 
 
And Dr. Lalita Malhotra was awarded the health, sports, and 
fitness award. Mr. Speaker, by the way, she has the distinction 
of having delivered more babies than any other person in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Rebecca Sadler, a young woman from Carlton Comprehensive 
High, was the recipient of the SaskPower/Roberta Bondar 
scholarship. 
 
These women really do exemplify the kind of diversity and 
dedication to community that is vital to the future, not to 
mention the current life in our city. 
 



872 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

And I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me 
in congratulating these five women for their very valued 
contribution to their community. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Municipal Revenue-Sharing Grants 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Municipal Affairs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today the mayors of the cities of Saskatchewan 
met with the minister and they had a message for his NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government. The mayors said urban 
municipalities are facing a crisis situation. Mayors representing 
550,000 people said they are sick and tired of being ignored by 
this NDP government. And the mayors told the minister that 
another empty NDP promise of more funding next year just 
isn’t good enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister finally admit the NDP made a big 
mistake with this year’s budget by making the government 
bigger, driving property taxes up, instead of holding the line on 
taxes by increasing revenue sharing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had a good 
meeting with the city mayors this morning. Our dialogue 
continues and I was very pleased to hear from those mayors. 
 
I’m really disappointed in the member opposite bringing up this 
question of forcing increases in taxes. 
 
In January — local governments seek education tax relief from 
Finance minister. Guess what? Just — if they care to listen — I 
have a letter here that says Rosthern lowering mill rate for 
2001. Prince Albert Daily Herald — a best budget in several 
years for Sask Rivers’ mill rate. Catholic ratepayers get break as 
tax rate falls by 1.48 per cent. The city of Regina, we just heard 
the good news about the school boards not increasing their mill 
rates. 
 
We are working with municipalities. We are listening to them 
and we will continue to listen to them. And I made a 
commitment to open a dialogue as to where we go in the future 
on behalf of our communities, our rural communities and our 
cities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the minister might be interested to know, just because 
the mill rates are going down, with reassessment in many cases 
there’s more tax dollars being taken in than less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because the NDP has spent the last 10 years 
downloading on municipalities, the municipal infrastructure is 
crumbling and many essential local services can no longer be 
maintained without raising property taxes. 
 

Mr. Speaker, thanks to this NDP government’s misplaced 
priorities, property taxes are going up all across this province. 
Listen, Mr. Speaker, this is interesting. 
 
Mr. Minister: in Prince Albert, a 10 per cent property tax 
increase. In Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, 6 per cent increase. 
Estevan, 7 per cent increase. Yorkton, 8 percent. Saskatoon, 4 
per cent increase. North Battleford, 8 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister commit today not to grow the 
size of government with 570 new government employees, but 
instead increase revenue sharing to municipalities all over this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Once again, I’m 
disappointed. The member opposite brings up the point of not 
wanting more people working throughout our communities, to 
the benefit of our communities. 
 
I want to remind them of the letters that they sent to those 
communities pointing out that they would sooner see those 
people not working in lieu of money, and they disagreed with 
them, Mr. Speaker. They said you didn’t tell us exactly what 
your amendment to the budget was going to be. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, having said that, this government has been 
contributing to the well-being of our communities, of our 
municipalities despite the fact that revenue sharing has 
remained the same. There have been many other targeted 
programs involving millions of dollars over the last few years 
that have helped these communities. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the members opposite 
will recognize and live through it themselves — you do the best 
you can with what you have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Management of Crown Corporations 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Mr. Speaker, every day we see more and more 
evidence of a Crown sector that is completely out of control: 
Crown corporations getting into all sorts of businesses where 
they just don’t belong; Crown officials ignoring the direction of 
cabinet, operating outside their mandate, losing millions of 
dollars. Mr. Speaker, allegations of bribery. It’s not a very 
pretty picture. 
 
And what’s the Premier doing to rein it in? Absolutely nothing. 
And when someone like the former minister of Economic 
Development does try to rein them in, she gets forced out of 
cabinet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who’s running things over there? Who’s taking 
responsibility? Why has the Premier lost control of the Crown 
corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 873 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, let me make this 
observation about the Crown sector in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. The member opposite talks about Crown sector 
outside of mandate. Not at all, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Crown sector in this province are delivering services to the 
people of Saskatchewan at a very cost-competitive rate, in some 
cases the best in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. The Crown sector 
is returning resources and investment to the people of this 
province by millions and millions of dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’ll tell you what we’re not doing with our Crown sector — 
what his friends in Alberta have done with their Crown sector 
— privatized it and deregulated it, Mr. Speaker. Because look at 
the mess that’s created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a solid Crown sector, a sector that’s 
contributing to the people and the economy of Saskatchewan, a 
sector that we are going to grow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Premier is living in a dream world, but let’s bring him back to 
reality. 
 
On Monday, if he will remember, we released a memo from the 
former minister of Economic Development that raised serious 
concerns and asked detailed questions about Information 
Services Corporation and its business plan. 
 
And how did CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) respond to these concerns? In today’s paper, Mr. 
Speaker, CIC president Frank Hart said her concerns were 
baseless. What absolute arrogance. Here was the Vice-Chair of 
CIC, the most senior minister in this government, asking 
questions about ISC’s (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) business plan and Frank Hart says that her 
concerns were baseless. 
 
Again I ask the Premier, who is running things over there? Why 
is the tail wagging the dog? Do you think it’s acceptable that 
Crown officials so simply blow off questions from cabinet 
ministers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — The concerns of the former minister 
for Economic Development were addressed by the CIC Board. 
Each of her concerns were analyzed and investigated by the 
board and, Mr. Speaker, each of those concerns were found to 
be groundless. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crown corporation, the Information Services 
Corporation has the support of the legal profession, has the 
support of the real estate association, has the support of the land 
surveyors, has the support of the computer industry, Mr. 
Speaker, and has the support of the Regina economic 
development agency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well let’s shed a 

little more light for the minister. He seems to be in the dark as 
well. The Saskatchewan Party has obtained a copy of Fraser 
Nicholson’s response to the minister’s questions. He basically 
told her to take a hike. In a January 8, 2001 letter to CIC 
president Frank Hart, Nicholson refused to answer the 
minister’s questions. Instead he said, and I quote: 
 

I have serious concerns about the implications of the latest 
demand on the CIC decision-making matrix and the 
authority of the Crown corporation boards. 

 
Nicholson refused to answer because the minister was 
infringing on his authority. Mr. Speaker, I ask again, who is 
running things over there? Does the Premier agree that his 
ministers have no right to question the business plans of Crown 
corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the 
role of the ministers who are on the Crown Investments 
Corporation Board is specifically to question the activities of 
that board and to ensure that they run appropriately and in the 
best interests of the people of this province. 
 
When any issues are raised, Mr. Speaker, as was the case here, 
they were investigated, Mr. Speaker, and they were addressed. 
Every single one was addressed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a corporation which will save the people of this province 
money, which will develop economic opportunities in this 
province, and which, Mr. Speaker, has the solid support of 
everybody who’s been consulted on this, from lawyers to real 
estate agents to the business community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is trying to paint a different picture than the facts that 
we have from the correspondence that we’ve looked at. 
 
Here are some of the questions that the former minister asked. 
She wanted detailed revenue and expense projections; she 
wanted a detailed report on the changes that had taken place 
since the original business plan; and she also wanted a detailed 
report on salaries, accommodations, and travel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are legitimate questions that deserve 
answers and what was the response? Fraser Nicholson told her 
to get lost. He said and I quote: 
 

As the chief executive officer of ISC, I find that the current 
demand creates confusion (that’s what he said) and may in 
fact set a new standard for Crown corporations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, in other words, heaven forbid, Crown corporations 
may actually have to be accountable. 
 
My question to the Premier: why is he allowing his Crown 
corporations to openly defy ministers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me reiterate. These 
issues were raised by the former minister, they were addressed 



874 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

by the CIC board one after the other; each one addressed by the 
CIC board. 
 
Let me just deal with a couple, Mr. Speaker. The mandate 
question. The member will know . . . I’m sure he was paying 
attention when this legislation was introduced last year. The 
mandate has been fully followed by the Information 
Corporation of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And if you look, 
Mr. Speaker, one of the critical aspects here is to ensure that 
there is a return on this investment to the people of this 
province. There will be a return on the investment to the people 
of this province, Mr. Speaker. The computer industry says so, 
the business industry says so, lawyers say so, everybody says 
so, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the minister is still living in 
the land of illusion. The Crown corporation lost $11 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we heard serious allegations about a 
government trying to silence the member for North Battleford. 
 
After the last few days in question period, we’re starting to 
wonder why the Premier doesn’t get up and answer these 
questions. Why is he so silent? Mr. Speaker, I believe it’s 
because this Premier has lost control of his government and 
he’s lost control of the Crown corporations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Here we have, Mr. Speaker, a Crown 
corporation operating outside its mandate. They lost millions of 
dollars last year. They are millions of dollars over budget. In the 
case of Land Titles, it’s still not automated . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. Order. Order. The 
member will put his question. Ten seconds. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Land Titles still isn’t automated and they have the arrogance to 
openly defy a request from the minister. It’s no wonder The 
StarPhoenix editorial talks about an NDP government in utter 
disarray. 
 
My question: why does the Premier think, why does he think 
that it’s acceptable for a Crown corporation head to refuse to 
answer the minister’s question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition seems to want to suggest that things are out of 
control. Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell you this, that member — the 
Leader of the Opposition and his friends — will never have a 
chance to be in control. That’s for sure. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I had the opportunity today to attend to a 
function where there were about 600 people present, leaders of 
the business and the community here in Regina and across 
southern Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, they don’t take the view 
that things are out of control. They take the view that things are 
going very well, Mr. Speaker, with reductions in personal 

income tax, with reductions in small-business tax, with a 
growing economy in all segments — except the difficulty we’re 
having on the farm front, Mr. Speaker. Those folks think things 
are going very well in this province, never mind in the Crown 
sector as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s time for this group of men and women, if they 
want to be a responsible opposition, to get with us, join the 
program, become enthusiastic about the province, and stop this 
kind of foolish criticism, 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Land Titles’ Fees 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Justice. He’s done a fine job of playing premier 
so far today — now we’ll let him take care of his own 
department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the original objectives of automating the 
Land Titles Office was to cut costs, reduce fees for Land Titles’ 
customers. However now that ISC is losing millions of 
taxpayers’ dollars, both the minister and president of ISC are 
admitting that fees will probably be going up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, computerizing Land Titles Office was supposed to 
save money — save money — not cost more money. Mr. 
Speaker, how much more will the property title transfer fees 
increase as a result of the NDP’s botched computerization 
program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure the 
member opposite will be pleased to know that in fact the fees 
will not increase. For the vast majority of transactions, for the 
vast majority of people in this province the fees will go down 
substantially. For a small number, the fees will go up a very 
modest amount. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in sum total this will be a huge saving to the 
people of this province. It’s a better, cheaper, more efficient, 
faster system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
1998 the NDP said that the fees would be less than 
paper-processing fees. Now the minister gets up and he says 
some will and some won’t. Well we know what the NDP’s 
some will and some won’t is worth. Many of those are actually 
going to increase. 
 
Let’s just review the NDP’s record on this whole project. 
They’re $40 million over budget. They lost $11 million in the 
first year. Land Titles still isn’t up and running. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, is: what will the total difference in 
increased fees mean for this particular government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 875 

 

Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite 
have a habit of finding things that are not in fact the case and 
spreading rumours across this province of . . . And, Mr. 
Speaker, Mr. Speaker, ask the member, ask the members, ask 
your leader, Mr. Speaker . . . the member should ask his leader 
what happens when people don’t tell the truth about things that 
are going on in this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the truth of the matter is, the truth of the matter is 
that these fees for the vast majority of people will go down. 
That this will create jobs in this province as the computer 
industry has said. That it will be a faster, cheaper, better service 
as real estate people have said, Mr. Speaker. This will save 
money for the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SecurTek 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. And it has to do with another 
subsidiary of a Crown corporation called SecurTek, Mr. 
Speaker, that in 20 months lost about $2.8 million, Mr. Speaker. 
But what is arguably more disturbing than the loss of taxpayers’ 
money is the impact this corporation is having on small 
businesses in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bryan Pratt is a constituent in Swift Current who 
owns a small security company. He sent me a very emotional 
e-mail that made his case clear on the subject of SecurTek. He 
says, and I quote: 
 

I’d like to know where I agreed by paying taxes to be in 
direct competition with myself.  

 
He says SecurTek has made it impossible for anyone in this 
province to make any kind of a living selling security systems. 
He says, and I quote: 
 

This is just more proof of why Saskatchewan’s tax base 
will continue to shrink. If I could, I would pack up 
everything and get out of this province.  

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how can the minister rationalize 
destroying small Saskatchewan businesses with their own tax 
dollars and losing $2.8 million in the bargain? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Of 
course we are concerned when this impacts on the private 
sector, Mr. Speaker. But SaskTel and SecurTek live in a 
competitive environment, Mr. Speaker. I would say, Mr. 
Speaker, that the member should take about the 14 companies 
that SecurTek is partnering with and creating jobs . . . 
(inaudible) . . . creating jobs here in Saskatchewan. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I refer to an article in The Leader-Post, Mr. 
Speaker, of yesterday actually, that says the following, Mr. 
Speaker: 

Elite Security Ltd., a Regina company that has SecurTek 
handle its monitoring, is one security company that is 
pleased with the arrangement. 

 
I quote, Mr. Speaker, I quote. It says: 
 

“It’s getting better all the time,” said Larry Sydor, general 
manager (Mr. Speaker). 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister wants to 
talk about how companies feel about this particular Crown 
corporation, SecurTek, and we’d be happy to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just the Saskatchewan Party or Mr. Pratt 
that’s concerned. Frankly, it’s Charlie Currie of Active 
Security, and Randy Logan of the Security Company in Regina, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s Don Burback of Yorkton. 
 
And I also received an e-mail from a Saskatoon resident who’s 
a former owner of a security firm, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Kevin 
Banman. And here’s what he had to say in his e-mail about 
SecurTek. He said: 
 

SaskTel basically, their strategy was to (and I quote) 
basically divide and conquer. 

 
He says: 
 

It makes it very hard to compete when they use my tax 
dollars to advertise and finance customer systems against 
me. 

 
He says, Mr. Speaker: 
 

We sold our company last May because the money just 
wasn’t there any more. 

 
He says, and I quote: 
 

I built my company up from nothing 10 years ago and was 
basically forced to sell. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: in the face of these comments 
from Saskatchewan small-business people, for men and women 
entrepreneurs in our province, how can he possibly justify 
losing $2.8 million to drive them out of business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, I say we are 
always concerned when we have impact on small business. But, 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel, our Crown corporations, and SecurTek 
in this particular case, lives in a competitive environment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Why doesn’t that member ask the mayor of Yorkton about the 
40 jobs that out there, Mr. Speaker? Why doesn’t he ask the 
mayor of Yorkton how he feels about that? He’s very positive 
about this. He thinks this is wonderful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have 14 different companies that SecurTek is 



876 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

partnering with. They say they are pleased with the jobs that are 
being created and the opportunities that are being created by 
SecurTek and by SaskTel, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, today the Premier spoke to a luncheon of 
small-business men and women in this city. And I’m sure he 
told them how much he valued the small-business sector in this 
province. 
 
Right after he won the leadership of the New Democratic Party, 
he indicated that he felt small business was the most important 
engine of our economy. 
 
Well now, Mr. Speaker, it’s time for the Premier to walk the 
talk. It’s time for him to back up his words, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is to the Premier. His Crowns are 
driving small business out of our province, and destroying the 
entrepreneurial spirit of Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. It’s just getting 
increasingly difficult to hear the questions, and I would like to 
be able to hear them. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. His Crowns are driving 
small business out of the province, and destroying the 
entrepreneurial spirit of Saskatchewan men and women. 
 
To the Premier: will he commit today, to rein in those Crowns; 
to stand up for Bryan Pratt; to stand up for Kevin Banman; for 
Don Burback ; for Charles Currie. Will he stand up for 
Saskatchewan small business, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I want to 
tell the people of Saskatchewan what that member wants to do. 
That member wants to sell the Crowns, Mr. Speaker, to ensure 
that there is a monopoly held by the private sector, so none of 
the services will be provided in the constituencies that they now 
represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you need only go to Alberta, Mr. Speaker, where 
deregulation is taking place. What’s happened to the power and 
energy rates over there, Mr. Speaker? They’re way right 
through the roof, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is we are concerned when we have impact 
on local business, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — The fact is, Mr. Speaker, as I was 
saying, we are concerned when we have impact on small 
business, but we try to find a balance, Mr. Speaker, that works 
with the private sector. I think we have achieved that with this 
objective through SecurTek. We’ve created 40 jobs in Yorkton, 
Mr. Speaker — not jobs if it was held by a large private utility 
that would be in Toronto and Vancouver, Mr. Speaker — right 
here in rural Saskatchewan. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, I just gave the Premier a chance to 
stand in this legislature and back up his talk; back up his hollow 
words about how he values small business . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. We’ll just have to take our time 
here until we can get a little order so that we can hear the 
question . . . so that we can hear the question, so that we can 
hear the answer. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just gave the Premier 
the chance to stand up in this legislature and back up his words 
about the government support for small business. But he 
remained in his seat, Mr. Speaker, so I’ll give him another 
chance. 
 
It’s time for the Premier to choose. Will you choose between 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member will put all 
of his questions, his comments through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier stand in his place 
today and confirm for the small business sector of this province 
and for people, especially security firms, in this province that he 
will stand behind them instead of his precious Crown 
corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I appreciate that the man 
who would-be leader of that party would give me a chance to 
speak in the legislature. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he wants to talk about my, and our commitment, 
to small business in this province. I invite him to reread the 
budget speech delivered by the Minister of Finance just weeks 
ago. 
 
And what was in that budget, Mr. Speaker, was a 25 per cent 
reduction to the small business tax rate in this province from 8 
to 6. What was in that budget, Mr. Speaker, was a raising of the 
ceiling which qualified some small business from 200 to 
$300,000. What was in that budget, Mr. Speaker, was the ability 
for the professionals of our province to incorporate, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That is commitment to small business. A commitment, I may 
say, Mr. Speaker, that’s not dependent on the sell-off of our 
Crown corporations as they propose, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Question of Privilege 
 

The Speaker: — Members, before orders of the day, I would 
like to bring down the ruling which I deferred yesterday. 
 
Yesterday, the Opposition House Leader raised the question of 
privilege concerning an allegation made by the member for 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 877 

 

North Battleford to a newspaper, that a senior official of the 
Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan offered him a 
trip in return for not criticizing certain CIC investments. 
 
I thank the member for raising this matter by the proper means 
and for doing it in a timely fashion. I also thank the member for 
North Battleford for his intervention when the question was 
raised yesterday. 
 
Before I make my ruling, I remind all hon. members that it is 
not the role of the Speaker to decide if a breach of privilege or 
contempt of the Assembly has been committed. This is a 
question only the Assembly can decide. It is the Speaker’s role 
to decide whether a prima facie case has been established. That 
is, whether on the surface of it the case has been established 
which would justify the matter taking precedence over other 
business before the Assembly. 
 
I will now turn to the case of the Opposition House Leader. In 
making his case the Opposition House Leader states that the 
allegation of the member for North Battleford constitutes a 
breach of rule 102 of the rules and procedures of this Assembly 
and as such is a breach of privilege. Rule 102 states that, quote: 
 

The offer of any money or other advantage to any Member 
of the Assembly, for the promotion of any matter 
whatsoever pending or to be transacted in the Legislature, 
is a high crime and misdemeanour, and tends to be the 
subversion of the constitution. 

 
The member also quoted paragraph 101 of Beauchesne's 
Parliamentary Rules and Forms, which relates to a parallel rule 
of the Canadian House of Commons. I repeat the applicable part 
of Beauchesne which is as follows, quote: 
 

. . . the offer of a bribe in order to influence a Member in 
any of the proceedings of the House, or of a committee, has 
been treated as a breach of privilege, being an insult not 
only to the Member, but also to the House. 

 
In each of these passages it must be stressed that the offer of 
money or advantage or bribe as the case might be, must be 
related to the proceedings of the House or committee. Both the 
rule 102 and Beauchesne's paragraph 101 are based on practice 
at Westminster, which described on page 112 of Erskine May’s 
Parliamentary Practice, 22nd edition, which I quote: 
 

The acceptance . . . of any fee, compensation or reward in 
connection with the promotion or opposition to any bill, 
resolution, matter or thing submitted or intended to be 
submitted to either House, or to a committee, is a contempt. 

 
Again, the operative part of this passage is the connection of the 
contempt with the proceedings of parliament. 
 
It is stated on page 60 of Maingot’s Parliamentary Privilege in 
Canada that, I quote: 
 

. . . it would be a question of fact in each case whether the 
member’s parliamentary activities were fettered by the 
association in question (i.e. a financial inducement to take a 
particular course of action in parliament). 

 

In addition to the case made by the Opposition House Leader, I 
have a letter the member for North Battleford sent me during 
question period yesterday, just before the question of privilege 
was raised in the Assembly. 
 
In his letter, and in his subsequent statement in the House, the 
member for North Battleford indicated that the exchange 
recounted in the newspaper article was accurate but that he did 
not characterize the exchange as bribery. He did not claim that 
the exchange constituted a breach of privilege or contempt. He 
also stated that an investigation was not required to determine 
what was said. 
 
Now with respect to the concept of privilege, Speaker Lucien 
Lamoureux said in the House of Commons in 1971, and I quote, 
that: 
 

. . . parliamentary privilege does not go much beyond the 
right of free speech in the House of Commons and the right 
of a member to discharge his duties in the House as a 
member of the House of Commons. 

 
The general contention of the Opposition House Leader is that, 
and I quote: 
 

The allegations made by the member for North Battleford 
clearly constitute a prima facie breach of privilege against 
the member for North Battleford and against all other 
members of the House. 

 
From the statements of the member for North Battleford to the 
Speaker and to the House, it can be concluded that the member 
for North Battleford does not feel that he has been impeded in 
the performance of his duties. Nor do I find that this allegation 
has impeded the parliamentary activities of any other members 
of this House, collectively or individually. 
 
As the member for North Battleford is the only member directly 
affected by the alleged offer of a trip, and he has indicated no 
intention to claim a breach of privilege, I find that a prima facie 
case of privilege has not been established. Therefore this 
question will not be given precedence over the other business 
on the order paper. 
 
Before concluding the question of privilege, I want to address 
the second part of the case made by the Opposition House 
Leader. The member states, and I quote: 
 

The member for North Battleford has made allegations that 
impugn the character of every member of this Assembly by 
suggesting that members’ support on important issues can 
be bought. 

 
Although the member for North Battleford has stated that he 
does not call the incident in question a bribe, he nonetheless 
makes a very serious allegation. As Speaker, I share the concern 
of the Opposition House Leader and feel that this is a matter not 
to be treated lightly because it diminishes the respect for the 
House and its members. 
 
It is stated in Erskine May, page 112, that: 
 

Any person who is found to have offered such a corrupt 



878 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

consideration is also in contempt. 
 
When allegations or bribery or similar misconduct have been 
made at Westminster, the House of Commons has referred the 
matter either to a select or privilege committee for 
investigation. In Saskatchewan we have a comparable 
precedent. 
 
In 1916 the member for Prince Albert City made an allegation 
that certain members had been offered and had accepted bribes 
in return for political support in the House. The issue was 
referred by direct reference to a committee for investigation. 
 
Although I have found that this case does not constitute a prima 
facie case of privilege and therefore should not take precedence 
over all other business at this time, members still have the 
opportunity to pursue this matter further by submitting a motion 
with the proper notice. 
 
(14:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to table a response to question no. 125. 
 
The Speaker: — The response for no. 125 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
to stand up and respond on behalf of the government to question 
no. 126. 
 
The Speaker: — One twenty-six is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — It has been requested to convert question no. 
127. Converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Request for conversion of 128. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased to stand and 
supply the answer to question 129. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 129 has been responded to. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — 130 is converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Convert 131. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to stand 
and supply the answer to question 132. 
 
The Speaker: — Answers to question 132 have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 10 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 10 — The Oil 
and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take a few 
moments to comment on this particular piece of legislation, The 
Oil and Gas Conservation Amendment Act, Bill No. 10. 
 
The reclamation of orphan wells and how it is going to be done 
in an orderly, organized manner is a good thing, something 
that’s quite workable. However, Mr. Speaker, there are some 
companies in the province we want to continue consultations 
with to make sure that they are indeed onside with this proposal 
the government has put forward, to make sure everyone is on 
the same page and any new rules are agreed to and will be 
adhered to in the future. 
 
It should be noted though that the industry has been very 
responsible in this regard and the orphaned wells at this time, 
province-wide, total about a dozen. Certainly no reason to risk 
throwing the baby out with the bath water. 
 
This Bill makes mention of how oil and gas wells’ facilities and 
related sites are properly abandoned once they are no longer in 
production or use. It should be noted, Mr. Speaker, that some 
members of the oil and gas industry were a part of the 
committee to help look into this situation and to put some input 
into this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to mention also that we are in 
discussion with these groups as well to go over the proposal, to 
make sure that everything is included that the industry would 
like to see and that there were no oversights. So more time to 
study this Bill would be required for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members on this side of the House are very much 
in favour of an environmentally responsible agenda when it 
comes to this particular industry, and I am quite sure the 
representatives from within the industry will concur. And we 
hope this continues and that any good will that exists between 
the industry and the Department of Energy and Mines won’t be 
put into jeopardy because of any provisions that may seem 
heavy-handed, particularly with regard to the licensing 
provisions of this Bill. 
 
It is refreshing to see the minister’s comments on his second 
reading speech on this Bill that Saskatchewan will follow the 
Alberta model for orphan wells. Mr. Speaker, it’s our hope on 
this side of the House that the members opposite will continue 
to follow the examples set by our neighbours to the west in 
regards to the industry so that we can attract the needed 
investment to this industry that will stimulate our economy, 
provide many more good secure jobs in the province, and begin 
to grow Saskatchewan. 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 879 

 

Although as I have said, Mr. Speaker, that we support the basic 
concept of this Bill and what we believe to be the minister’s 
motives for advancing it, we certainly feel that more input is 
still needed from the players in the oil and gas industry. When 
we can get a clear consensus from the industry — one way or 
another — on all of the implications of this Bill, then, Mr. 
Speaker, will be the time to debate it in more detail. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 11 — The 
Freehold Oil and Gas Production Tax Amendment Act, 
2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
speak to this Bill, An Act to amend The Freehold Oil and Gas 
Production Tax Act, Bill No. 11. It’s my understanding, Mr. 
Speaker, that this Bill proposes to impose a new tax on oil 
recovered from such facilities as cavern disposal, waste 
processing, water disposal, or water injection facilities. 
 
This is the sort of activity undertaken by the industry, Mr. 
Speaker, that greatly extends the life of our oil fields, 
substantially enhances oil production in the province, increases 
revenue to the provincial government, protects the environment, 
and provides many good jobs for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only does recovered crude oil provide great 
benefits to the province, but it also tends to be more expensive 
oil to produce. Any government purporting to act in the best 
interests of Saskatchewan should do everything in its power to 
encourage the production of this so-called recovered crude oil 
and certainly should not risk discouraging this type of activity 
through the imposition of onerous new taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the level of this proposed new tax on recovered 
crude oil is not set out in the Bill and will consequently have to 
be dealt with in the accompanying regulations. To debate a Bill 
of this nature without any indication of the level of the proposed 
new tax is akin to buying a pig in a poke. I caution the minister, 
Mr. Speaker, in the interest of the economy of this province, to 
do some real work with the players in the oil industry and to 
reach a consensus with them before proceeding any farther with 
this Bill. 
 
This is a Bill that, if properly done in consultation with the 
industry and with a tax rate acceptable to the industry, could be 
a positive thing for the industry and the province. But if a tax 
regime is imposed on recovered crude oil that is not acceptable 
to the industry, this Act has the potential to cause considerable 
harm to the industry and to drive more oil investment dollars to 
other jurisdictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to continue my comments on this 
proposed piece of legislation by just talking about its title, the 
freehold oil and gas production Act. Now the keyword in this, 
of course, is the word “tax”, Mr. Speaker. Whenever this 
tax-happy NDP government even mentions the word “tax”, 
people in businesses across Saskatchewan start to shudder. 
 

They know the NDP history on taxes. Last year’s PST 
(provincial sales tax) expansion, this year’s forced property tax 
increases — thanks to the NDP. So it’s no surprise when we see 
a Bill or document from the members opposite, and it mentions 
the word “tax”, that it raises some eyebrows. 
 
The minister responsible mentioned the tax instead of a royalty. 
That type of initiative, Mr. Speaker, the oil and gas groups have 
expressed concern time and again, as have members on this side 
of the House, about the oppressive royalty tax structure in our 
province and how it hinders growth. That is something that has 
to change if we are to attract anywhere near the kind of 
investment that this dynamic industry can sustain. 
 
We would also have concerns about what the industry thinks 
when they see this Bill and they see that word “tax”. Will that 
scare off even more business as this NDP government has done 
over the past decade? That is why this proposal needs more 
study, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need this investment to grow the economy of 
this province, and I would question the wisdom of putting a 
new tax in place when high taxes are already the greatest 
deterrent to investment in Saskatchewan, and particularly 
investment in Saskatchewan in the oil industry. 
 
The minister in his second reading speech mentioned that the 
province’s authority to levy a royalty on oil recovered from 
certain oil field facilities including waste processing facilities. 
The minister goes on to say that the government’s authority to 
levy a royalty on this oil was not as strong as it could be and 
may not stand up to a legal challenge. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is another section of the document that will 
require further examination as to what the implications are for 
the oil and gas industry, if it is a positive or negative thing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to do what we can to grow 
Saskatchewan. A lot of companies would like to come into our 
province and contribute to the economy, but they do not. They 
say it is because of the NDP government and its regressive 
taxation. This has to change. 
 
The Canadian Association of Petroleum Producers says that we 
are the highest-taxed jurisdiction in Canada and therefore the 
highest-cost jurisdiction for them to do business in Canada, and 
one of the highest in the world. 
 
Surely it is time to begin removing and lowering taxes rather 
than imposing new ones, and that is why we need more time to 
study this Bill and to see if the affected parties will be 
supportive or not. 
 
This legislation before us will need further study, Mr. Speaker, 
further input into our office from the numerous oil and gas and 
drilling companies. They’re expressing to our office that they 
would like more time to study the Bill, to see how it will affect 
their businesses in Saskatchewan. Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, 
we require much more time to gather input from the industry 
regarding the implications of this Bill on them and the 
implications that it will have on the overall economy of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



880 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

When we have had sufficient time to gather input from the 
industry and to determine what the future ramifications of this 
Bill will be to the economy of the province, then, Mr. Speaker, 
will be the time to debate this Bill in more detail. I move 
adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(14:45) 
 

Bill No. 2 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 2 — The 
Securities Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As was just stated 
this is not a full Bill, this is just an amendment to a Bill but still 
there are a number of things in there that I think we need to talk 
about, we need to question, and we need to get an opinion on. 
 
The Bill, Bill No. 2, The Securities Amendment Act, what it 
does and one of the things that it does, it allows for a permanent 
registration system of deals and salespeople involved in 
securities trading, ending a practice of yearly registration which 
is currently in place. 
 
This is almost astounding, Mr. Speaker, that this government 
would actually do this. Because what happened here is we’re 
actually cutting back on red tape. It means that these 
individuals, instead of having to come cap in hand to 
government every 365 days and saying please, government, 
may I go ahead and carry on this business for another year, can 
go ahead and be registered and carry on for a certain period of 
time longer than just, you know, 12 months, 12 months, 12 
months. 
 
And the reason I say that, that it’s surprising, is that it’s not in 
the attitude of your average socialist to get rid of red tape. And 
maybe looking at this comes from the present Minister of 
Justice who had tried hard to be the premier. Maybe he should 
have been premier; he would have taken away some of the red 
tape we have. 
 
We have, Mr. Speaker — I’m not sure if you’re aware of it — 
17 binders of this size of red tape in Saskatchewan. Can you 
imagine how many binders full of red tape that is? And yet 
finally, finally, we have one minister who’s prepared to be 
brave enough to take away a little bit of the red tape. 
 
We wonder how much red tape there is in this province that is 
absolutely useless, Mr. Speaker, that serves no purpose 
whatsoever except to hassle the individuals who are making a 
living, who are creating jobs for people in this particular 
province. They have no idea of what’s going on out there. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Speaker, that if the members opposite 
would actually go ahead and spend some time in business to see 
what was going on, they would find out the amount of red tape 
that’s out there and how frustrating that is. When the employers 
of this particular province, Mr. Speaker, after putting in a full 
day’s work — they’re there first, they provide the jobs and the 
opportunity for their employees, they provide a service for their 

communities — then after that’s all over with, after supper, they 
have to come back and they have to deal with 17 volumes of red 
tape, Mr. Speaker. It’s unbelievable, it’s unbelievable. 
 
So finally they take away one little bit of red tape. And it’ll be 
interesting to see, Mr. Speaker, very interesting to see that 
maybe after a year or three that the securities area actually 
hasn’t fallen on its face and collapsed because they cut some 
red tape. 
 
I see the members over there, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate 
this. They’re sitting there with, you know, glued to what I have 
to say because they themselves are spellbound by the fact that 
they would actually cut some red tape out of their 17 volumes 
of red tape that this government has. 
 
So now what we have, what this recommends, Mr. Speaker, is a 
permanent registration system. And that’s why this is so 
amazing. They’re moving from this 12 month, 12 month, 12 
month thing — coming cap in hand in government — to 
permanent registration. Permanent registration; not even once 
every 2 years or 3 years. 
 
And I see the look of awe on their faces. I’m sure government 
members aren’t anywhere near aware that this piece of 
registration is being presented by them. And I’m a little afraid, 
Mr. Speaker, that when it comes to voting on it, they’ll 
probably vote it down. They’ll probably vote it down. 
 
Another thing that this particular piece of legislation does, Mr. 
Speaker, and I’ll read it to you. It says: 
 

It prohibits anyone with the intent of making a trade to 
make statements that contain untruths. 

 
Well this is going to be amazing. I’m sure this government’s 
going to find an opportunity to hire thousands of bureaucrats to 
sit in on every deal that’s made throughout the province, to 
make sure that there isn’t an untruth told. 
 
So now we have . . . this government is going to become the 
truth police. It reminds me a whole lot of Big Brother in some 
other situations. The truth police over there. 
 
Now we hope that any time a deal takes place that no untruth 
will be told, no untruth will be said. And yet it’s impossible to 
imagine that this government is actually going to go ahead and 
ensure by this piece of legislation that an untruth is not going to 
be told in business. And I’m a little concerned — seriously, Mr. 
Speaker — that we’re going to have the truth police around 
very shortly. 
 
But we need the police out there to do a lot of other things than 
to sit in on another deal, and to sit in and listen to what they’re 
saying when they’re trying to negotiate a deal. It’s also going to 
set out terms and conditions to be disclosed to investors from 
other provinces. 
 
Now that’s good, Mr. Speaker, that’s good. It sets out terms and 
conditions in which information regarding those involved in 
trading securities can be disclosed to investigators from other 
provinces. Finally, finally the socialists over there, instead of 
drawing walls around themselves and around the province and 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 881 

 

trying to keep this whole thing out — no free trade, you know, 
they might allow trade between Yorkton and Saskatoon but you 
need a permit for that, Mr. Speaker — but now basically they’re 
actually going to allow some of that information, some of that 
trading in securities to be disclosed to investigators from other 
provinces. 
 
Well it’s about time we do some co-operation, Mr. Speaker. We 
just heard my seatmate here, a day or two ago, discussing some 
of the things that were happening in the sex trade and the ideas 
that were happening in other provinces, and yet this government 
was bound and determined on trying to invent the wheel again. 
 
Well I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, the socialists opposite 
could not invent a wheel if they were given a millennium. So 
let’s make sure that we support this sort of thing, where they 
allow this to be disclosed to investigators from other provinces. 
 
Okay, Mr. Speaker, also, Bill 2, Securities Amendment Act, 
states that electronic delivery of certain legal information is 
recognized, making it an option over the current requirements 
of pre-mailed delivery of documents. That’s probably a 
movement ahead into the year 2001, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
movement in that direction. 
 
But we just saw that happening with the Land Titles Office, Mr. 
Speaker, where we’re going to move away from the system 
where we used to have to wait weeks, it’s now going to be 
electronic. And yet today, Mr. Speaker, today, the minister in 
charge of the Justice department got up in his place and he said, 
some of the fees for land titles are actually going to go up. 
 
It was put in place, Mr. Speaker, the Land Titles Office, the 
electronics of it, to get rid of a lot of employees. To do it 
electronically, it was going to be fast, it was going to be quick, 
it was going to be efficient. But today he added on a little fine 
print. It’s also going to be more expensive for some of the 
people. Hard to believe. 
 
So when The Securities Amendment Act includes the 
possibility of electronic delivery of certain legal information, 
we wonder very much what the costs are going to be. We 
wonder very much what the costs are going to be. It’s likely 
going to result in an increase in costs, in costs and fees to the 
people of this particular province. 
 
The amendment to The Securities Act, Bill 2, as we’re dealing 
with it this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, also extends the period in 
which investigations can take place to two years from the 
current one year, following an incident. And I think that’s 
probably a worthwhile thing to support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So that if it’s only one year after the particular incident, it often 
takes a lot of time for all the paperwork — electronic or mail, 
whatever it be — to get shuffled through the system and for 
someone to find out that actually something had gone wrong 
with that deal and that there was something dishonest going on 
in it. 
 
By that time, a year is over and suddenly the state of it is, you 
can’t do anything about it because it only lasts for one year. So 
they’re now increasing it to a two-year time during which 
investigations can take place. 

It also removes points from legislation and moves them into 
regulations, and we’ll have a fair bit to say about that a little 
later on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Changes in this legislation for the most part seem fairly 
well-intentioned and positive — the specifics of it. As I said, 
we’re a little surprised it came from over there. We have some 
concerns where they’re going to take it. In this day and age . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It’s a secret socialist plot. We didn’t 
think that you’d catch it up. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And as the member from over there says, it is 
a socialist plot, and I agree with him. And if anyone should be 
able to recognize a socialist plot, Mr. Speaker, it should be a 
socialist. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — In this day and age when so many more 
people are getting involved in the markets, trading stocks and 
securities . . . and there’s very few people in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, that today aren’t talking about that to some extent. 
Many of them are doing it, involved in stocks and securities, 
and at least they’re all very aware of it. 
 
And so this is changing times, and so we have to keep up the 
legislation to change with those particular times. It’s important 
to keep our laws as current as possible, and both to keep up the 
demands with the trading industry, and we also need to protect 
those particular customers. 
 
I find it interesting, Mr. Speaker, that one of the changes in this 
Act makes it illegal for those conducting trade to make 
misrepresentations. It’s interesting that after a decade, the NDP 
would finally decide that to make a misrepresentation is now 
illegal. After 10 years in government, the NDP bring in an 
amendment to say that misrepresentation in conducting a trade 
is illegal. 
 
Where have they been, Mr. Speaker, for the last 10 years? 
Weren’t they aware of this problem, or didn’t they care? 
 
It is important to have laws in place that do protect citizens 
from those who may have less scruples, and to enhance 
investigatory procedures against those with a mind that tends to 
drift away from what is right and what is legal. So there’s some 
good directions in here. 
 
Now we see that there’s increased power to share information 
for those involved in the market with investigators from other 
provinces. And with the globalization that’s taken place, and 
Saskatchewan is part of that globalization — and the NDP are 
being dragged into it, kicking and screaming, but they’re being 
pulled into it — there’s a need to have that investigation set up 
in such a way that it can take place from all over, not just 
province by province or even country by country. 
 
Now no one will hope that proper safeguards are in place. So 
this new power to share such information cannot be abused, and 
the privacy of individuals not involved in illegal activity cannot 
be infringed upon. And that’s a very serious concern, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s one that we always have to be careful to 



882 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

balance all the possibilities that are out there. 
 
We’ve talked this is going to be a lot of electronics taking place 
in how information is going to be sent back and forth. How can 
we ensure that the business that people do in private doesn’t 
suddenly become the knowledge of individuals that have no 
right to it and should not have access to it. 
 
We’ve seen the Pentagon, in some cases, people have managed 
to access some of the records out there. I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, 
if the records of the Pentagon can sometimes be broken into, I 
don’t think that the Saskatchewan government is that much 
more secure. So we have some questions on that, and we’ll 
want to get some more information on that later on this spring 
and summer. 
 
The change to the modernization of the legislation is definitely 
a plus. 
 
But there’s one article that I said earlier on we’d say a bit more 
about, and that is the movement of issues and items out of 
actual legislation and into regulations. And I just pointed out the 
17 volumes, Mr. Speaker, that there exists, of red tape. Red tape 
are essentially regulations. Legislation is not usually considered 
red tape; it’s all the little regulations that are put on and that are 
changed from time to time. And those are ones that I think the 
public has the biggest concern about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have a concern about those because there’s no way for the 
average person out there to have any idea that this is happening. 
They can’t even hope for their member of government to know 
and to let them know in their articles and weekly newspapers or 
however else they communicate to their constituencies. Because 
it’s done by a few bureaucrats. They make a few changes in the 
regulations, and none of the 58 people out here have any idea 
that it’s happening, but suddenly those individuals find 
themselves afoul of the law because someone’s changed a 
regulation. 
 
And I’m going to have to go ahead and set up a bit of a different 
analogy for this one so that the people who are watching this on 
television get the full significance of regulations, of how this 
can catch people and turn honest people into criminals 
overnight. 
 
Saskatchewan and the NDP fortunately have joined us in this, in 
strong opposition to the federal gun control. Now in the federal 
gun control situation, what’s happened over there is the 
firearms that are legal, the ones that aren’t illegal, the ones that 
are classified possibly as being restricted or prohibited, that’s 
under regulations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so here’s what can happen. A particular firearm that an 
individual has purchased on a particular day and it’s legal and it 
is not restricted and it is not prohibited, he goes to bed, wakes 
up in the morning, but what he doesn’t know is that someone in 
Ottawa, some bureaucrat, has just taken that particular firearm 
and said it is now prohibited. This person now has a prohibited 
firearm. He is a criminal. He has a criminal record, just like 
that. He has no responsibility, no way of finding out what was 
happening. 
 
(15:00) 

And that’s why when we have these things take place, where 
issues and items are taken out of legislation where we can 
debate them in the House as we’re doing this afternoon, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’re put into regulations, these things can be 
changed on a whim by bureaucrats. And there’s one million 
people in this particular province that can be affected by it, and 
will have no way of knowing that things have changed for 
them. 
 
There’s no requirement to let the people who are affected by 
those changes and regulations to be informed. That’s very 
serious, Mr. Speaker, that’s very serious. And it’s the kinds of 
things that puts a lot of fear into the people of our province. 
 
The minister states that this particular Bill, Bill No. 2, the 
amendment, is going to make future changes to the rules that’s 
going to make that a whole lot easier. I’m sure that’s true. I’m 
sure it would be far easier for any government to make changes 
it wants without bringing these changes to the legislature. They 
can just slide off into a quiet room some place, make the 
changes, and it’s done. 
 
However our system is not in place to make things simple for 
bureaucrats. Our system is in place to protect the public. It’s put 
in place to allow elected officials scrutiny over government 
actions. And when more and more is moved to regulations that 
have little scrutiny taking place over them until they’ve been 
passed by cabinet, and then how are we going to get to see them 
anyways, the people’s right to hold the government actions 
accountable is weakened even further. 
 
When you’ve made and moved everything to regulations, you 
basically kill democracy, Mr. Speaker. You kill democracy. 
And what you’ve done is create a dictatorship. 
 
And that’s what I’m concerned about that’s happening when I 
look at this particular Bill, Bill No. 2, and I see that there’s a 
desire by this particular government not to allow — not to allow 
the members of this legislature to debate the issues, but to take 
them out of this legislature, put them into regulation, and have 
somebody else make those particular changes. 
 
And I need to repeat this, Mr. Speaker. When you’ve moved 
everything to regulations you kill democracy because there’s 
nothing left for anyone else to do. Furthermore when you’ve 
moved everything to regulations you’ve created a dictatorship, 
and in this case it’s a dictatorship of the socialists. And I can 
see the Finance minister over there already waving a white flag, 
but I’m not sure he’s giving in, so we’ll have to continue a little 
longer. 
 
There are numbers of things that we need to look at further. I 
mentioned though the part about regulations, the part about 
something that looks like we’re going to end up with something 
that might be like the truth police, checking up on everything 
we say. We need to check on some of the other regulations that 
are taking place, the amount of disclosure that’s going to be 
made to investigators, and the security of the electronics that 
will be used in this. 
 
So for that particular reason there’s much more research we 
need to do, and I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 2. 
 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 883 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 13 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 13 — The 
Class Actions Act/Loi sur les recours collectifs be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 13, The 
Class Actions Act. Now this is probably a fairly new one to 
everyone in this province because class actions are not 
something that take place a whole lot in this particular province. 
And I guess to some extent I’d like to be able to say that I’m 
glad that it hasn’t, because possibly there has been no need for 
that. However I rather doubt that. But I think we would all like 
to think, Mr. Speaker, that we haven’t seen many class actions 
take place because there hasn’t been the need. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, times are a changing. I mentioned 
globalization a while back, and I think what happens with that 
is all the things that take place in other countries, in other 
democracies, we tend to pick up on those. And class actions is 
another one of those. 
 
I think it has some validity. And the purpose for class actions is 
so that those individuals that are harmed in similar sorts of ways 
can go ahead and together take some action in front of the 
courts and look for some redress. And I think that’s good. 
 
We had in this particular province, some possibility for people 
to act together — where you could have had 10 or a hundred or 
a thousand people get together and say, we’re going to 
collectively carry on a suit in Saskatchewan. 
 
However, there was a unique quirk in the law in this particular 
province that said that the harm that had to take place to you, 
the injury that had to be done, had to be identical — had to be 
identical. Which meant that if you happened to be in a plane 
that crashed and there was a definite reason — that someone 
had probably flown the plane poorly and that was the reason for 
the crash — in Saskatchewan you couldn’t carry on a class 
action suit unless for all of you maybe it was your left leg only 
that was broken. If half of the people on that flight had their left 
leg broken and half their right leg, in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, you couldn’t carry on that sort of action. It seems 
bizarre, but that’s the way it was. 
 
What would have to happen is that all those people would have 
to hire their own individual lawyers and carry on their own 
lawsuits, which would just have created a feeding frenzy for the 
legal community but created a totally impossible situation for 
all those people on that particular flight, each one having to 
finance a separate lawyer to carry on that particular lawsuit. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Bizarre. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — A very bizarre situation. That’s correct, as I 
heard one of my seatmates say. 
 
So there is some need, some definite need for this particular 

Act. So now what takes place with this new Act is these 
individuals can get together and a lawsuit can be carried out 
because they were injured. The injuries do not have to be 
identical; they just have to have suffered some injury and they 
can work together on that. 
 
And I think this is one of those cases that we’re sort of catching 
up with the rest of North America, I would probably guess, Mr. 
Speaker. And to that extent I think we need to look at this 
particular Bill very carefully, this change that would allow 
much more latitude in launching such a multiple party or class 
action suit. And I think we would probably accept that. 
 
Class action suits are very seldom, Mr. Speaker, frivolous. 
Individual lawsuits sometimes are because a person thinks a 
little differently, or doesn’t think or whatever, and just decides I 
think I’m going to sue someone, and they look for someone to 
sue. That doesn’t happen with class action suits because class 
action suits usually have a lot of people suffering in somewhat 
similar ways or at least from a similar occurrence. This allows a 
much larger latitude in that area, and I think that’s good. 
 
Of course when you introduce a major change like this, it’s 
important that we also look at what kind of limits we’re going 
to set on a class action suit. Is this now wide open and you can 
have five people suing all kinds of individuals and companies 
on a willy-nilly basis? No it is not. 
 
In his opening remarks introducing this piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Justice stated that the Uniform Law 
Conference of Canada adopted the Uniform Class Proceedings 
Act. And a Uniform Class Proceedings Act is what we’re 
dealing with here — it’s a class action. 
 
In order to bring about legislation that is consistent between 
provinces . . . and as I stated earlier, it’s good to see that we 
have the members opposite once in a while climbing on a 
ladder, looking over the borders and boundaries they’ve set up 
around this province to see what’s happening elsewhere. 
 
I read from his remarks that this legislation does follow those 
recommendations — and I’m referring to the recommendations 
set up by the Uniform Law Conference of Canada — that this 
legislation follows those made by that conference. He didn’t 
state that directly, but I think there’s a bit of a hint there. 
 
And we’ll want to check that out carefully to make sure that this 
actually does follow the recommendations of the Uniform Law 
Conference of Canada. And I wish you would have made that a 
bit more clear. But we’ll want to question him closely on that 
Bill in the next few weeks or months, when it arrives in 
committee. 
 
In general, Mr. Speaker, I find it somewhat refreshing to see the 
members opposite actually appear to be introducing a law that 
may well enhance people’s rights before the courts instead of 
extinguishing them, as we have seen in so many instances 
dating back to 1991. 
 
And this government is probably the government in North 
America, maybe even in the Americas, that is better than any 
other government in extinguishing people’s rights and 
freedoms, things that they thought that they meant. 



884 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

And we just had a member from Saskatoon chirping over . . . 
doesn’t seem to want to believe this. Well I’ll mention to her, 
Mr. Speaker, the word GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program). Where people in this province had a contract with the 
NDP government, Mr. Speaker, they had a contract with that 
particular government . . . signed contract that was very clear, 
very specific. 
 
It had been in effect over a number of years and farmers had 
used this, so they were used to it. It wasn’t something new that 
came in and suddenly was found out not to work. It had been 
there; it had been in effect. And this government tore it up and 
said, we just decide we’re going to take those rights and 
freedoms away from you. 
 
Now had we had class action in Saskatchewan, had we had 
class action, all those farmers, thousands of them, could have 
joined together in a lawsuit against this NDP government and 
shown them that what they were doing was wrong, was illegal, 
was unfair, was actually immoral — to take a contract that you 
sign, tear it up, and say it no longer exists. 
 
So if the members opposite wonder if that happens in this 
country, if it happens in this continent, it happens in this 
province and it was carried out by the NDP. GRIP is something 
which people still remember and many of them are, 
unfortunately, never going to be able to forget that because it 
created so much hardship. 
 
And I see the minister in charge of Agriculture sitting there and 
grinning from his seat, as if he’s proud of the fact that he went 
back to the farmers in Yorkton and said, all you people that 
farm in Yorkton, tear up the contracts because we deem we 
never signed it. Amazing that a government can just deem they 
never signed it, when their name is on it. That’s why we need 
something like this, the possibility for a class . . . a group of 
people to go ahead and form a class action suit. 
 
And, of course, no-fault insurance is another one, Mr. Speaker. 
And amazing when we start looking at places where class 
action suits would have been valid, would have been useful for 
the people of Saskatchewan, it’s the NDP government opposite 
that would have suffered at the hands of most of those class 
action suits. GRIP was one; no-fault insurance was another one. 
Took away people’s rights before the courts. 
 
We had an interesting situation not long ago under SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance). And you will recall, 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure, where partway through the year SGI 
decided to up the rates. So someone who might have paid $900 
for his insurance finds it’s gone up a little further — and I’m 
referring to the deductibles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So just like that this government said you all have a contract, 
you signed it for a year, you bought your licence, you paid for it 
for a year, 12 months, so you now have your security for 12 
months from now . . . or till 12 months from now I can drive 
this vehicle; I’m covered with insurance. This government, their 
SGI Crown corporation they’re so proud of, shamefully said, 
we’re going to tear up that licence you have and say you owe us 
more money when you have accident. The deal that you had 
when you sign it is gone. 
 

So there is much room for class action suits. 
 
What happened in that case, Mr. Speaker, what happened in that 
case, Mr. Speaker, is one individual took it to court. And I 
believe SGI realized that they could find themselves losing 
every single court case and decided to save themselves a lot of 
hassle and having their reputation sullied still more and paid 
that money back. I hope we’ll soon see another piece of 
legislation that remedies that sort of thing as well. 
 
Some of the members on the side opposite who were here in 
1999 will remember that particular thing happening, when that 
deductible, as I mentioned, was changed from 500 to 700. 
 
And I wonder when the minister gives us examples of where 
class action suits are preferable, this case of against the 
government, and the two that I mentioned — the GRIP case and 
the SGI case. And again, the member from Yorkton should 
know both of those well. One is a farmer tearing up that GRIP. 
And second, I believe he used to be an insurance salesman. He 
probably knows both of those very well. 
 
So while the principle behind this Bill is one that I think we can 
agree with, we’ll need a lot of clarification on the details of that 
Bill. We’ll need some clarifications to make sure what the 
limits are, the parameters that are out there around this 
particular Bill, Bill No. 13, The Class Actions Act. 
 
I’m also interested in sections of this Bill, such as section 14, 
which states that any time the court may make an order it 
considers appropriate respecting the conduct of a class action to 
ensure fair and expeditious determination of a case. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now I would hope that means that this government, this 
government, the NDP government, can’t hide behind the legal 
system and literally drive people into poverty rather than settle 
their court cases. 
 
We had one on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) not 
long ago, Mr. Speaker, where an individual family had been in 
court with this government for seven years — for seven years. 
They’re waiting, they’re ready, they’re trying to get into court 
and to deal with this with the government. 
 
This government, this NDP government, is dragging its feet, is 
dragging its heels, to try and stay out of court. They saw it on 
CBC; I’m sure they did. It’s probably the only station they 
watch. 
 
Those kinds of things, I would hope, that when we look at the 
details of this particular Bill, Bill No. 13, are taken care of so 
that, as I’ve said, class action suits are taken care of in a fair and 
expeditious manner so that they don’t last for years and years. 
 
I’m also interested in clarifying with the minister the power of a 
person to opt out of a class action suit and pursue his or her own 
action independent. Those kinds of things in his introduction 
weren’t given. And we have those sorts of questions; we want 
to ask those. 
 
The minister also stated in his remarks that this legislation 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 885 

 

makes our justice more fair, more certain, and more efficient. 
And in my debate so far this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked 
about those sorts of things — things being fair, things being 
certain — so that you could be sure that when you signed a 
contract with an NDP government, it wasn’t going to be torn up 
in front of you and it was going to be more efficient. 
 
And I mentioned that one court case, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
already been in court in Saskatchewan for over seven years, and 
this government is purposely dragging its feet hoping that those 
people will go away, go broke, or just up and die and get out of 
their hair. 
 
So we have those sorts of questions, we’ll need to get those 
answers, and for that reason at this time, Mr. Speaker, I move to 
adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Superannuation (Supplementary 
Provisions) Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act pertains to the following defined benefit 
pension plans: the Liquor Board superannuation plan, the Power 
Corporation superannuation plan, the Workers’ Compensation 
Board superannuation plan, the Public Service Superannuation 
Plan, which encompasses the Anti-TB (Tuberculosis) League 
superannuation plan and the Saskatchewan Transportation 
Company superannuation plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these various plans were closed to new employees 
in 1977 and the majority of active members are now between 
ages 40 to 59. Each of the pension plans has a board that 
oversees the operations of the plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the major amendment proposed in this Bill 
provides a surviving spouse of an employee who dies prior to 
retirement with the maximum pension allowance available 
under the pension plan. This amendment replaces a provision 
that provided the same maximum pension allowance only if the 
employee had chosen the higher benefit. 
 
As people move from one employer to another, Mr. Speaker, it 
is important for some members that their pension asset be 
transferable. This Bill updates and modernizes the ability for 
these plans to enter into new agreements to allow 
transferability. These changes are required because other plans, 
like the Government of Canada’s, have cancelled their 
agreement with these plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of several of the proposed 
amendments to this Act is to clarify compliance with the federal 
Income Tax Act. It is imperative, Mr. Speaker, that the pension 
plans comply with the federal legislation to ensure that their 
registration status is not affected. 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, the amendments proposed to The 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act serve the 
purposes of improving survivor benefits, revising the portability 
of the member’s pension asset, and compliance with federal 
law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend the 
Superannuation (Supplementary Provisions) Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
whenever you’re dealing with someone’s pension plan, it’s their 
future and it has to be taken very seriously, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As the minister said earlier, this plan closed in 1977. So you can 
be assured, Mr. Speaker, that the people involved in this plan 
have put a lot of reliance into it for their future to support them 
as they retire or, in the case of a tragedy and someone dies, to 
support their spouse and family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did find it interesting though when the minister 
stated that the people involved in this plan, since it closed in 
1977, were between the ages of 40 and 59. At age 40 today, if 
you’re involved in this plan, you must have started working and 
to qualify for this pension when you were 16 years old. I didn’t 
realize that the government hired employees at age 16 that 
would have been eligible to receive a pension. 
 
So perhaps that’s something that the minister at some point 
could explain to us, why the government was hiring employees 
at age of 16 to qualify for this pension plan. You know that’s 
one of the issues I think that would be of interest. Not that 
there’s anything wrong with it, Mr. Speaker, in the sense of 
being illegal, but rather a point of interest, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Opportunities for youth. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — The minister hollers across, 
opportunities for youth. Well, Mr. Speaker, I hope that when 
the minister says that he means that whenever a youth works for 
the government then, that they would be entitled to start 
building a pension plan that’s transportable with them. So that 
when they are hired as summer students, summer employment 
students, that they can start to build a pension plan for their 
future. 
 
I’m not sure that this happens but perhaps the minister can 
clarify this when he gets an opportunity in Committee of the 
Whole, when this Bill reaches that point sometime this summer, 
to explain that to us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s very important that people be able to transfer 
or have a portable pension plan, that as they move from location 
to location that that pension plan follows them and they can 
continue to contribute to it. 
 
I guess the questions we need to ask the minister: is this plan 
only portable within government or is it portable as a person 
may move through their career, in government service, out of 
government service, and whatever else they may be employed 
with such as self-employment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the issues that has been raised to me on pension plans, 
Mr. Speaker, particularly by those people involved in the 



886 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

pension plan is, as they leave that sector of employment, where 
they’re no longer contributing to that particular pension plan, 
what notifications do they receive, on an annual basis let’s say, 
of the status of their pension plan? 
 
You know, a person may have been employed in the 
government employment for 10 years prior to 1977, contributed 
to the pension plan, but haven’t worked for the government 
since that point in time. Is there a notice sent to them on an 
annual basis, Mr. Speaker, that shows the value of their pension 
plan and indicates to them that the managers of the pension plan 
still remember that they had made contributions and are still 
eligible to receive benefits? 
 
That’s very important for a lot of people, Mr. Speaker, because 
they may have forgotten what they did 25 years ago in the sense 
of contributing to a pension plan. As they move, papers get lost. 
It’s important that the people who operate the pension plan, Mr. 
Speaker, remain in contact with all of the participants whose 
money resides within that pension plan and who are eligible to 
receive benefits. Because it’s not just the individual who made 
the initial contribution who is entitled to a benefit, but their 
spouse and children in the case of death, Mr. Speaker, who 
would be entitled. 
 
So that is important. And those are some of the issues, I think, 
Mr. Speaker, that the minister needs to take under advisement 
and be prepared to answer at the opportunity he will receive 
whenever this Bill would go into Committee of the Whole, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But there are a number of people across the province, Mr. 
Speaker, who are very interested in any changes to the 
superannuation Act because it affects their pension plan, Mr. 
Speaker. They need an opportunity to review what this Bill does 
and the implications it may have on their future well-being. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s important that they be given the time to 
have a look at this Bill, to respond to any concerns that they 
may have. Therefore I would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today 
to move second reading of Bill No. 14, An Act to amend the 
Provincial Auditor Act. This Bill, Mr. Speaker, amends the Act 
governing the Provincial Auditor which was passed in 1983. 
 
The Provincial Auditor is an officer of the Legislative 
Assembly. The amendments in this Bill strengthen the 
independence of the Provincial Auditor and strengthen the 
accountability of the Provincial Auditor to the Legislative 
Assembly. The amendments in this Bill reflect the 
recommendations of the Standing Committee of the Legislative 
Assembly on Public Accounts — an all-party committee of the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
And I’m very happy to say, Mr. Speaker, that the amendments 
proposed in this Bill have received the unanimous support of all 
of the political parties in the Legislative Assembly — 
something we don’t see everyday. 

The process leading up to these amendments, as can be 
appreciated, was very open and complete. 
 
On December 6, 1999, the government announced in the 
Speech from the Throne that amendments to The Provincial 
Auditor Act were planned. 
 
In February 2000, the Provincial Auditor issued a special report 
that provided the Provincial Auditor’s recommendations for 
amendments to the Act. The Provincial Auditor at that time 
indicated that the purpose of the special report was to obtain the 
views of the Public Accounts Committee regarding required 
amendments to the Act. 
 
The government established an advisory committee to review 
the Provincial Auditor’s recommendations and the amendments 
being considered by the government to provide an independent 
review. This Provincial Auditor Advisory Committee was 
chaired by George Baxter, Ph.D. (Doctor of Philosophy), who is 
a professor of accounting at the University of Saskatchewan. 
And the committee reported its recommendations on June 7, 
2000. 
 
The Public Accounts Committee was able to review the special 
report of the Provincial Auditor as well as the report of the 
independent committee. It completed its review of the 
Provincial Auditor’s recommendations and the advisory 
committee’s recommendations in the fall of 2000. 
 
The Provincial Auditor and the government worked together on 
the wording of the amendments to appropriately reflect the 
recommendations of the Public Accounts Committee. And the 
opposition Finance critic says it wasn’t easy. And it probably 
wasn’t. 
 
And I have to compliment, actually, the opposition Finance 
critic here, Mr. Speaker, because he is, as you know, the Chair 
of the Public Accounts Committee. And the Public Accounts 
Committee did a lot of work with respect to this legislation 
which, I think, has led to a better product and the rare event of a 
unanimous recommendation from the Public Accounts 
Committee and both sides of the House, which is reflected in 
this legislation. 
 
So the government recently announced in the Speech from the 
Throne, Mr. Speaker, that amendments to the Act would be 
introduced during this session of the legislature. The 
consultations are now complete, and the Bill therefore has been 
introduced and is today having second reading. 
 
I would like to thank the Provincial Auditor for providing his 
views and working with the Department of Finance on the 
amendments in this Bill. I appreciate the work of the Public 
Accounts Committee, chaired by the opposition Finance critic 
in thoroughly reviewing the Provincial Auditor’s 
recommendations and the advisory committee’s 
recommendations. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I would also like to thank the advisory committee for the 
service it provided and its vision of an enhanced audit 
committee. 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 887 

 

So you can see, Mr. Speaker, that we have the support here of 
the Provincial Auditor, the Public Accounts Committee, the 
various political parties in the Legislative Assembly, and the 
independent advisory committee. 
 
The Provincial Auditor has written me and reported to this 
House indicating that he supports this Bill because it maintains 
the government’s accountability to the Legislative Assembly 
and improves the Provincial Auditor’s independence. 
 
I’m very pleased, Mr. Speaker, that the Provincial Auditor 
supports this Bill and that we were able to find agreement 
between the Provincial Auditor, the Provincial Controller, the 
Department of Finance, the Public Accounts Committee, and 
representatives of the private sector. This is not an everyday 
occurrence. 
 
I should say, Mr. Speaker, the main provisions in this Bill are as 
follows. Firstly, the amendments — and this is very important 
— ensure an independent process for the selection and 
appointment of the Provincial Auditor for Saskatchewan. The 
amendments provide for the appointment of the Provincial 
Auditor by resolution of the Legislative Assembly upon the 
unanimous recommendation of the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
What that means, Mr. Speaker, is the Public Accounts 
Committee of course is a committee of all of the political 
parties of the Legislative Assembly. So you need to have all of 
the political parties agreeing on a recommended Provincial 
Auditor and then that recommendation would come to the 
Legislative Assembly. 
 
The amendments also ensure an independent process for the 
review and approval of the Provincial Auditor’s budget. 
Currently the Board of Internal Economy performs this function 
but that is not required by law. What these amendments do is to 
say, in law, Mr. Speaker, that the Public Accounts Committee 
— which is, as I said, an all-party committee of the Legislative 
Assembly chaired by a member of the opposition that works 
with the Provincial Auditor — will review and approve the 
Provincial Auditor’s budget. 
 
The amendments strengthen the accountability of the Provincial 
Auditor to the Legislative Assembly by formalizing, in law, the 
current practice whereby the Provincial Auditor provides a 
business and financial plan and an annual report on operations. 
The amendments provide for the tabling of these documents in 
the Legislative Assembly and the referral of these documents to 
the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
So once again, all of the political parties of the Legislative 
Assembly will be involved in looking at the plans and budget of 
the Provincial Auditor. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, the amendments strengthen 
accountability by providing for an independent audit committee 
to advise the Public Accounts Committee, at its request, with 
respect to recommending a Provincial Auditor to review the 
Provincial Auditor’s reports if requested to do so, and in other 
matters as determined by the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
The amendments also provide for members of the audit 
committee to be selected and appointed by the Public Accounts 

Committee after consulting with the Crown Corporations 
Committee. Members from the academic, legal, business, and 
accounting sectors of the province would be selected to provide 
technical advice to the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Once again, Mr. Speaker, the point of all this is to say that 
because the books of the province need to be independently 
audited by the Provincial Auditor, we want to take the control 
out of the hands of the government of the day, the political 
party that may be in government, and to involve all of the 
members of the Legislative Assembly, which is only proper 
because the Provincial Auditor is an officer of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
And I should say, Mr. Speaker, that this follows a trend with 
respect to other officers of the Legislative Assembly as well, 
such as the Ombudsman, the Children’s Advocate, and the 
Chief Electoral Officer. More and more what we’re doing, what 
other governments are doing, is to take the decisions respecting 
these people out of the hands of the major political party in the 
legislature and involve all of the members of the legislature. 
And that’s what we should be doing; that’s what the Bill 
proposes. 
 
In addition to the Public Accounts Committee, the amendments 
allow the Provincial Auditor, the Minister of Finance, or the 
minister responsible for The Crown Corporations Act, or the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations to request the 
Audit Committee review issues that in their opinion should be 
reviewed by the Audit Committee. This is to facilitate the 
discussion and resolution of audit and accounting issues. 
 
The amendments also deal with a number of administrative 
items, Mr. Speaker, and I won’t mention most of them but I’ll 
mention two of them. Currently there is no term of office 
specified for the position of Provincial Auditor. Saskatchewan 
is just one of three provinces without a term of office specified 
in legislation. 
 
The amendments establish a 10-year term of office for the 
position of Provincial Auditor. They also permit the Provincial 
Auditor to apply for a second or subsequent term. This allows 
for periodic renewal for the office. It also provides a time frame 
that is long enough to attract candidates and allow the 
incumbent to make substantive changes to the office. 
 
The amendments also provide for, as part of the Provincial 
Auditor’s duties, audit assignments that may be required when 
the government issues securities. This eliminates the need for 
an order in council when this service is required. 
 
These amendments, Mr. Speaker, will come into force on 
assent. And I’m very pleased to move second reading of An Act 
to amend The Provincial Auditor Act. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
talk to Bill 14, An Act to amend The Provincial Auditor Act. 
After talking to some of my colleagues and listening to the 
minister opposite speak on this Bill, we find that probably a lot 
of the groundwork and a lot of the homework has been done. 
 
As was mentioned by the minister that it was an all-party 
committee that suggested the changes in this Act, so we’ve 



888 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

certainly had a lot of time to have our input into it. And as the 
minister mentioned how it’s unusual to have all the parties 
come together and agree on something like this, and I would 
just suggest that perhaps it was the fact of the chairperson. It 
was the opposition chairperson of that committee and it was 
really quite interesting how it all came together when we were 
chairing it. 
 
And I would just advise the members opposite if they want to 
get some more agreement that maybe they could replace some 
of their Chairs that are on that side of the House with some 
Chairs from this side of the House, and I think things would 
work quite a bit better. But perhaps, perhaps that will be coming 
in the near future. That may be coming in the near future 
regardless. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it was unanimous. It was unanimous between 
the auditor and it was unanimous with the opposition and as 
well as the government of the changes that are being suggested. 
 
I think the most important part — and it was really working 
towards that — is to keep the independence portion of the 
Provincial Auditor, to make sure that it was truly independent 
and that it would be reporting now to the Public Accounts 
Committee as opposed to the legislature as a whole. But it’s so 
important to have that independence, otherwise the office of the 
Provincial Auditor really loses probably most of the respect and 
most of the importance of that position. 
 
I think of many different reports that have come out by the 
Provincial Auditor, which are not always complimentary of 
governments, regardless of what government it is. And 
certainly, this government is no exception. And to know that the 
auditor is speaking on behalf of and accounting on behalf of the 
general public and not certainly bent on any one political 
persuasion — government or opposition — it certainly adds to 
his relevance. 
 
I was talking to, again, a couple of our members that sit on that 
committee and they were talking about not only the 
independence, but how, as the minister opposite was talking 
about, the Audit Committee and how it’s going to have more 
responsibility, or not necessarily more responsibility, but put to 
work more often than what it was in the past. And I think in the 
past it really had been, you know, a structure there that just 
hadn’t been used. 
 
By the looks of it, it’s going to be used a little bit more in the 
future, which is . . . if we’re going to have a committee, it might 
as well be put to work. 
 
One other part of this Act that I think is — and again, talking to 
members on our side that are on that committee really suggest is 
a good idea — is a term of office for the auditor. And they 
suggested a 10-year term with the ability to apply for a second 
length of term. And I think just listening to the minister 
opposite, when you compare it to most of the other provinces 
and their provincial auditors, that they have something like that 
in place, and that was missing here in the province. 
 
And the fact that it’s a long enough term of 10 years with the 
option of a second, you’d certainly get some continuity and 
some . . . with the auditor. They can carry issues from year to 

year to see whether there have been changes on his suggestion 
or not. Whereas perhaps if it’s a quick turnover, it would be a 
little bit tougher to do. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think what we would like to do, although 
we’re very, very close to sending this to the Committee of the 
Whole, at this time I’d like to adjourn debate in case . . . just to 
let it go once more and see if there’s any other issues that come 
up. But by the sounds of it, being unanimous, as I mentioned, 
by the parties concerned, that we’d have no problem letting it 
go to the Committee of the Whole. But at this point I’ll adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
The Chair: — I’d invite the Minister of Finance to please 
introduce to the committee his officials with him here this 
afternoon. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
have with me today, seated to my left is Dr. Paul Boothe, who 
is the deputy minister of Finance; and to his left is Mr. Terry 
Paton, who is the Provincial Comptroller; and beside Mr. Paton 
is Ms. Joanne Brockman who is the executive director of the 
economic and fiscal policy branch of the Department of 
Finance; and seated behind Mr. Boothe is Mr. Bill Van Sickle, 
who is the executive director of the corporate services division. 
 
Behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle, who is the assistant deputy 
minister and is in charge of the Treasury Board branch of the 
Department of Finance; beside me on my right is Mr. Len Rog, 
who is the assistant deputy minister and is in charge of the 
revenue division of the Department of Finance; and behind Mr. 
Rog is Mr. Kirk McGregor, who is also an assistant deputy 
minister and is in charge of taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs of the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, welcome this afternoon and to your officials, also 
welcome. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, for your compliment back 
a few moments ago when you spoke on Bill No. 14. I appreciate 
that comment and I must say that all members worked very hard 
to try to produce a document that is best for the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I guess that’s maybe where I’d like to begin 
today in more general terms with yourself as Minister of 
Finance and responsible for the budget of all of Saskatchewan, 
as well as your particular department is concerned. 
 
The newspaper article, of course, that is before us in the last 
couple of days indicating that the deputy Finance minister 
sitting to your left is moving back to Alberta causes, I’m sure, 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 889 

 

some concern for you as the Finance minister, and it does cause 
the opposition some concern. 
 
(15:45) 
 
I guess, Mr. Minister, what I’d like to know is the contract that 
you had established, the secondment contract that you had with 
the University of Alberta, was it an ongoing contract or did it 
have a term to it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It was for an indefinite period, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while 
we appreciate the work I’m sure that . . . and as well that you 
have . . . must also appreciate the work of Mr. Boothe, we note 
that in the last couple of months there’s been some negotiations 
with yourself and the Clerk of Executive Council regarding that 
contract. And we’re wondering why back at the end of March 
there was a decision made to change the . . . a clause of the 
contract that allowed for the reduction of notice by either you, 
the employer, or the employee in this case, to be reduced from 
three months to two months. Could you explain that particular 
clause? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. It was changed, as the 
member says, from three months to two months to make it 
consistent with the notice provision required by the University 
of Alberta for a return. And also to make it consistent with other 
such contracts that I understand have been entered into by the 
Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — So with the announcement at this time, just 
prior to May 1, does that mean then that that notice was 
necessary to allow for the July 1 re-entry back into the 
University of Alberta? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s correct. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for clarifying that, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, now then with the departure of Mr. Boothe 
effective June 30, you’ve indicated that Mr. McGregor will be 
taking over as the current assistant deputy minister, will be 
assuming that responsibility. Do you see any change in the 
direction of your department with Mr. Boothe leaving, and that 
responsibility being passed on to Mr. McGregor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, I do not, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, the 
changes as I believe the Premier documented in his press 
release, he complimented Mr. Boothe for certain numbers, 
certain accomplishments, certain directions that have been 
implemented as a result of Mr. Boothe being your Deputy 
Finance Minister. Would you indicate that whether or not you 
were pleased with the role that Mr. Boothe played, and the 
direction that your department has headed in in the last two 
years, and whether or not you anticipate any change in that 
direction. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, I do not anticipate change in a major 
way, Mr. Chair. I am very actually pleased with the direction of 
the government’s fiscal policy and the government in general. 
 

I’m pleased with the budget and I’m very, very pleased and 
proud of the men and women that work at the Department of 
Finance. We have a Department of Finance that is recognized 
across the country as being one of the finest in the country. It of 
course does not depend upon the efforts of one individual; it 
depends upon the collective efforts of a few hundred or 
300-and-some men and women who work there. 
 
Certainly the Department of Finance has made major strides in 
the last few years in terms of things like: personal income tax 
reform; tax reductions; The Provincial Auditor Act with the 
co-operation of the member opposite, for which I thank him and 
his colleagues; changes in the area of Indian taxation; many 
other initiatives. And these policies will certainly continue. 
 
I’m very pleased with the job that Dr. Boothe has done as 
deputy minister of Finance during his secondment here. And the 
direction that we have been taking is the direction that we will 
continue to take. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, this 
budget that has been presented most recently, when compared 
to the budget that was presented a year ago — which would be 
the two budgets that Mr. Boothe was involved with — are to 
some degree slightly different. 
 
You announced some income tax changes, some tax changes 
last year. Even though we saw an expansion of the PST, I think 
everyone agrees that if your projected changes produce the 
results that you anticipate, by the year 2003 we should see some 
significant changes in that department. 
 
You also note of course that it was necessary to change the 
income tax system that we had operating in Saskatchewan with 
the federal system, and to decouple, and that was also needed. 
And that’s sort of the mark I guess that we would see Mr. 
Boothe and, as you indicate, others made on that very first 
budget a year ago. 
 
We note now of course that the budget has taken a slightly 
different turn. Much less in the way of tax reductions — in fact 
very little — and more a spend budget. Is that a role that your 
deputy minister has recommended and is this something that 
has the support of your new deputy minister who will be taking 
over? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well certainly my new acting deputy 
minister, Mr. Kirk McGregor, is actually the head of the 
taxation and intergovernmental affairs division of the 
Department of Finance. He has in fact been in charge of the 
response of the government to the Vicq Committee and in 
charge of the program to reduce income taxes. So clearly, Mr. 
McGregor is very much involved with that. 
 
But I’d like to say to the member opposite whose question may 
imply, if I heard it correctly, that the idea of tax reform arrived 
in Saskatchewan with Dr. Boothe, that that certainly is not the 
case. Without taking anything away from the major contribution 
of Dr. Boothe — and it certainly has been major because he’s a 
very competent and respected individual — in fact if the 
member will recall in the budget of 1999, which was several 
months before the arrival of Dr. Boothe in Saskatchewan, I 
announced that I was going to be appointing a committee to 



890 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

review the matter of personal taxation in Saskatchewan. That 
process began as a result of this government’s commitment to 
fairer, simpler, and more competitive personal taxes. 
 
The report arrived after the arrival of Dr. Boothe, but it was in 
fact commissioned before Dr. Boothe came here and then 
implemented under the leadership of Dr. Boothe, ably assisted 
of course by Kirk McGregor and his people in taxation and 
intergovernmental affairs. 
 
So I think that point has to be made. The second point I would 
make for the member is that his question may be taken to imply 
that there were no tax reductions in this year’s budget. In fact I 
would remind the member that the small business corporate 
income tax rate was cut as of July 1 this year by some 25 per 
cent, which I think is a significant reduction. The amount of 
income that small business can earn and be eligible for the 
lower tax rate is going from $200,000 to $300,000. I believe 
most reasonable people would regard that as a tax cut. 
 
And I also would remind the member that in fact it is during 
this fiscal year, Mr. Chair, that the really first part of major 
income tax cuts take effect. There were a variety of additional 
credits for students, caregivers, disabled people, seniors, that 
were announced in the budget as well. I won’t detail all of them 
but the member’s implication that the budget did not cut taxes is 
demonstrably incorrect. 
 
I want to say to the member also that . . . The member says, 
well, the budget had a different focus perhaps this year than last 
year. Well the reason for that, of course, is the tax reform plan 
announced last year takes effect in 2001, which is this year, 
2002 and 2003. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, all of that was announced last year. And of 
course what we’re doing this year is what we said we would do 
last year. 
 
I think it’s very important that governments set out a plan, say 
what they’re going to do, and then do it. And certainly that is 
what our government is doing and the member knows that. 
 
But I also want to say to the member that running a 
government, building a society, is not just about one thing at 
any time. Certainly tax reform is important; tax reduction is 
important. But in this year’s budget we are doing other things. 
 
We are rebuilding the highway system. We are investing more 
money in education, in the K to 12-education system. We’re 
taking high-speed Internet throughout rural Saskatchewan so 
that we can have a level playing field in terms of the 
information technology available to people regardless of where 
they live; and I think perhaps more importantly, so that a child 
who lives in rural Saskatchewan, in the member’s constituency, 
will have the same access to information in the education 
system as a child who lives in my constituency in Saskatoon, or 
anywhere else in the province. 
 
And all of these things, Mr. Chair, are building blocks which 
are important for the province’s future. Part of it is tax reform 
and making sure that we have a fair tax system, but part of it 
has to be fixing our roads and educating young people. 
 

And there are many other things in the budget, but my point is 
we need a balance between tax cuts and investments in things 
that matter to people. And of course people expect the highways 
to be fixed, they expect to have a public health care system, 
they expect to have an education system — all of those things 
are an important part of budgeting, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister for that answer, and 
I do want to end my questions on the direction of your 
department and the role played by Mr. Boothe by wishing Mr. 
Boothe well as he returns to his role at the University of 
Alberta. And thank you for your contribution to the province of 
Saskatchewan in your short two years here. 
 
Mr. Minister, to a question that I asked of you during, I believe, 
the debate on the appropriation Bill, was whether or not your 
department could supply the various numbers of the capital tax 
estimates and the components of tobacco tax, etc. And to date I 
have not received those. And I have a couple of questions. And 
I was wondering whether any of your officials have had the 
opportunity to prepare that information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Actually, Mr. Chair, yesterday I sent a 
letter through the assistance of one of the pages in this 
legislature to the Leader of the Opposition, answering the 
questions of the opposition with respect to taxes and various 
components. And I don’t have that in front of me, although I 
can get it and perhaps send a copy over to the member. But I 
did in fact send that to the Leader of the Opposition yesterday. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. While I understand 
that you may have answered some of the questions and letters, 
and you have done that in the questions I’ve asked, my request 
is for the chart form as you have prepared in previous years that 
indicates all of the values of the various components. And I’m 
just wondering whether or not that chart is available for 
distribution, you know, publicly. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that we did provide 
that yesterday. And I don’t have a copy in front of me, but I will 
ask my office to provide a copy so I can send it to the member. 
But I did send that over yesterday. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. That’s 
very acceptable. 
 
Mr. Minister, to better understand this year’s budget, in a 
general sense, I need to ask you a number of questions relating 
to your mid-year report that was put out in November and how 
that affects the development of this year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve had some discussion about a couple of 
funds that were created in last year’s budget. They were the 
Health Transition Fund and they were the — through the 
Environment and Resource Management division — they were, 
that was referred to as the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
Both of those funds indicated in last year’s budget and even in 
the mid-year, in fact they were not only . . . remained the same 
as the Forest Fire Contingency Fund was, that is it was kept at a 
$50 million limit, but the Health Transition Fund, which was 
initially budgeted at 150 million, was increased by 33 million. 
Mr. Minister, that 33 million, as you noted in your mid-year 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 891 

 

report, was a transfer of federal dollars and it grew that fund to 
183 million. 
 
When I compare the mid-year report to your current budget, 
there seems to be a disappearance of the, of the — not the 
disappearance of the money — but the disappearance of where 
that money actually was placed. Could you explain the $50 
million Forest Fire Contingency Fund and the $183 million 
Health Transition Fund. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to deal 
with the Forest Fire Contingency Fund first. And I should say to 
the member, I did send the member a letter with respect to the 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund which I think he would have 
received last week. 
 
And as I indicated last time we were in estimates in the House, 
we didn’t spend that much of the Forest Fire Contingency Fund 
last year fortunately because we didn’t have as many forest fires 
as we have had in some years. I think we spent 3 or $4 million 
of that. 
 
At the end of the fiscal year, that fund lapses according to the 
rules of accounting. But as I indicated to the member with 
respect to the Forest Fire Contingency Fund, I propose to 
present legislation to set that fund up in law so that the money 
would not lapse in the future, but there would be a permanent 
fund available to fight forest fires in the event of an extra 
number of forest fires in a year. So that deals with the Forest 
Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
With respect to the Health Transition Fund, the member is right 
that $33 million was added to that as a result of monies that 
came from the federal government last fall. And some of that 
money was spent during the last fiscal year, $100 million 
approximately of the Health Transition Fund lapsed; in other 
words had not yet been provided to the health districts. That 
$100 million was added to this year’s Health budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Further question to 
the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, if it was not your intention to create a fund that 
would be carried over last year, why didn’t the actual budgeting 
or estimated budgeting of $50 million, why didn’t the category, 
vote no. 10 within the Environment and Resource Management 
budget, why wasn’t that total budget just increased by $50 
million which of course would lapse at the end? 
 
Was there an intention to create a fund last year that was going 
to be carried over but then because of . . . as you’ve indicated 
this year, you require legislation, was that a decision as to why 
that fund was not put forward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, with respect to the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund, we have increased the basic forest 
firefighting budget this year by something close to $10 million 
— I don’t have the exact figure in front of me — hence the 
Forest Fire Contingency Fund is now $40 million instead of $50 
million, but the total amount available roughly the same as last 
year. 

The reason why we did not pass a law last year to prevent the 
money from lapsing was simply that we wanted to have some 
experience with the fund and see how it operated. We’ve done 
that. Now what we’re going to do is do in legislation — what I 
think the member would want us to do as implied by his 
questions — which is to create a permanent fund where we can 
put some money in to make sure that we have resources 
available to fight the forest fires. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I would 
support that type of move to ensure that there is funds available. 
And as you’ve noted, Mr. Minister, I think that the dollar figure 
that you’re proposing for this year for fighting forests in 
Saskatchewan is relatively the same as last year, except that 
you’ve moved 10 million from sort of an operating to a fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, we are on . . . you know today is May 2, I’m 
wondering how close you are to having that legislation 
available for presentation to the House? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m sorry I can’t answer that question, Mr. 
Chair. The legislation actually — and I may have mislead the 
member — would be presented by the Minister of the 
Environment rather than myself. But what I will do is undertake 
to find out from the Minister of the Environment when that 
legislation is anticipated to be introduced and to advise the 
member accordingly. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
I do want to indicate to you that the official Opposition Whip 
has just talked to the Leader of the Opposition, and indeed the 
document that you said that you circulated to the Leader of the 
Opposition contains the information and I thank you for that. 
 
Mr. Minister, to the second fund that I asked about and you’ve 
made a brief comment — the $33 million of federal money that 
was transferred to the province of Saskatchewan last September 
— could you indicate whether or not that $33 million was used 
to purchase equipment in particular hospitals or was it allocated 
to districts throughout the entire province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It was allocated to districts throughout the 
province, Mr. Chair; 16.5 million spent last year and 16.8 
million will be spent this year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I note in the mid-year financial 
report that you anticipated an expenditure in Health of about 
$2.170 million. That was the projection as of November of last 
year. In the end, your estimates show that you have reduced . . . 
or that the actual expenditures up to March 31 were 
significantly lower than that. Could you explain how we hear 
through listening to boards, district health boards talk about 
being underfunded? 
 
We note that we have problems with maintaining beds and 
utilization of facilities. We have longer waiting lists. And it 
seems that the budget that was proposed by your department 
last spring was, in fact, enhanced throughout the year because 
of federal transfer monies, because of additional monies that 
were made available from windfall oil and gas royalties. And 
indeed, there was the opportunity to spend $2.1 million on 
Health to maybe change some of the weaknesses that we see in 
the Health structure. 



892 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

Yet we note that if you look at the estimated expenditures or the 
forecast for March 31 of this year in Health, we see well over 
$100 million less than what was projected to be spent. Could 
you explain why the Health minister didn’t lobby your 
department to ensure that they could have spent the entire 
amount as was projected? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think it needs to be pointed out, Mr. 
Chair, that the member is correct that less money was spent in 
Health last year than had been estimated at the time of the 
mid-year financial report. But that does not necessarily mean 
that the health districts got less money because the health 
districts only account for part of the budget of the Department 
of Health. There are other expenses in there such as drug plan, 
physician remuneration, and a number of other things. And I do 
believe that the health districts got enough . . . actually more 
money than was budgeted last year, especially since the deficits 
were covered toward the end of the fiscal year. But some things 
were not quite as much as anticipated. 
 
But it needs to be pointed out that overall the . . . in Health, 
about 80-some million dollars more was spent last year than 
budgeted. So we certainly can’t be accused of not spending all 
the money that we said we were going to spend, because in fact 
we’ve spent more than we said we were going to spend. The 
difference was just not as much at the end of the year. But this 
is, I think, a good thing because you should try to, you know, 
spend roughly what you budget. 
 
But I’d like to say to the member also, I mean detailed 
questions about the Department of Health should obviously be 
referred to the Minister of Health in his estimates and he’ll be 
pleased to answer them. But I do want to say that in health care 
it seems to me that the question is not only how much money is 
spent and the answer is not only to put more money into it, it’s 
also to make sure that it’s properly spent in the most efficient 
and effective way to meet the health care needs of the people of 
the province. And that is a subject which I’m sure would be one 
for considerable debate between the members opposite and the 
Minister of Health for questioning in estimates. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarifying the 
health fund and its budget and I’m sure we’ll have other 
questions for the Minister of Health as well. Mr. Minister, I will 
turn to an area that I believe is under your jurisdiction and 
that’s, of course, equalization payments between the province 
of Saskatchewan and the federal government. 
 
In your mid-year report you noted that because of the revenue 
structure in Saskatchewan and the fact that the oil and gas 
sector was doing well, you forecast that the equalization 
payments for Saskatchewan would be decreased by $49.8 
million from the original budget estimate. And I’m wondering, 
Mr. Minister, whether or not that projection was accurate and 
whether or not the fiscal year that just ended on March 31 of 
2001, what indeed was transferred to the province of 
Saskatchewan in equalization payments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. We had budgeted last year 
— that is the 2000 budget — to receive equalization in the 
amount of approximately $336 million and in fact the forecast 
now for last year is $215 million. So roughly $121 million less 
equalization in the last fiscal year than we had budgeted. 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, when 
you recognized or realized, I should say, a growth in revenue in 
the oil and gas sector last year of some almost half a billion 
dollars — 440, I think, was the estimate — I noted in your 
article last year, when you prepared it you indicated that the 
reduction of the equalization factor from Ottawa was not going 
to be as significant because — and I read from your document 
— it says that: 
 

Strong growth of personal and business income revenues in 
other provinces relative to Saskatchewan offset the 
anticipated decrease. 

 
We’ve heard a lot about growth in other provinces and how that 
type of growth of course controls the equalization transfers to 
Saskatchewan. And I recognize that, in your projection for this 
year, you are estimating that we’re going to get an increase of 
about $162 million in equalization payments. 
 
So there are a number of factors that are playing into how 
equalization payments are determined for the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I know that it’s a complicated type of 
calculation, but could you indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan — as you have just pointed out — that in fact 
there was a decrease last year of nearly 100 million because of 
the revenue that Saskatchewan had obtained, yet that was 
considerably less than the windfall of nearly half a billion 
dollars because of the fact that other provinces were doing in 
fact stronger and better than what the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
This year you project $162 million increase. Is that because 
Saskatchewan is continuing to do much worse? Is it because 
there is a new plan between the financing from Ottawa and the 
province of Saskatchewan, and that new numbers are being 
used to determine what the amount of money the province of 
Saskatchewan will receive from the federal government? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. The increase in equalization this year 
will not be due to poor financial performance by the province of 
Saskatchewan. It is due to the fact that we anticipate that our oil 
and gas revenues will be much less than last year. 
 
I want to say to the member that of all the seven provinces that 
receive equalization, Saskatchewan receives the least amount 
per capita. And the reason for that, Mr. Chair, is not because we 
perform badly. It’s because we generate more own-source 
revenue through economic activity than the six other provinces 
that receive equalization. And so actually in relative terms 
we’re doing quite well. 
 
I want to let the member know that equalization is, as he says, 
very complex. Last year there was more money available 
because the Ontario economy — which is the largest economy 
in the country; they have 11 million people, I believe — grew at 
a rate of about 5 per cent. And that is the major determinant in 
terms of more equalization being available last year. 
 
This year our equalization entitlement goes up. It is not because 
of relatively poor economic performance on our part, it’s 
because we expect oil and gas revenues to be less than they 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 893 

 

were last year when the prices were somewhat higher. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, as your officials and others in 
your department have looked across the country at the growth 
and/or performance of other provinces, how do you feel 
Saskatchewan will do in the current fiscal year that we’re in 
relative to the other provinces that are, as you’ve indicated, the 
have provinces or those that are in the category of have not. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We believe, Mr. Chair, that Saskatchewan 
will do, in relative terms, better in comparison to the rest of the 
country than we did last year. We project that our rate of growth 
will be closer to the national average than it has been in recent 
years. So if the member wants to compare Saskatchewan to the 
other provinces, we feel that we will do relatively better than we 
have been doing in the last number of years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, one of the components of the 
budget that has been raised numbers of times in this House, of 
course, is debt servicing, and I note in your projections for this 
year that the debt-servicing cost for this year will be reduced 
somewhat. Could you indicate why you feel that there will be a 
significant decrease in interest of almost $44 million from the 
year-end of the last fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Two parts, Mr. Chair. We reduced the 
general debt of the province by $180 million during the last 
fiscal year, so there’s less debt and therefore less interest. 
 
The other part is we have some long-term debt that is coming 
due this year, which had a high interest rate, and we’re going to 
replace that debt with debt at a lower interest rate. So partly we 
have less debt and partly we’re negotiating some of our debt at 
a lower interest rate. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, on 
page 68 of your budget document, which is the section I’ve 
been referring to, vote no. 12, we note that the expenditure for 
foreign currency adjustment has increased a fair amount. And 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if . . . We’ve seen the dollar, the 
Canadian dollar fluctuate rather significantly in the last number 
of months, and I’m sure the impact that it may have had in your 
government . . . in your budget projections. 
 
As we see changes in the value of the Canadian dollar relative 
to the American dollar, does it have any projections on your 
interest costs or any of your other budget numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We believe that the impact of the lower 
Canadian dollar will mean about a $3 million cost in terms of 
interest. And that’s taken into account with respect to the 
estimate of the debt-servicing costs, I believe. 
 
I should say to the member that one of the things that the 
Department of Finance has quite successfully done over the last 
five or six years is to ensure that the vast majority of our debt is 
payable in Canadian dollars. I think it’s somewhere in the range 
of 80 per cent is payable in Canadian dollars. And the reason 
for that, of course, is if our debt was totally payable in 
American dollars, then as the dollar goes down it would cost us 
a lot of money. 
 
And I’d like to point out to the member, Mr. Chair, that a few 

years ago when this happened, it cost us 15 — that’s one five 
— million dollars because the Canadian dollar went down. 
 
Nova Scotia had not taken the same steps that our Department 
of Finance took to convert most of their debt to Canadian 
dollars and it cost them in excess of 50 — five zero — million 
dollars and forced them into deficit. 
 
And so the point is, our Department of Finance officials have 
been doing a very good job, I think, protecting us from the 
weakness of the Canadian dollar. So we are exposed, I think, to 
the tune of about $3 million but if it wasn’t for the good work 
of our officials over there we would have a much bigger 
problem on our hands. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I note 
that there is a category that makes up the debt servicing total 
which is referred to as fees and commissions and that’s a 
statutory. Who receives the payments from your department for 
fees and commissions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That would be the investment syndicate 
that sells our bonds to the retail market, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I’d 
like to turn to a section that’s been discussed a number of times 
and that’s, of course, the provincial debt. The auditor has raised 
the concerns and in his report each year the Provincial Auditor 
points out that . . . how government finances actually work and 
he indicates where the government has moved in the last 10 
years. And I’m referring to the 2000 Fall Report, Mr. Minister, 
that was put forward by the auditor. 
 
Mr. Minister, in the report that I just mentioned, the auditor 
indicates by a chart that the debt of the province is hovering 
right around $19 billion as of March 31, 2000. Do you agree 
with that auditor’s chart that indicates a $19 billion debt for the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the chart speaks for itself and, of 
course, I don’t disagree with the Provincial Auditor. The 
Provincial Auditor indicates that there is $11.1 billion in 
general debt, and $3.8 billion, I believe it is, in unfunded 
pension liability, and $4.1 billion in other. And I would point 
out to the member that the debt indicated by the Provincial 
Auditor has been falling generally from a high in 1994 to today. 
And the debt of the province is certainly going down in absolute 
terms. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. When we look at 
the total debt of the province being at $19 billion, we note that 
actually that’s an increase for the first time since 1994, when 
we look at the total amount of debt of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Could you explain why you see the province of 
Saskatchewan starting to increase its total debt relative to that 
number of 1994-95? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think the problem the member may 
be having, Mr. Chair, is that this chart the member is referring 
to deals with two things: it deals with long-term debt and it 
deals with current liabilities. And current liabilities may be 
indebtedness that the government is going to pay off next week, 
and there may be money in the bank even to fund those current 



894 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

liabilities. 
 
The relevant numbers that the member would want to look at 
would be the numbers certainly exclusive of the category of 
other, which includes current liabilities. And the member, I 
would suggest, in terms of looking at the long-term debt of the 
province, should be looking . . . pardon me, should be looking 
at the relevant figure which is the bonds and debentures 
category, which is $11.1 billion in the year 2000 and was at one 
time $14.2 billion in 1994. 
 
To mix current liabilities and long-term debt is not truly 
reflective of the long-term debt of the province, Mr. Chair, 
because to state the obvious, the member is referring to 
numbers that are more than the long-term liabilities of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while 
we recognize that the $11.1 billion is a combination of the 
General Revenue Fund debt and of course Crown corporation 
debt, we must remember that in the province of Saskatchewan, 
regardless of whether that is a government Crown debt or 
whether that’s held in debentures for, you know, the general 
workings of government, it is still the debt of the taxpayers of 
the province of Saskatchewan. And you know in Saskatchewan, 
that famous saying is that one taxpayer is still the only one that 
is responsible for the debt. 
 
So leaving that $11.1 billion aside, Mr. Minister, a lot of 
concern has been raised by a number of people about two of the 
other components that make up that $19 billion debt and you’ve 
referred to both of them. You’ve indicated that the debt factor, 
which is part of the $19 billion, the components called the 
unfunded pension liability is in fact up to $3.8 billion. 
 
And I note, Mr. Minister, that in the last 10 years that that debt 
has in fact increased by over $1 billion. And the auditor 
indicates that in 1991 the unfunded pension liability was 2.7; 
and it now sits at $3.8 billion. And that’s of concern to people 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, what your department and what 
you would suggest would be a solution to the fact that the 
unfunded pension liabilities of the various groups that make up 
that component continues to increase. What solution do you 
have in mind to address this concern? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well first of all, Mr. Chair, I’d like to point 
out to the member that I agree with him, that whether a debt is 
to the Crown corporation . . . or of the Crown corporations or 
the general government, it’s a debt, and it’s a debt of the 
taxpayers. There’s no question about that. But both of those 
amounts add up to $11.1 billion. 
 
The point I was trying to make to the member before is when 
he’s talking about $19 billion in debt, he’s including liability 
such as trade accounts payable, accrued interest in unpaid 
claims for government insurance and Workers’ Compensation 
programs. That is in fact referred to by the Provincial Auditor 
on page 13 of his 2000 Fall Report. 
 
And the member, when he’s talking about $19 billion in debt, is 
adding current liabilities to long-term debt. The current 

liabilities are met on an ongoing basis; they do not comprise 
long-term debt. And what we need to be concerned about is 
long-term debt. And the long-debt of the province is $11.1 
billion as indicated by the Provincial Auditor. 
 
With respect to the unfunded pension liability, I think the 
member is correct that that is $4.1 billion. I’d like to point out 
that that liability has been accumulating since the 1930s. This is 
not something that just came along. 
 
But I also want to say that the member should be well aware, 
since he is the Chair of the Public Accounts Committee, that the 
deputy minister of Finance and the Department of Finance, 
presented a report to the Public Accounts Committee, chaired 
by the member, explaining that the unfunded pension liability 
will in fact be met by the province, and explaining how. 
 
(16:30) 
 
That is a matter of public record before the Public Accounts 
Committee, but the member is certainly entitled to ask the 
question again. And what I will say to the member is that the 
unfunded pension liability is an obligation to the pensioners to 
meet the cost of their pensions as time goes on. That cost will 
be met over time. Over time, also, the liability will become 
decreased as people actually retire, receive their pensions, and 
then cease to receive their pensions at the appropriate time. 
 
And certainly this is a long-term obligation of the Government 
of Saskatchewan and the taxpayers to the people that have 
worked in the public service. They’re entitled to their pensions 
and they’ll be paid their pensions. The liability is as indicated 
by the Provincial Auditor. Eventually in the long-term that 
liability will be reduced as time goes on, as has been fully 
detailed before the Public Accounts Committee. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
you are correct in indicating that the Public Accounts 
Committee received a detailed report from Mr. Boothe 
regarding the request to address the concern over the unfunded 
pension liability. And we appreciated the comments of a 
representative from the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. 
 
While we understood the report, there still has to be government 
commitment to ensure that the debt that we see now . . . And, 
Mr. Minister, in listening to the individual from the Teachers’ 
Superannuation Commission, we’ve seen the growth or the 
increase of the unfunded liability of especially the teachers’ 
pension plan, and it’s been a significant increase. 
 
And we are aware that the last individuals to enter that plan 
were about those that entered the plan, I think, in the year 1979. 
And the member pointed . . . or the representative had pointed 
out that the year 2015 approximately — give or take a year or 
two — is when the maximum amount of retirements will occur 
and in fact after that, there will be very few left contributing. 
 
His point, Mr. Minister, I think is that . . . And it shows in your 
budget document when we look also in your allocation for 
pensions and benefits for the education sector. We note that the 
number that is used there is not the total amount of money that 
is necessary to maintain a balance in the Teachers’ 
Superannuation Plan. 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 895 

 

And in fact the liability, the unfunded liability, will grow again 
next year, and it will grow again the year after, and it will 
continue to grow until about 2015 when suddenly the 
requirement — and I use that word, you know, loosely for you 
to define maybe — is that suddenly we will need approximately 
$200 million more than the previous year, if we continue to 
maintain the type of program that you’ve put in place. 
 
Mr. Minister, while Mr. Boothe and the report that was 
prepared indicated that government was responsible and 
government would ensure that monies were available, it may be 
difficult — and I’m sure that neither you nor I will be in this 
House in the year 2015, and I say that with tongue-in-cheek, 
Mr. Minister — but it will be of concern to the people of 
Saskatchewan that suddenly the government of the day will 
now have to increase its expenditure for pension by at least 
$200 million more from the previous year. 
 
Do you see that as a workable solution or should we be 
addressing the need to ensure that the unfunded pension liability 
does not continue to grow as we move from 2001 to 2015? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well actually I should point out, Mr. Chair, 
that information about the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan was 
certainly included in the discussion at the Public Accounts 
Committee with the member, of course this is as Chair. 
 
And I will say that with respect to the Teachers’ 
Superannuation Plan, our obligation is to meet the pension 
payments that are required to be paid to retired teachers who are 
a part of that plan, and that obligation will be met. 
 
In fact I’m advised by the Department of Finance that the 
amount of money required on an annual basis to fund the 
Teachers’ Superannuation Plan will in fact rise between 
approximately the year 2009 to 2015, but it will never actually 
be more in constant 2000 dollars than it was in the year 2000. 
So that in relative terms, it actually won’t be any worse by 2015 
or thereafter, than it was in 2000. 
 
And what the member has to remember is that while it may be a 
certain amount of money in 2015, $200 million perhaps, that 
will be $200 million in 2015 dollars. And we anticipate of 
course there will be inflation between this current year and 14 
years hence. There will also be growth in revenue to 
government, so as a percentage of government revenue in fact 
the obligation may be less in 2015 than today. 
 
But to compare apples to apples, the situation will not be worse 
in 2015 than it is today. It will be perhaps roughly the same. 
Between now and 2015 the situation will actually be not as bad 
as it was a few years ago in terms of the cost of the . . . the 
annual cost to fund the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, could you clarify . . . It was my 
understanding that when actuarial studies are done, that the 
dollars of today, 2001, are in fact adjusted for — if we’re 
looking at a projection of cost for 2015 — that in fact those 
numbers are adjusted to ensure that we are talking about relative 
dollars so that indeed we’ll still be talking about the same kind 
of need, which will be about $200 million of today’s money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well my advice from the Department of 

Finance, Mr. Chair — which advice I accept — is that in terms 
of constant dollars the situation is, as I indicated, that the 
amount of money required, peaked in approximately the year 
2000. It will go down until 2012; it will then rise until 2015. In 
2015, in constant dollar terms, the situation will be about the 
same as it was in 2000. It will then go down for a while and 
come back up, but it will never be appreciably worse than it was 
in the year 2000. 
 
To put it in another way, I’m looking at another chart that I 
didn’t look at a moment ago — and I see by the way that this 
actually was, is a document that was sent from Dr. Boothe, my 
deputy minister, to the Clerk of the committee, the Public 
Accounts Committee, so the member I presume will have read 
this — at page 6 of that document, the problem is dealt with in 
terms of a percentage of GRF (General Revenue Fund) revenue. 
In other words, a percentage of the money we receive. 
 
Just to put it in perspective, in the year 2000 we spent 3 per cent 
of our revenue funding the — both actually — the Teachers’ 
and the Public Service Superannuation Plan. That presently, by 
my reading of this chart, has dropped to about less than 2.5 per 
cent. In 2015, it will go up to about 3.2 per cent, then it will go 
back down to 3. And the highest it will ever get to as I read this 
is about 3.8 per cent. And then after 2027, it eventually goes 
down to zero per cent. 
 
But my point is this, that however you cut or slice it the answer 
is, I think, that the cost to pay on an annual basis the unfunded 
pension liabilities will be between 2.5 and 3.8 per cent between 
now and the year 2027. That doesn’t imply to me that we’ll be 
in any kind of crisis situation. It implies to me that we’ll either 
be paying 3 or 2.5 or 3.2 or 3.8. It goes up and down, all within 
a range of 1.4 per cent of the revenues of the province. 
Something that I think is, quite obviously, very manageable and 
nobody needs to get into a panic about meeting pension 
obligations. 
 
We’ve been doing it since the 1930s when unfunded pension 
liabilities began. We’ll be doing it until the year 2060, 
approximately, when the problem will go away. And I want to 
say just . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Will go away. And I 
agree with the member that neither of us will be members of the 
Legislative Assembly when this happens. 
 
But I want to say, to put this in perspective also, that this 
problem actually started, I think, in 1927 someone told me 
once, when unfunded liabilities in pension plans of the public 
service started to accumulate. And the problem stopped being 
added to approximately in 1977-78, 24 years ago, because the 
then minister of Finance, Wes Robbins, and the then premier, 
Allan Blakeney, decided to close off entry to these pension 
plans, where the pension costs more than contributions, and put 
everybody into a money purchase plan, which I think was a 
very good move. 
 
But the point is we’re 25 years, approximately, later, and if they 
hadn’t done that, the problem would probably be twice as bad. 
But it gives you an indication of how long it takes to get out of 
one of these problems when you start getting into it. 
 
But it seems to me that there’s actually a good story here in the 
sense that we can manage the unfunded pension liability by 



896 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

either paying, this year, about 2.5 per cent of our revenue and, 
as I said, going into the future the maximum will be about 3.8 
per cent of revenue. 
 
We can do that; we will do it because people, whether they 
worked as teachers or public servants, are entitled to receive 
their pensions. They will receive their pensions and the cost of 
it is quite manageable. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I think you’ve 
clarified for us the fact that some of us for sure won’t be around 
by the year 2060. 
 
But, indeed, everyone is concerned, Mr. Minister. We hear 
about mortgaging our children’s future. We’ve heard about that 
and the debt of this province that skyrocketed during the ’80s. 
And when we see a pension debt or an unfunded liability 
continuing to rise, of course, it causes concern as to whether or 
not it’s going to be manageable. 
 
And I understand, I have the document that you referred to and 
I’ve studied it and we appreciated the comments made by Mr. 
Boothe, but there still is concern that the anticipation is that the 
provinces’ revenues are going to continue to grow at some 
projected rate and that in the end there will be a percentage that 
will be about 3.8 per cent of GDP (gross domestic product). 
 
The problem though is not being addressed at the current time 
when we indeed see that the unfunded liability continues to 
grow. And as I’ve pointed out, and as the auditor has pointed 
out, it has grown from $2.8 billion and it has grown up to the 
current level of 3.9 I believe . . . No, it’s 3.8. 
 
The question that people are wondering about, and I’ve been 
asked this question by many, is as we move towards 2010 and 
2012 which is another decade, if we’ve grown by over $1 
billion, if that unfunded liability has grown by over $1 billion in 
the last decade, do you expect that at the time that we’ll be 
looking at the last group of retirements, that indeed the 
unfunded pension liability of the province will be somewhere in 
the area of 6 or 7 or $8 billion? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I would say this, that what the 
unfunded pension liability is, is a debt that was accumulated 
between the years approximately 1928 to 1978. It took 50 years 
to build up that debt — 50 years. And it hasn’t, the debt, in one 
sense hasn’t been added to — at least in terms of new members 
of those plans — since 1978 approximately. 
 
And I would say to the member, Mr. Chair, through you, that it 
is not reasonable to expect that the taxpayers today are going to 
pay for this problem all at once and make it go away. It took 50 
years for that debt to accumulate. It will take many years for 
that debt to go away. And what we will ask the taxpayers in 
each year to do, is to allow us to contribute 2 or 3 per cent, or 
3.5 per cent of our revenues, toward the meeting of that 
obligation. 
 
It is a large sum of money that is an unfunded pension liability 
but if we tried to make that large debt go away all at one time, 
we would be more than doubling income taxes, for example. I 

think you’d probably quadruple them actually. And that’s not 
reasonable. 
 
And so yes, we have an unfunded pension liability which we’ve 
had since approximately 1928. We’ll continue to have an 
unfunded liability in that regard for the next 50 years or 60 
years; and we’ll have to manage it on a year-by-year basis, as 
I’ve described. And that I think is the answer, if we don’t 
expect people in this current fiscal year to make the problem go 
away. 
 
Because I don’t think anybody has a desire to pay $4,000 per 
capita, or $16,000 for a family of four, to pay for it right now, 
today. We’ll pay for it over time, as I’ve described, and retire 
that debt over a long period of time, as indeed it took to 
accumulate the debt. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I think you’ve misunderstood 
me. While I agree with you that there are no additional people 
entering plans that have closed, and the old teachers’ pension 
plan is an example of that, the last people to enter that plan 
were in 1979, and you, I think, agree with that. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is not that you should be putting in 
place a process to eliminate the current unfunded liability debt 
which now sits at $3.8 billion and has grown by over $1 billion 
in the last decade; my question, Mr. Minister — and I think it’s 
been verified by Mr. Boothe and the representative of the 
Teachers’ Superannuation Commission — that the unfunded 
teachers’ liability continues to increase. It’s not that you’re 
making progress and trying to eliminate it, in fact you’re 
allowing the debt to continue to grow. 
 
And the question that people are asking — and that’s the 
question that I asked you, Mr. Minister — was by the year 2015 
when the last group of the current teachers’ pension plan 
retirees are going to be retiring, will that accumulated debt be 
somewhere near 6 billion or 7 billion? Because you are going to 
allow the debt to grow. 
 
It’s not a debt that was created 50 years ago that is of concern to 
the people right now. It is the fact that that debt is continuing to 
increase and it’s increasing because of the structure that you’ve 
put in place; the amount of money that’s needed to pay for the 
requirements of the pension fund is not balanced by revenue 
and in fact the unfunded liability continues to grow. Could you 
explain your last answer in relationship to the question that I’ve 
just asked? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, when the member says 
that I am going to allow the liability to grow or that I have 
allowed the liability to grow, what the member is implying is 
that I should raise taxes on people today to pay more money 
toward the unfunded pension liability. And this is where I have 
a disagreement with the member. Because if the member is 
saying to the public that I’m allowing the debt to grow, the 
member should also point out that the only way that you can 
make that debt grow smaller is to substantially raise taxes to 
people today to pay it off now or pay some of it off now. 
 
And that’s where I have a problem. I think that this is a 
long-term debt that took 50 years to build up, between about 
1928 and 1978. The reasonable thing to ask the taxpayers to do 



May 2, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 897 

 

is to pay it off over time by paying a little bit of it each year. 
That’s what we should do. 
 
If, in order to make the member happy, I say well I’m not going 
to let it get any bigger, the member also has to point out to the 
people that we would have to really substantially raise income 
taxes and sales taxes, for example, to prevent that from 
happening. So I guess that’s just a disagreement I have with the 
member. 
 
I’m in favour of tax reform, which means keeping the sales tax 
at 6 per cent instead of the higher rate it used to be and also 
bringing our income taxes down. 
 
What the member is suggesting may sound on the surface to be 
more palatable, that somehow we’ll eliminate the unfunded 
pension liability, but it means higher taxes for the people of the 
province and that is not the policy of our government. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
think we’re still not on the same wavelength here and I’m going 
to try this again. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve discussed one very specific plan and that is 
the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan. And you have noted, and I 
think we both agree, that the unfunded liability of that plan has 
continued to grow. And the accumulated unfunded liability of 
the province of Saskatchewan over the last 10 years has in fact 
grown by over $1 billion. I think you agree with that. And I 
have not suggested that you should be eliminating the unfunded 
liability in one year. 
 
The question, Mr. Minister, is that that unfunded liability is 
going to peak, and it’s going to peak primarily because of the 
number of teachers that are in the plan, even though there is a 
legislative members’ plan that makes up a component of that 
and a Public Service Commission component. But the largest 
component of the unfunded liability is the teachers’ pension 
plan. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will . . . according to the document that Mr. 
Boothe produced, could you indicate to the people of 
Saskatchewan what year you expect the peak to be for the 
amount of unfunded liability of the province of Saskatchewan 
for pensions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — My officials advise, Mr. Chair, that they 
believe that the amount of the unfunded liability would peak 
approximately in the year 2015. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do your officials in 
the report indicate what you expect the unfunded liability 
amount to be projected to in that year of 2015? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The information that I have, Mr. Chair, has 
to do with the annual cost of meeting the unfunded liability. I 
don’t have the global figure. And the annual cost in nominal 
dollar terms will reach approximately $400 million by 2027. In 
2015 it would be about $250 million. 
 
And as I indicated to the member before, in constant dollars we 
will be going down between the year 2000 and the year 2015, at 
which point it will be about $175 million in constant dollar 

terms for the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan, I should say, and 
another $90 million or so for the Public Service Superannuation 
Plan, which will then begin to go down. And the teachers’ will 
fluctuate up and down until about 2027, at which point it will 
begin to be reduced. 
 
And I’ve given the member figures with respect to the 
percentage of the revenue that it will take to meet these 
obligations. I won’t repeat those numbers. Those are the 
numbers I have which have been provided to the Public 
Accounts Committee. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for clarifying the 
year and the annual amount of payment. 
 
One of the concerns, Mr. Minister, and I’m wondering, when 
you talk about whether or not taxes will have to be increased or 
whether or not there will be reductions in expenditure, when we 
look at that group of teachers — and I think the Teachers’ 
Superannuation Commission uses the number of about 450 to 475 
retirements on an annual basis — that last group of retirees will 
occur in about 2015. And in the calculation of the pension 
requirement for the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan, and this year I 
note that it’s been reduced from 79 million to 50 million, the 
revenue from those teachers is used to offset what is required for 
government to pay to the Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. 
 
When that final year occurs, Mr. Minister, and there will be in the 
year following no retirements of 450 people because the plan 
basically will have, you know, 99 per cent of the teachers retired, 
how will the government of the day come up with the additional 
money that is now needed? Because the revenues from the retirees 
will not be there because there will be zero retirees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well just as I’ve described, Mr. Chair, 
because I’ve provided the member, through Dr. Boothe at the 
Public Accounts Committee, with charts which show with as 
much exactitude as one can ever estimate, the amount of money 
required on an annual basis to meet the obligations. 
 
So the answer is that after the teachers that are in the plan all retire, 
which is in 2015, as I pointed out to the member, the government 
will be required to take between 3.25 per cent and going down to 3 
per cent and up again to 3.8 per cent of revenues to meet the 
unfunded pension liability. 
 
How will the liability be met? It will be met by taking 3 or 3.5 or 
3.8 per cent of every dollar we receive and paying that money out. 
I should say for both the Teachers’ Superannuation Plan and the 
Public Service Superannuation Plan. 
 
The obligation will be met by taking 3, 3.5 per cent of every dollar 
we get, that is three and a half cents on every dollar, and meeting 
the obligation. And that will be true before all the teachers retire; it 
will continue to be true after all the teachers retire. And as I said 
before, this is a manageable plan to take three and a half cents 
out of the dollar to meet the pension obligations. That leaves us 
with ninety-six and a half cents of every dollar to spend on 
other things. 
 
The only way that we can avoid paying it off, as I’ve described, 
is if we raise taxes today. And I am . . . my position and the 
position of the Government of Saskatchewan is it took 50 years 



898 Saskatchewan Hansard May 2, 2001 

 

to create the problem, we will pay it off gradually over time as 
the taxpayers can afford, and we’ll pay it off by using about 
three and a half cents of every dollar we take in to meet that 
obligation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One final question 
as the hour is drawing near to closure. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other components, as you indicated, is 
the other liabilities. And you’ve indicated that accrued interest 
and trade accounts payable and government insurance and 
Workers’ Compensation programs make up that other portion. 
And, Mr. Minister, I note that in the last six, seven years that 
the unfunded liability for that section has grown from 2.8 
billion to 4.1 billion. 
 
Could you indicate why we’ve seen such a, such a dramatic 
increase in the amounts that make up the other liabilities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, the member is not correct. 
These figures that he just talked about are not unfunded 
liabilities. It is not I that points out that they are other liabilities 
including trade accounts payable and so on. It is, in fact, the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
The Provincial Auditor says at page 13 that these other 
liabilities of $4.1 billion are not unfunded liabilities. They are 
other liabilities like trade accounts payable, accrued interest, 
and so on. 
 
What the member has to understand is that this chart he’s 
looking at — graph 4 — is the government’s liabilities debt as 
at a certain date. And as at that date, there are current liabilities 
at $4.1 billion. The next week, many of those liabilities could 
be paid off. 
 
So I don’t know how to put it other than to say that the member 
is mixing up current liabilities with long-term debt. And he’s 
talking about apples and oranges and mixing them all together. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I don’t want to leave by 
suggesting that, you know, I don’t know the difference between 
an apple and an orange. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, my question is that . . . And I used the term 
unfunded incorrectly. I agree. They are liabilities of the 
government as proposed by the auditor. My question was that 
the liabilities in the last seven years have increased from 2.8 
billion to 4.1. That seems to be an increase of $1.3 billion in 
liabilities of your government. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is, why do you see that increase 
having taken place over that period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I’ll just say this, Mr. Chair, that when 
you’re talking about current liabilities, you also have accounts 
receivable, cash in hand, that kind of thing that you then 
balance against accounts receivable . . . or I’m sorry, against 
current liabilities. 
 
Current liabilities are not long-term debt, they are current 
liabilities. And what we need to be concerned about is 
long-term debt, which in our province, fortunately, is going 

down rather than up. Which is the direction it should be going 
in. 
 
And I don’t quite know how to answer the question other than 
by saying to the member that current liabilities are important — 
one should know what they are — but one cannot mix them up 
with long-term debt. 
 
The Chair: — Order, it now being the hour of adjournment, the 
committee will rise and report progress and ask for leave to sit 
again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 
 


