















































Hansard: April 09, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 451 
 April 9, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again today on 
behalf of residents of southwest Saskatchewan to present a 
petition concerning the ramifications of the Saskatchewan EMS 
development project and, if it is implemented, the effect it 
might have in the great southwest. The prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Gull Lake, 
Shaunavon, Swift Current, and the community of Tompkins. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand today to present a petition on behalf of citizens of 
Cudworth, Saskatchewan who are concerned that they may lose 
their local ambulance services. And the petition reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as I mentioned, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition 
are from Cudworth, and we even have one from Consort, 
Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition today from 
the citizens of my constituency that are concerned about the 
EMS report and the ramifications it may have. The prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Rose 
Valley. 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned about the high energy costs. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, Kinistino, Crystal Springs, and St. 
Brieux. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in Swift Current concerned about their hospital, and the 
prayer of this petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed exclusively by people 
in the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy and surrounding area, and it’s about the EMS 
(emergency medical services) development project. And the 
petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this petition is signed on behalf of citizens of Weyburn, 
Creelman, Tribune, Fillmore, and Estevan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise again today with a petition from concerned citizens 
that are worried about the cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge, and 
the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at the Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 



452 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from Assiniboia and 
Congress. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Petitions on the following matters: 
 

Legislation to protect children from tobacco use; 
 
Energy rebates to Saskatchewan consumers; 
 
The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
The level of services and care at Pioneer Lodge in 
Assiniboia; and 
 
The necessary funding to upgrade Highway 43. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to give notice that I shall 
on Wednesday next move first reading of The Democratic 
Unionism Act. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 20 ask the government the following question: 
 

For the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: what 
salary increase will the president and vice-presidents of 
SaskPower receive in 200l? 

 
And while I’m on my feet I have several other questions that I 
would ask, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall on day no. 20 
ask the government the following question: 
 

Of the Minister of CIC: what salary increases will the 
president and vice-presidents of SaskEnergy receive in 
200l? 

 
A similar question regarding the salaries of the president and 
vice-presidents of CIC in terms of what they’ll receive in 200l 
in increases. For SGI as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And finally I give notice that I shall on day 20 ask the 
government the following question: 

 
To the Minister of CIC: what salary increases will the 
president and vice-presidents of SaskTel receive in 200l? 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 19 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: (a) how much money was 
transferred from the federal government to the provincial 
government in the 2000-200l fiscal year for services 
provided to off-reserve Indians; and (b) which provincial 
government agencies and departments received money, and 
how much did each of these agencies and departments 
receive? 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 20 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management: what are the details of all planned 
purchases, leases, and upgrades to your department’s 
fire-suppression aircraft in the current fiscal year; and 
provide a complete inventory list of all aircraft owned by 
the Government of Saskatchewan for firefighting purposes, 
the cost of their annual maintenance including engine 
replacement. 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
legislature, a school group seated in the west gallery; they’re 24 
grade 5 students from the M.J. Coldwell School in my 
constituency. And the school group is accompanied here today 
by Ms. Lori Skogberg. 
 
And they are taking in the proceedings of the House, then they 
are going to tour the legislature. Then I’ll have the pleasure of 
visiting with them for a few minutes. 
 
So I’ll ask all the members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure and honour to 
introduce through you and to you an individual who needs little 
introduction to this place. Dwain Lingenfelter has joined us 
behind the bar today. The opposition asks with some frequency 
as to his well- being, so I’m glad that you have the chance to do 
so in person today. 
 
Please join with me . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . They miss 
you, Dwain, they miss you. They miss the beatings. 
 
Anyway, please welcome him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure as well to welcome back what appears to be the NDP 
senate back there — Mr. Lorne Nystrom, John Solomon, and 
my good friend, Dwain Lingenfelter. It looks like, Mr. Premier, 
the unofficial race for the leadership started once again, if you 
ask me. 
 
But I would want to join with all members in welcoming back 
my good friend, Dwain Lingenfelter, back to the legislature. 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 453 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated in your 
gallery is another former member of this legislature, that being 
none other than Andy Renaud, and with Andy Renaud is Bob 
Romanchuk and Ken Magnison of Aallcann Wood Supplies. 
They’re based in Prince Albert. And it will be my pleasure to 
meet with these three gentlemen at about 3 o’clock. 
 
I ask all hon. members to join me in welcoming them to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member as well in welcoming two members of my 
constituency to the Assembly today. Andy Renaud, of course, 
I’ve always said very proudly, was a pretty good constituent of 
mine, even though I don’t think I’ve ever got him to vote for 
me. And Ken Magnison of course ran for the Liberals last time 
and his circumstances may change dramatically in the next 
election. But we’d like to welcome them here today and ask all 
members to join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would 
like to join with the other members in welcoming Mr. Andy 
Renaud here today. Andy served with distinction in this 
legislature, and I understand that lately he has been extremely 
busy with operating a number of different businesses and 
continues to be involved in his community. 
 
So I would ask everyone to join with me in wishing Andy 
continued success and welcoming him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to join 
briefly in offering greetings to one of my constituents, and I 
want to offer this greeting, Mr. Speaker, in an attempt to allay a 
very vicious rumour that passes around from time to time. So I 
would like to join in greeting my constituent, Dwain 
Lingenfelter, to this House and allay that rumour that comes 
from the other side that he’s a resident in Calgary. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Sometimes, 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t know who to invite because there’s so 
many people here we know, but I just want to also invite Andy 
Renaud and the guys up there, but to make special mention of 
my former colleagues, Lorne Nystrom, the member for 
Regina-Qu’Appelle, the Member of Parliament, and John 
Solomon with whom I worked long and hard for a long period 
of time. 
 
Terrific members of parliament, Mr. Speaker, and terrific 
supporters of the province of Saskatchewan. I’d ask all 
members to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. McCall: — Just very quickly, I would also like to join in 
welcoming Lorne Nystrom, MP (Member of Parliament) for 
Regina-Qu’Appelle, to this place. He’s my Member of 
Parliament. I know he works very hard for myself and the 
people of Regina-Qu’Appelle in Ottawa, as I formerly worked 
with him to serve those people in Ottawa. 
 
So I just again like to welcome him to this place. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Scotty T. Rex Postmark Issued 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this past 
Wednesday I had the opportunity to attend the unveiling of a 
special postmark in the community of Eastend. Canada Post 
unveiled a Scotty T. Rex postmark at a ceremony held at the T. 
Rex Discovery Centre recognizing Eastend as the home of 
Scotty, the T. Rex. 
 
Scotty’s fossilized skeleton was discovered in 1991 in the 
Frenchman River valley in southwest Saskatchewan by Mr. 
Robert Gebhart, a local teacher. The T. Rex Discovery Centre 
was opened on May 30, 2000 and is the home to Scotty, or parts 
of him, and an array of other fossils, but is also the home of a 
working fossil preparation laboratory operated by the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum. 
 
The idea for the postmark originated with Ms. Sheril Dietz 
employed with Canada Post in the community of Sceptre. With 
the help of other regional post office employees, including 
Crystal Kerr from Eastend and Brent Guppy of Swift Current, 
the idea was run through many official channels and several 
make-overs before the final design was approved. 
 
This project was actively encouraged by Bruce Lewis, the 
executive director of the T. Rex Discovery Centre, and his 
board of directors as a significant means of promoting the 
centre and the community of Eastend. 
 
And this marks only the fourth time in the province’s history 
that a special postmark of this type has been granted. This is a 
significant achievement for the community of Eastend, for 
Scotty himself, and for the Discovery Centre. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Good News Budget 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan. Friday this Assembly voted on and passed a 
good news budget. As the Premier said, it is an all-weather 
budget that will provide the wherewithal to build highways, 
improve education, support health care, help children at risk, 
and show the world once again that this government is prudent, 
thoughtful, and visionary in its financial management. 
 
This budget is a tally sheet of our provincial character, Mr. 
Speaker — the progressive, caring, sharing character that has 



454 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

defined us throughout our brief history. 
 
Who approves of this budget, Mr. Speaker? Nearly everybody. 
The Child Advocate likes it. The senior economist of the Bank 
of Nova Scotia likes it, as do her counterparts at the Royal Bank 
and the TD (Toronto Dominion) Bank as well. The FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations) approves. 
Schoolteachers and school trustees like it. Mr. Speaker, our 
friends at The Leader-Post and StarPhoenix like it. 
 
Who else thinks highly of the budget, Mr. Speaker? Our third 
straight budget from this great Finance minister and our eighth 
straight balanced budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The labour movement likes it because it will create jobs to fix 
highways and help children, Mr. Speaker. Road builders, 
community builders, home builders, all approve. Makers of art 
and makers of school curriculum approve. Environmentalists 
and conservationists approve, Mr. Speaker, and of course 
taxpayers also approve, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a very good budget for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

2001 Lakeland Citizens of the Year 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I’m honoured this afternoon to 
rise in our Assembly to pay tribute to two very special people in 
my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
This past Saturday evening the Lakeland Recreation Board held 
its annual Citizen of the Year banquet. Many nominations were 
received and after days of examining the many highly qualified 
nominees, the committee charged with rating all applications, 
Mr. Speaker, were forced to declare a tie. Fortunately the 
decision was made relatively easy by the simple fact that the 
winners are husband and wife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Blake and Stella Jones of the Lakeland area are 
the 2001 Lakeland Citizens of the Year. This special highly 
involved couple are true embodiments of the Saskatchewan 
volunteerism. The communities of Christopher Lake, Northside, 
Paddockwood, Beaton, and Forest Gate have all benefited from 
the commitment of Blake and Stella. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this couple have helped tirelessly in the building 
of the Paddockwood arena, the Lakeland curling rink, and the 
ambitious expansion of St. Christopher’s Anglican Church. 
They are also involved with Meals on Wheels and are always 
ready to assist someone in need, whether that means helping a 
neighbour with yardwork, to driving someone to their doctor’s 
appointment in Prince Albert — a drive of 30 miles. 
 
Mr. Speaker, until their retirement, Blake and Stella operated a 
dairy farm — making their commitment to Lakeland even more 
astonishing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this Assembly to join me in 
recognizing Blake and Stella Jones as Lakeland’s Citizens of 
the Year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Saskatchewan Federated Indian College Powwow 
 

Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, more good news. The 
sounds of men, women, boys and girls echoed in the Agridome 
this past weekend. Over 600 dancers, drummers, singers, and 
several thousand spectators attended the 23rd annual 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College powwow. This is the 
first major start off to the powwow season. 
 
For Denise Genaille from Peter Ballantyne First Nations it was 
the first. She says it is part of her culture and it makes her feel 
proud and happy to come to events like this. 
 
The Saturday and Sunday events drew participants and 
spectators from across Western Canada and United States. In 
addition to the music and dance, a trade show featuring 
Aboriginal arts and crafts was on display. 
 
This premiere event was attended by the Premier and several 
NDP (New Democratic Party) MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) and ministers. Congratulations to SIFC 
(Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) for continuing to 
build on the tradition of respect, honour and excellence. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hockey Team to Compete in Air Canada Cup 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
hockey season in Saskatchewan is coming to an end. After 80 
games this season, the Beardy’s Blackhawks are no doubt the 
best midget AAA hockey team in Saskatchewan. The Beardy’s 
Blackhawks defeated Moose Jaw’s Boston Pizza Warriors 3 to 
1 and now they are on their way to the Air Canada Cup in 
Prince George, BC (British Columbia), April 23 to April 29. 
 
Congratulations goes to head coach Dale Grayson and assistant 
coach Jim McComas. Coach Grayson said after the win, “Five 
years ago we had two wins that season. It’s an incredible 
feeling right now.” 
 
Please, members of the Assembly, help me congratulate Dale 
Grayson, coach; assistant coach Jim McComas, and the entire 
Beardy’s Blackhawks hockey team and staff on a great season 
so far, and wish them all the best of luck in the Air Canada Cup 
tournament in BC coming up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Race Relations Awards 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We opened this 
session with a private member’s statement by the new member 
from Regina Elphinstone recognizing the International Day for 
the Elimination of Racial Discrimination — a good way for us 
to begin, I think. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want members and the public to be aware that 
that same week my city of Saskatoon and its Race Relations 
Committee held their annual Living in Harmony awards 
ceremony. 
 
I should recognize in passing, Mr. Speaker, that the member 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 455 

 

from Saskatoon Southeast was instrumental in establishing 
Saskatoon’s Race Relations Committee when she was on city 
council. 
 
This year Dr. Freda Ahenakew, a retired native studies 
professor, received a recognition award for her work in helping 
design Cree language courses and in documenting the lives of 
elderly Cree women. Dr. Ahenakew also recently received the 
national Aboriginal Achievement Award. 
 
Dr. Peter Li was given an award for his writing and research on 
race and ethnic relations and the Chinese in Canada over the 
past 25 years. 
 
And the City Centre Project on 20th Street in Saskatoon was 
recognized for its work in reducing racial discrimination in the 
city. This facility is a joint project between the city of 
Saskatoon, the Saskatoon Tribal Council, Saskatoon Metis 
Urban Council, Saskatoon District Health Board, and the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And last but not least, Mr. Speaker, Monique Martin, a local 
artist and an art educator at Georges Vanier school in my riding 
of Saskatoon Eastview, and the students at Georges Vanier 
were presented with an award for their anti-racist art projects 
during the last six years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we know, eliminating racial discrimination is 
the job of us all. But some, like these individuals and groups, 
deserve special recognition, which I’m happy to do today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Woman Develops New Pill 
from Portulaca Plant 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Anyone who is a 
gardener and has encountered the portulaca plant knows that 
this weed is a prolific grower, which is nearly impossible to 
eradicate. 
 
While weeding in her strawberry patch, which had a vigorously 
growing patch of portulaca, Elsie Belcheff noticed a mouse 
come out from behind a shed and bypass all the taller weeds 
and head straight for the portulaca plant. This started Mrs. 
Belcheff wondering what the portulaca was made from. 
 
From there Elsie Belcheff, a farm wife from Margo, 
Saskatchewan began a company called Natural Plantation Inc., 
which has begun selling a Super D Master pill which she has 
developed from the portulaca plant. 
 
This newly patented product is recognized by scientists and is 
one of the few supplements on the market which has all the 
necessary nutrients in one pill. Scientific research reports that 
purslane is a uniquely nutritious plant, rich in naturally 
occurring Omega 3 and 6 fatty acids. Research has shown that 
Omega 3 fatty acid prevents heart disease. 
 
Mrs. Belcheff took her herbalogy class in 1995, became a 
member of the American and Canadian Nutraceutical 
Association, and this background, along with trial and error, 
enabled her to unlock the treasure of the portulaca plant. 

Mrs. Belcheff’s company has joined the approximately 50 
companies in the province selling everything from herbal 
extracts to velvet antler pills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask my colleagues to join with me in 
offering congratulations to Mrs. Belcheff on the development of 
her Super D Master pills and wish her well in future 
endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

SaskPower Executive Compensation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatchewan people 
were no doubt floored to read in this past weekend’s 
newspapers about a NDP sweetheart deal cut with a senior 
SaskPower executive. The deal will allow this VP 
(vice-president) to move to Victoria, BC, keep his $160,000 a 
year job, and it will hire a replacement VP for him back in 
Regina at roughly the same wage. Not only that, Mr. Speaker, 
but they also gave him a 7 per cent raise as a going away 
present. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there may be a number of Saskatchewan 
people who support the relocation of senior government 
officials thousands of miles away, but I have a feeling when 
people look at a crazy deal like this, they’re hoping that that 
official is the minister of SaskPower not the vice-president, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — To the minister, the question to the minister is 
this: will the minister tell this House how he is reacting to this 
sweetheart deal, and has he considered steps to reverse it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — First of all, Mr. Speaker, let me point 
out that the member may not be aware, but this is not a role for 
the minister to become involved in at all. It is clearly a decision, 
Mr. Speaker, made by the president of the corporation. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, I want to talk about if I 
could some of the wonderful things that SaskPower is doing. 
They’re doing a wonderful job, Mr. Speaker, of providing 
reliable service to our Saskatchewan citizens. They provide 
rates here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, rates that are lower 
than almost anywhere else in Canada, Mr. Speaker. I venture to 
say lower than anywhere else in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When we look at what has happened in Alberta and other 
jurisdictions across the world, Mr. Speaker, I think that we 
should value the role that many of our long-term employees 
have played in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it is hard to believe the minister of 
the Crown, the minister responsible for SaskPower — emphasis 
on the word responsible — says it’s not his role, says it’s not 



456 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

his role to get involved in senior management decisions at the 
Crown. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that cabinet doesn’t hesitate to get involved 
in approving rate hikes that face Saskatchewan people here in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now they’ve got a chance to take some action to 
lower costs at SaskPower and that minister should take that 
opportunity today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they want us to believe that they can move this 
senior VP to Victoria, give him a 7 per cent raise, pay him over 
$160,000 a year, set him up with everything he needs in 
Victoria, fly him back to Regina for meetings, and hire a 
replacement VP, and what we’ve been told is somehow this is 
going to cost less than the early retirement plan, Mr. Speaker. 
Maybe their early retirement plan is a little too lucrative. 
 
I’ll ask the minister again, I’ll ask the minister again: will he 
reconsider this deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, 
everyday we listen to the members opposite in the opposition 
saying that we should allow our private . . . our utilities, our 
Crown utilities to operate more like private utilities. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve said in the last, when I gave my last 
answer, Mr. Speaker, that I as a minister have no intention to 
answer the question specifically, have no intention of getting 
involved in something that is clearly the role of the president of 
the corporation and perhaps the board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to refer again to some of the things that 
SaskPower does. SaskPower provides wonderful, wonderful 
service for Saskatchewan and has for years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And when I look at headlines like this, Mr. Speaker, out of the 
Calgary Herald that says “Albertans stuck with $3 billion tab,” 
it says, and I quote here: 
 

Albertans are unlikely to recoup $3 billion lost in the 
transition to a deregulated power industry, even though 
soaring electricity rates will moderate after 2001, warns a 
new study by Calgary-based Energy Consulting. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I think we need to value the service that is 
provided to us by wonderful civil servants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister just said again, he said, 
well the deal is done and there’s nothing he could do to reverse 
it. Well that’s never stopped this government before, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
They didn’t bat an eye when they broke their own health care 
election promises. They didn’t lose any sleep over breaking 
their own job creation promises, Mr. Speaker. And they 

certainly didn’t lose any sleep when they ripped up GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) contracts with farmers across this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Now they have chance, now they have a chance 
to reverse a deal and actually do some good for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I attended the SaskPower rate hike meetings 
across this province. And at every meeting SaskPower said they 
were doing everything in their power to keep costs under 
control. And now we see them pulling this little stunt, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So my question to the minister is this: why should SaskPower 
customers have any confidence that costs are being kept under 
control when they see the NDP cutting these Monty Python-like 
deals with senior SaskPower executives, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t understand 
where he’s going with this line of questioning. I think if we 
refer back to Hansard you probably will . . . tomorrow you will 
probably have . . . you will probably be able to read where he 
quotes and says that money was apparently saved through this 
process. If you acknowledge that, Mr. Speaker, then I don’t 
understand why he’s asking the questions that he is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve said and I’ll say it again, Mr. Speaker, that 
our Power employees provide great service here in 
Saskatchewan. And when I look again at even headlines here 
out of the seniors’ voice that talks about “California’s electric 
energy nightmare,” is the headline, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It says: 
 

Governor Gray Davis in his state of the state speech, 
Monday, January 8, said, never again can we allow our 
out-of-state profiteers to hold California hostage. Never 
again will we allow out-of-state generators to threaten to 
turn off our lights with the flip of a switch. He says, 
California’s (and I quote) California’s deregulation scheme 
is a colossal and dangerous failure. 

 
It’s because of employees that we have, Mr. Speaker, that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s pretty clear that the 
minister is not going to answer the question on whether or not 
he will look into reversing the deal. He’s got a choice to make 
here today and we’re presenting him with this choice, and that 
is to choose Saskatchewan Power customers in favour of their 
executive board officers. That’s what we’re asking him to do 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 457 

 

Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has confirmed that this 
VP is getting a 7 per cent raise hike and that some executives 
will get up to a 9 per cent hike this year. Where do you have to 
live to get a 9 per cent rate hike these days, Mr. Speaker, 
Aruba? 
 
I have a question for the minister respecting the salary increases 
for SaskPower executives which could equal $10,000 per 
executive. The question is simple. Mr. Speaker, how can the 
minister justify rates of up to 9 per cent or $10,000 for 
SaskPower executives, and at the same time ask SaskPower 
customers to fork over another 6 per cent on their utility bills? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I find this 
attack on public servants has gone on here for days, Mr. 
Speaker. I find this unacceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve got an employee here, Mr. Speaker, who has provided 
wonderful service to the corporation for over 30 years, Mr. 
Speaker — over 30 years. And the opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
attacks a civil servant, Mr. Speaker, that has provided, as I have 
said, great service to our corporation and to this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskPower has been able to freeze rates for over 
five years, Mr. Speaker — five years. There isn’t any other 
utility in all of Canada, or for that matter in North America, that 
has been able to do that, Mr. Speaker. And it’s because of 
employees like Mr. Yeske that’s been referred to here in the 
House today, that we’ve been able to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister wonders 
what or why we’re attacking. I’ll tell you, Mr. Speaker, the 
official opposition will attack hare-brained schemes of this 
government that wastes taxpayers’ money every single time, 
Mr. Speaker, every single time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, at every single SaskPower rate 
review meeting, at every SaskEnergy rate review meeting, the 
government told customers they were doing everything in their 
power to keep costs low. So I think customers have a right to 
know, Mr. Speaker, what kind of raises did the senior 
management get this year? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister table a list of all of the raises 
received by SaskPower executives, SaskEnergy executives, and 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) 
executives? Will the minister commit to do that today in the 
legislature? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well as I’ve 
said before, as the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation, I have no intention of getting into 
micromanaging at this level, Mr. Speaker. 
 

This is clearly, clearly the responsibility of the president and the 
board of directors of the corporation, Mr. Speaker. They have 
called on, for years, that our utilities be . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The minister will 
proceed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition for years 
has called on our utilities to become more competitive and to 
become more at arm’s length from governments, Mr. Speaker. 
And it’s for reasons like that that we have removed ministers 
from the Crown boards, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, employees like Mr. Yeske who have contributed 
to service through the corporation for over 30 years, employees 
like him and many others within the corporation, we should 
admire what they’ve done for the corporation, Mr. Speaker; not 
sit here and ridicule them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Health District Loses Psychiatrists 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Health. Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has 
learned that the Regina Health District will lose five 
psychiatrists within the next few weeks. This has been 
confirmed by the VP of human resources for the health district. 
 
We understand that four of the five psychiatrists at the Regina 
Mental Health Clinic are leaving to take positions in other 
provinces. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is Regina losing so many psychiatrists at one 
time and what is the minister going to do about it? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was getting a 
little lonely over here. I hadn’t had a question for quite a long 
time. 
 
But what I would say about this matter is that we in the 
province are very concerned about attracting professionals to 
provide all of the health services that we need. And we know 
that working with psychiatrists to both retain the ones we have 
and recruit new ones is an extremely important task. 
 
Last summer, June to be accurate, we created a provincial 
Psychiatry Manpower Committee with representation from the 
health districts, Sask Health, SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association), SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), College of Medicine, College of Physicians and 
Surgeons, and the contract psychiatrists. Their job was to look 
at the whole area around psychiatrist retention and 
compensation, and they are continuing to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question again for the minister. 
 
If he’s lonely, maybe he could turn to his colleagues for some 



458 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP and the minister keep telling us what a 
great job they’re doing managing the health care system in 
Saskatchewan and yet day after day we hear stories that there 
are doctors and health care professionals leaving. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these departures are going to leave the Mental 
Health Clinic in a very difficult situation. There simply won’t 
be enough doctors to see all the patients that come to the clinic 
and require care. These people are in a very vulnerable state and 
they require professional help. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is this government going to do to help the 
hundreds of mental health patients who are losing their doctors? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, a little over a week ago we 
came forward with a new budget that included money for the 
Department of Health. Included in that budget were funds for 
physicians, and that money goes to a panel set up by the 
Saskatchewan Medical Association and they allocate the money 
between the various professions. 
 
I’m pleased to report that it’s been publicly set out that 
psychiatrists will be receiving a 14 per cent increase in their 
salary this year, in this budget. And that money is being 
allocated by the profession themselves. 
 
We are continuing to work with these people to make sure that 
we have the professionals that we need, and we will continue to 
work so that we have the best health care system that we can 
have. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Labour Relations Board Ruling on Management Positions 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Labour. On April 5 the Labour Relations Board 
ruled that 673 managerial positions within government 
departments will be unionized as of May 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of those people do not want to be unionized. 
In fact the Labour Relations Board received over 300 individual 
submissions from managers opposing the move. They are 
outraged that the board has ruled in favour of the union and feel 
their rights have been violated, especially since they were not 
allowed to vote as a group on whether or not they wanted to be 
unionized. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why these 673 managers 
are being forced to unionize against their will and why they 
were not allowed to vote on the move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission I’m pleased to 
explain this to the member opposite. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is the public service is a unionized 

workplace, and the matter of whether a job is in or out of scope 
is a matter of negotiation and the particular description of the 
work that the employee does. 
 
This has always been the case. There has never been a time in 
the history of the province when it’s been any different. And 
our relationship of in scope to out of scope is approximately the 
same as it is in other provinces. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know why this Minister 
of Labour in this government is so afraid of giving their 
workers their democratic right to vote and why this minister is 
so afraid to answer the question. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Labour: the positions 
affected are managerial salary positions. These are people who 
do not necessarily work set hours because of the nature of their 
job. They may meet with clients outside of regular hours. They 
may be on call because their jobs are technical in nature. How 
are they going to be expected to adhere to set unionized hours? 
In fact, an internal survey of employees at the Department of 
Health showed that their staffing costs would increase by 70 per 
cent if the managers were unionized. 
 
To the minister: do you expect these managers to conduct all 
government businesses within union hours, or is the 
government simply prepared to pay huge increases in 
administration overtime costs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the 
member opposite will know, in the public service, people’s 
compensation is tied to their job duties and to the particular 
scope of what it is that they do. 
 
Now this scope review was determined by an impartial third 
party, the Labour Relations Board, which I will remind the 
members opposite is made up — they might have forgot since 
last year — 50 per cent employers, 50 per cent employees. They 
adjudicated that these positions were within scope and an 
implementation committee will now follow up on what impact 
that would have on pay and other provisions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again to the 
Minister of Labour: over half of the managers affected by this 
decision formed the Saskatchewan Government Managers’ 
Association in order to fight this push by the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union). 
They hired their own lawyer who presented their very strong 
opposition to this move. They are not happy that they’ve been 
sold out to the SGEU. 
 
Their question: why the government, their employer, didn’t 
express opposition? But it’s the government who has the most 
to lose. The government will have to pay the increased costs, 
the government will be held hostage by the union in case of a 
strike. 
 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 459 

 

Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP government sell out their 
employees to the SGEU? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Despite the absence of the member 
opposite listening to the answer, I will try again to explain this 
in as simple terms as I can. 
 
The fact of the matter is, is it’s a matter of negotiation what the 
scope positions are, Mr. Speaker, that are within or outside the 
classified, unionized section of the bargaining agreement. 
 
The independent body that adjudicates on these things, a group 
of men and women whose job it is to make this decision, have 
looked at all the information. They’ve made this ruling and, 
quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, I think they’re in a better position to 
do it . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, here’s the picture. Over 600 
government managerial employees forced to join the SGEU 
against their will, with no vote, with no say as to which union 
will represent them. The union will gain at least a half a million 
dollars in union dues annually. But the government will lose by 
having to pay increased staffing costs and will be virtually 
paralyzed if they ever face a strike position. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the union says this move was made because these 
managerial positions were removed from the union years ago. 
That’s not the case. 
 
These positions have been out of scope by agreement between 
the government and the SGEU for decades. And many of these 
people accepted the positions knowing they were out of scope 
and because of that fact. 
 
How can the government accept this ruling? Mr. Speaker, is this 
a payoff to the union for supporting the NDP? If not, Mr. 
Speaker, then why isn’t the government speaking up for their 
employees and maintaining the decades-old agreement to keep 
them out of scope? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll try this one more 
time, one more time. The SGEU is the union that represents . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. The minister will continue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The SGEU is 
the union who represents — and I might say well represents — 
the employees that work within government. So if you are 
defined, by definition and by negotiation, to be in scope, you 
automatically are then in the union that represents those 
employees. It’s very straightforward. 
 
There is an independent body, the Labour Relations Board, that 
adjudicated that. I know these guys don’t like independent 
bodies. They would like the government to micromanage every 

darn decision. But the fact of the matter is there’s an 
independent body and that member should learn that there’s 
some fair rules that govern these things, and those rules have 
been applied. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Government Investment in Potato Industry 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for CIC. Mr. Speaker, over a week ago I asked a 
few questions; I didn’t get an answer. I asked the minister 
whether his government was moving back into the potato 
industry. 
 
Is Sask Valley Potato Corporation buying new equipment and 
leasing land in the Outlook area? And if they are, why is the 
government leasing land and why are they buying new 
potato-growing equipment? 
 
Does the word Spudco (Saskatchewan Potato Utility 
Development Company) mean anything to you over there, 
where you lost millions of dollars . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would ask the member to 
rephrase his question through the Chair please. Please continue. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, my question is, for the minister, 
is: why is the government leasing land? Why are they buying 
new potato-growing equipment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as I answered the question 
on budget day, the . . . when Sask Water was responsible, Mr. 
Speaker, when Sask Water was responsible, it was the mandate, 
Mr. Speaker, to start the industry and grow the industry, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I believe that we have a strong and viable 
potato industry that is now started out in that area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are providing seed potatoes, Mr. Speaker, to Prince Edward 
Island, Mr. Speaker, that has been recognized as a province, Mr. 
Speaker, that was the potato province, Mr. Speaker, and now 
we’re providing potatoes for them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it has always been the mandate, Mr. Speaker, to, 
once the industry was ready, that we would turn this back over 
to the private sector. That still is the mandate and that’s exactly 
what we will do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the industry out there is already 
viable. Why are they buying and leasing more land? 
 
If he wants to talk about Prince Edward Island, there’s another 
question I ask; I’m glad you brought that up. Was there a 
shipment sent back from Prince Edward Island because they 
were frozen? Has the minister looked into this matter? Why did 
it happen and how much money did the government lose in this 
shipment of frozen potatoes? 



460 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Do they want the frozen answer or the 
mashed answer, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is, Mr. Speaker, that the potatoes are 
inspected by the Canadian Food Inspection Agency, Mr. 
Speaker. It is my understanding — they’re looking into it — but 
it is my understanding that when the potatoes did leave, to 
answer the question, that they were not frozen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll ask you, how 
much did you lose on that shipment? And also how much 
money did the Saskatchewan Valley Potato Corporation lose 
last year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thanks again, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, look, the corporation that . . . When we started the 
potato industry out there, it was clearly, Mr. Speaker, in 
response to the fact that we had cereal grains growing that had 
little value, were adding little value to agriculture in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We had access to water; we looked 
for a way to add value to a product that would also provide 
meaningful jobs. And clearly, Mr. Speaker, it’s my estimation 
that the mandate is still — still, Mr. Speaker — to turn this back 
over to the private sector some day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my estimation, and I think probably those who 
pay some attention to this and evaluate this, that we do have a 
good industry there, Mr. Speaker, and that into the future this 
will be handed back over to the private sector, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 14 — The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 14, The Provincial Auditor Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to answer questions no. 53 and 54 on behalf of this 
open and accountable government. 
 
The Speaker: — Questions 53 and 54 are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — I’d invite the Minister of Finance to introduce 
his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to introduce 
to you and through you to members of the Assembly, sitting to 
my immediate left is Dr. Paul Boothe, who is the deputy 
minister of Finance. And to my right is Kirk McGregor, who’s 
the assistant deputy minister of taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs. Behind Dr. Boothe is Mr. Terry Paton, who is the 
Provincial Comptroller. And behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle, 
who is the assistant deputy minister of the Treasury Board 
branch of the Department of Finance. And I guess that’s it. 
 
And Mr. Chair, I would like to move resolution no. 1: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $923, 290,000 be granted to Her 
Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 31, 
2002. 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I want 
to welcome the minister’s officials this afternoon and we’ll try 
to, over the course of the next couple of hours, get a better 
understanding of the planning that went into the budget that has 
been proposed back a week and a half ago, and of course the 
projections for the expenditures that you have. 
 
The first question that I have, Mr. Minister, for you would be do 
you have the information concerning the expenditures and 
whether we’re talking about a one-twelfth situation or a 
two-twelfths? Could we have that information presented so that 
we would have a better understanding of what you’re asking for 
from each of the departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is in fact two-twelfths. And I do have 
some copies here, Mr. Chair. And I gather perhaps we have not 
sent those across and so I’d like to send across to the opposition 
members and the Liberal member for North Battleford some 
copies, if the page could come and take them, and then they 
would have the numbers in front of them. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And while we wait 
for those, to be more specific, I’m going to get into some of the 
general questions that I have for you. 
 
And I’m referring to page 52 of your general document, the 
budget that you proposed — not the Estimates. And when we 
start to look at the expenditures that you’ve asked for, of course 
relative to a balanced budget is revenue. And on page 52 of the 
document you talk about the revenue projections, not only for 
the past fiscal year but also for the next four years. And I would 
speculate that those revenue numbers are net numbers of actual 
decreases that you have projected and forecast in your tax 
reductions. 
 
And I would ask you, Mr. Minister, if you could inform the 
House and the people of Saskatchewan what amounts of tax 
reductions have you built in into each of the four years that you 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 461 

 

have forecasted there for the budget document? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — For the upcoming fiscal year, that is this 
current fiscal year, Mr. Chair, as a result of income tax cuts; 
income taxes will go down $322.4 million over the 1999-2000 
year. 
 
Sales taxes will be $151.4 million higher than that fiscal year; 
insurance premiums tax will be $14.1 million higher than that 
fiscal year; tobacco tax will be $6.3 million higher than that 
fiscal year; the net tax reduction in 2001-02 will be $150.6 
million over the ’99-2000 fiscal year. 
 
(14:30) 
 
In 2002-03, that is next year, income taxes will be down $374.5 
million; sales taxes at 155.9, relative to ’99-2000; insurance 
premiums tax at 14.5; tobacco tax at 6.3, for a net tax reduction 
of $197.8 million as of 2002-03. 
 
When you get into the 2003-2004 tax year, our fiscal year, 
which is the last year of tax reform, income taxes will have 
gone down $442.6 million; sales taxes relative to ’99-2000 will 
have increased $160.9 million; insurance premiums tax would 
be up $14.9 million; tobacco tax, again $6.3 million; for a total 
tax reductions to the people of Saskatchewan of $260.5 million 
— that’s 260.5. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much for the answers, Mr. 
Minister, and I know you’ve summarized a couple of things 
there and I’ll be able to obtain that information from Hansard 
regarding the total amount for each specific tax and what 
you’ve looked at. 
 
Mr. Minister, if we could look at specifically this current fiscal 
year that we’re in. Your proposal to have the small-business tax 
reduced on July 1 from 8 to 6 per cent, could you indicate to the 
Assembly here what amount of dollars that will actually be as 
far as a cost? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — During this fiscal year, Mr. Chair — that is 
2001-02, of course — because it comes into effect July 1, the 
cost of the small-business rate reduction is $11.4 million. I 
should say that over the course of one year, so that next year, 
2002-03 that figure would be $20.8 million. 
 
The small business threshold increase from 200,000 to 300,000 
will be $300,000 in this fiscal year and $3 million a year 
annualized. So the total this year would be $11.7 million and for 
an entire fiscal year it would be $23.8 million in tax relief for 
small business. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, one of the other initiatives that you announced was the 
ability for professional incorporation. Could you indicate what 
you see as the cost for that feature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. It would be $1 million in this fiscal 
year and $2 million annualized. So $2 million in next fiscal year 
and subsequent fiscal years. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, one of the other 
initiatives you announced retroactive to January 1, 2001 is the 

political tax credit for all political parties registered in the 
province of Saskatchewan. What do you see as the total cost for 
that added feature? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We estimate the cost of that to be $1 
million per year. Of course since we’ve had no experience with 
the provincial tax credit, we don’t know. But that’s the estimate 
and next year at this time perhaps we’ll have a more accurate 
figure. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
understand that Manitoba has had this political tax credit in 
place and are relatively similar in population — maybe growing 
a little bit more than we are — but does that $1 million compare 
favourably to what has been the experience for the province of 
Manitoba? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I’m advised by the officials, Mr. 
Chair, that we consulted with the province of Manitoba and 
used the information from them as a primary source of 
estimating an amount for Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the other announcements in the post-secondary area was the 
increase from $200 to $400 per month for post-secondary 
students, and that is taking effect for the calendar year, I 
understand, 2001. What cost implication is that to the treasury 
of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The revenue loss is $4 million per year. In 
other words, the doubling of the education tax credit from $200 
per month to $400 per month would put $4 million back into 
the pockets of the post-secondary education students. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, still on the angle of the 
post-secondary. Last year you announced a tax credit, a $350 
tax credit to each student, and you’ve had a year now for that to 
come into place. Have you anywhere in your numbers built in 
the difference between the $350 tax credit that you’ve issued 
. . . And I understand the cost implication there is about $3 
million per year. The other thing that was announced . . . the 
other announcement that you made was that the interest-free 
period for students who have student loans, the six-month, 
interest-free period was being eliminated, and in fact at, I 
believe, the point of graduation the student now would be 
responsible for the interests that they have on their accumulated 
loans. 
 
Have you had a chance to look at the savings that you as a . . . 
as a government and as a treasury would have incurred by the 
fact that students were now picking up the costs of there 
interests versus the $3 million that you projected that you were 
passing on as a tax credit to all students? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, we do not have those numbers, Mr. 
Chair. And the reason is that the student tax credit of $350 per 
student who graduated after, I believe, it’s January 1, 2000, the 
first year in which that could be claimed would be the 2000 
taxation year. And the students would just be claiming that now 
as they’re filing their tax returns for 2000 in 2001. And we 
won’t have the information as to how many claimed it or what 
the cost to the treasury would be until, at some point, the federal 
government can go through the tax returns that they’re only 



462 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

getting now, analyze it, and give us that information. 
 
With respect to the interest-free period that we eliminated, we 
don’t have the number for that either. I’m told that we are 
harmonizing our student aid program with the federal 
governments, and we are in this — as a result of this budget — 
somewhat improving the interest relief and forgiveness 
provisions of student aid. But we do not yet know what the 
savings to the province would be as a result of the elimination 
of the interest-free period, so I’m unable to answer that 
question. Although, I would be happy to undertake to ask the 
officials to make further inquiries and provide the member with 
a written response to that question. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, if I may, Mr. Chair, I’d like to say 
another official has come in and sat down. That is Joanne 
Brockman, who is the head of the economic and fiscal policy 
division of the Department of Finance. So thank you. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I want to 
welcome your other official as well. 
 
And I appreciate the fact that you’ll have one of your officials 
look at . . . especially, Mr. Speaker, I’ve had inquiries as to the 
number of students that are involved in this from last year and I 
know we’re looking back at last year. How many students were 
affected by that change with the interest-free period being 
removed? And as I understand, you’ll have your officials look 
at what that total cost might be for the province . . . or the total 
savings of that for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the other initiatives that you announced 
was the resource industry tax changes. Have you any idea of 
what that will mean as far as a cost to the Treasury Board for 
those incentives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we see the mineral exploration tax 
credit costing the treasury approximately $300,000 per year. 
 
The incentives for carbon dioxide based, enhanced oil recovery 
projects, we believe, will be revenue neutral; that we will be 
giving up some tax revenue but, on the other hand, there will be 
increased production that will bring in revenues. So we don’t 
believe it will cost anything in that sense. 
 
Then there is the sodium sulphate capital incentive, which is 
designed to encourage the sodium sulphate industry to find 
technologically more advanced ways to produce sodium 
sulphate. And we believe that the foregone revenue from that 
would be $300,000. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
also announced other tax initiatives, I believe is how you 
described them in your budget. Have you got a total picture as 
to what costs are involved in those other tax initiatives? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Other tax initiatives involving credits, 
Mr. Chair, were the political contribution tax credit, which 
we’ve discussed, and then we had the PST and real estate 
commissions on new home sales changed. That’s a foregone 
revenue of about a hundred thousand dollars. And then taxation 
of recovered crude oil, we feel that will be revenue neutral for 
reasons similar to the ones I indicated in the last answer. 

And then we had in addition to the enhanced tax credits for 
students at post-secondary institutions, which we have 
discussed; we also are giving enhanced credits to people who 
are disabled, caregivers, and infirm dependants. 
 
And in the case of the disability tax credit amount it goes from 
$4,400 to 6,000; the disability supplement amount goes from 
$3,015 to $3,500; the caregiver tax credit amount goes from 
2,446 to 3,500; the infirm dependant amount goes from 2,446 to 
3,500. 
 
And I’m told that the foregone revenue with respect to the 
disability tax credit, the caregivers, and the infirm dependants, 
would total about $2 million. That would be in addition to the 
$4 million in additional tax credit for the post-secondary 
students. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, last 
year your department produced a document that summarized the 
corporate capital tax, the corporate income tax, the various 
individual income taxes, and fuel tax, etc. And it was a very 
useful document, and I know I’ve heard you quote from it. 
Would you be able to send that document over to the 
opposition? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I don’t have it today, but we would 
gladly prepare that document and send it to the opposition. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, still staying on page 52 of that document, now that 
you’ve indicated how you have arrived at the net numbers for 
this year and for the next three projected years, I note that your 
net revenue is not projected to grow very much. You’re looking 
at basically a stagnant situation or very little growth, if we look 
at inflationary concerns for each year. 
 
Could you explain why your projections are so low for your net 
revenue numbers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mainly, our revenues are not growing at a 
big rate because of falling income taxes, and I’ve outlined the 
income tax savings that will come about through tax reform. 
 
And also falling resource revenue prices. We do not see the 
price of oil and gas being as high, and so that will mean that we 
get less revenue. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minster, 
besides the revenue, your document also contains the 
expenditures that you’ve indicated. And I note when you 
combine the ongoing and the exceptional expenditures over the 
four years, we almost see a decrease in expenditures. 
 
I believe, Mr. Minister, I remember your words criticizing the 
opposition and the Saskatchewan Party platform in 1999 for 
holding the line at the rate of inflation. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, over the last couple of years, we’ve seen 
inflation rates somewhere in that 2 per cent range. And if I take 
a look at your expenditure of about 5.662 billion this year and I 
look at the expenditures that you’ve projected for 2004, the 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 463 

 

combined ongoing and exceptional is about 5.650 billion. 
That’s a decrease, Mr. Minister. 
 
So I guess, over the next four years, you’re not only not 
projecting expenditures at the rate of inflation, you are 
projecting decreases. Could you explain why you’ve built in 
decreases for expenditures in all of those items? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, as page 52 reveals — and 
it’s all printed there for the member — we have exceptional 
spending this year of $243 million. That’s spending of a 
one-time nature. But in terms of ongoing spending, this year it’s 
$5.4 billion. Next year, it’s $5.5 billion; the year after that 5.56; 
and finally in 2004/5, 5.65. 
 
So in terms of ongoing expenditure, we have projected, based 
on very prudent projections, that spending of government will 
increase by some $230 million over the next four years on 
ongoing expenditures. And some members of the opposition 
have said that, you know, the spending projections, perhaps 
we’re spending too much. Well we’re projecting that our 
spending growth will be quite reasonable, in my view. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. When 
we take a look at the interest costs, Mr. Minister, over the last 
number of years, I think you’ve shown that the interest costs 
have declined dramatically, the cost of servicing the public 
debt, have dropped from 800-and-some million to a projection 
this year of 640 million. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve been dropping at about 20 to 25 million per 
year in the last three or four years since I’ve been involved in 
this capacity, and I note now that you forecast increases in the 
cost of servicing the public debt. Are you expecting that we’ll 
see an increase in the interest rates, or are you expecting to see 
your own debt increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, we do not forecast the debt of 
the General Revenue Fund to rise. We see it decreasing. And 
with respect to interest costs, any increase in interest costs we 
project is a result of slightly upward fluctuation in interest rates, 
according to page 52, starting in the year 2002-3. Of course, 
these are estimates and assumptions and they may or may not 
come to pass. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, while I agree that 
they’re estimates, I’m wondering about why you made a 
dramatic change to what has occurred over the last three years 
— about 20 to $25 million less each and every year. And I’ve 
looked at your . . . at the auditor’s report, and your estimates — 
each year we’ve seen a drop of 20 to 25 million in the cost of 
borrowing. Now you’ve said we’re not only levelling off, we’re 
increasing. 
 
Are you talking to economists who are projecting huge 
increases in the interest rates, or why did you suddenly change 
that plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Most of the reason for this is actually due 
to the fact that we have now retired most of the debt that was at 
a very high interest rate. We had debt that was in the double 
digits for the interest rate. And as we retired that debt and 
replaced it with debt at a lower rate, maybe 8 or 9 per cent, 

whatever it is, obviously the interest costs come down. 
 
And the situation now, I’m advised, is that pretty much all of 
our debt — or most of it, in any event — is already at lower 
interest rates. And then even if we don’t increase debt, when we 
go out to renegotiate the debt as it becomes due, we may be 
negotiating it at the same or perhaps a slightly higher interest 
rate; so that the debt is not going up, but the servicing costs are 
not coming down as quickly because we’re not . . . we don’t see 
interest rates dropping as dramatically as they have in the past. 
 
I should have added to my earlier response as well that, there’s 
a question of the interest rates going up slightly, there’s also a 
question of the exchange rate of the Canadian dollar. That if the 
dollar goes down, as we all know it has, and 20 per cent I 
believe, approximately, of our debt is in US dollars, so interest 
costs will go up slightly as a result of a lower Canadian dollar. 
 
Having said all that, I want to assure the member that if . . . that 
we operate on the basis of very prudent assumptions. And in 
fact, I think if you go back — well basically, until this 
government . . . since this government was elected — we have 
met or exceeded all of our targets. So we usually do better than 
we have projected because we tend to project on a cautious 
basis. 
 
If we again do better than we have projected in these budget 
documents, then we will use some of that flexibility to perhaps 
do a little bit more on the debt reduction side and so the figures 
would vary accordingly. But the amount of difference actually 
in these figures for interest could be accounted for entirely by a 
fluctuation in exchange rates, for example. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, will 
credit ratings for the province of Saskatchewan have any effect 
on renegotiating the interest rates that you would have on your 
debt that matures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that the markets anticipated 
that we would get credit rating upgrades before we got our 
upgrades. 
 
To put it another way, we have straight A credit rating now. But 
even before we went back to straight A’s, the interest rate we 
received was as if we had straight A’s, if you get my meaning 
so that we already have benefited from the fact that we’re in 
better fiscal condition. Because when we go to the market with 
our bonds, we’re one of the best jurisdictions in the country in 
terms of people wanting to deal with the province of 
Saskatchewan and giving us interest rates that are competitive 
with other jurisdictions. 
 
So it’s difficult to conceive that additional credit ratings in the 
short term would make a great deal of difference in our interest 
rate because we already are treated by the investment bankers 
and the credit rating agencies as a straight A credit rating 
jurisdiction, and there probably isn’t a lot that will change that 
because they already regard us in that light. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
made reference to exceptional spending, and I want to ask a 
number of questions there, even though some of my colleagues 
will elaborate a little more on your projections, especially in the 



464 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

area of agriculture. 
 
One of the concerns in exceptional spending from last year, Mr. 
Minister, and then a continuation of that project into this year is 
the rebate to agricultural property tax for education purposes. 
Mr. Minister, could you tell us what payments have been made 
for last year’s $25 million and that have been made up to this 
date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, those payments are actually 
processed by the Department of Agriculture and Food, and it 
actually is a question that would more appropriately be 
addressed to the Department of Agriculture and Food in 
estimates. We don’t have that figure available, but I’m 
assuming, we’re assuming, without knowing that the $25 
million is in the process of being paid out or most of it has been 
paid out right now. But that is handled by the Department of 
Agriculture and Food. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, we have talked to a lot of 
farmers — farmers who have submitted their requests back in 
September/October of last year — and very currently they’re 
just starting to come out, and there’s been four or five months 
of waiting. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, while I appreciate your answer that this is an 
agricultural responsibility, has your department looked at how 
you have expended that 25 million — or will expend it — and 
is there any possibility of improving on the plan? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I ask the question that has been raised by 
many municipalities who state that they have their administrator 
within their RM (rural municipality) office who handles tax 
payments on a regular basis. And the question has been asked: 
why isn’t there a working relationship between — in this case 
as you’ve indicated — the Department of Agriculture 
or/Department of Finance and the administrators in the rural 
municipal offices to speed up the process, to improve on the 
process, to save some money, taxpayers’ money, to ensure that 
the 25 million would have been into hands of farmers who paid 
their taxes last September and, as we understand, are just now 
starting to receive a rebate? 
 
Have you looked at improving that plan that you’re looking at 
spending the same $25 million this fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, that question would be 
appropriately addressed to the Minister of Agriculture and Food 
in his estimates because we don’t administer this program. 
 
Having said that, you know, if there’s some better way to do it, 
then as far as I’m concerned, that should be examined. But it 
should be examined by the Minister of Agriculture and Food 
because his department administers the program — we don’t. 
And I’d appreciate it if the member would address those 
questions about the administration of the program to the 
department which administers the program. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. 
Minister, I’d make a suggestion that you could put forward to 
the Department of Agriculture right now. It’s going to be a 
while before they’re going to be dealing with tax payments for 
the current fiscal year. 

I try to look at a plan that is going to deal directly with the RM 
offices. We have heard from so many RM administrators who 
say that they’ve received 20, 25 tax notices and payments in a 
given year. The money is paid upfront. 
 
The farmers are saying to you, and to me indirectly, we’re 
having to put up our money and then we’re waiting for the 
government to give us back the rebate that we’re entitled to, 
that you’ve announced and re-announced for this fiscal year. 
 
So take a look at that. It’s a plan that needs improving, and I 
think it will save taxpayers money and it will save treasury 
money. So I appreciate your openness to take a look at that. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Minister, you have spoken about your projections for 
commodity prices, not only the comments that you’ve made 
about oil and gas, and I look at those projections that you have 
and it seems that last year, if I take a look at last year, you 
seriously underestimated the oil and gas. And that’s a positive 
thing, as you’ve said, because, wow, you had a windfall in oil 
and gas revenues and those kinds of things. 
 
When I take a look at this year’s numbers — and I know you’ve 
stated that you see sort of a stabilization in the price of a barrel 
of oil US (United States) — I think you’re projecting about 
$25.50 and natural gas prices to have stabilized as well. 
 
But when I talk to the people in that industry, they’re saying 
that development and the discovery of wells and putting wells 
on line, both in the oil sector and in the gas sector, is occurring 
on a daily basis almost. So the production is increasing 
dramatically, yet you forecast a $400 million decrease in oil and 
gas revenues. 
 
One of the people in the industry said that means the oil and gas 
sector has gone into the tank, and I think that’s his quotation. I 
don’t think people see it that way and yet you have projected a 
$400 million decrease. 
 
Have you not taken into account any growth in production in 
both of those sectors? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Well I should say, first of all, that I 
agree with the member, Mr. Chair, that it’s better to err on the 
side of caution. And if we were wrong on our projection, it’s a 
good thing that we were too cautious, rather than overly 
optimistic. 
 
But I will say we are in good company in terms of our 
projections as to the price. I mean, it’s not just us, but the 
Government of Alberta, the private sector, the banks. Last year, 
we all said about $21 for oil and it turned out to be $30. 
 
But in answer to the member’s question, we project increased 
production of oil. I believe that for the year that just ended, for 
example, Saskatchewan will have produced about 153 million 
barrels of oil and we see that going to more like 159.3 million 
barrels. So in other words, more oil will be produced, but that 
will be at a lower price. 
 
And by the way, I hope that we’re wrong in a good way, that 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 465 

 

we produce more than 159 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
good, that’s excellent news. And it backs up what I said about 
maybe being cautious. 
 
But if we produce more than 159.3 million barrels of oil, 
nobody will be happier than me. If the price is higher, that will 
be good too, although we have to be careful about how high it 
gets, because when it gets really high, it’s very hard on farmers 
and certain industries. 
 
In terms of natural gas, we see the production of that going up 
as well, from about 235 bcfs (billion cubic feet) to about 237.5 
bcfs — billion cubic feet, the member from Cypress Hills very 
helpfully adds. So we see them going up, but we see the prices 
being somewhat down. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well we hear about 
record exploration and record development, and we’re 
encouraged as residents in the province of Saskatchewan, to see 
that. There’s also the rumour out there, Mr. Minister, that you 
have some plans to change the royalty structure involving oil 
and gas. Is there any truth to that rumour? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I would say this, Mr. Chair, there are 
no current plans to do so, but we always are willing to speak to 
the oil and gas industry about royalties. And over the course of 
the last few years, we have in fact adjusted the royalty structure, 
where it’s necessary, for the industry to make a fair return. I can 
think of the oil wells that have water in them, and we had to 
reduce the royalty so that it was still profitable to get the oil out 
of the ground, and the horizontal drilling, and the carbon 
dioxide process that is used. 
 
So we’re always talking to the oil and gas industry on an 
ongoing basis. And this is always a question of balance, and 
achieving a balance, the two competing interests being the need 
for the oil and gas industry, which we recognize to make a 
reasonable profit and to keep people working, and the interest 
that the people of the province have in getting a fair rate of 
return for non-renewable resources. And we want to achieve an 
appropriate balance. 
 
I think the industry is working quite well. There are many 
people employed in it, production is up, we want to see more of 
it. And although I have no specific plan to adjust the royalties, 
our door is always open, and the Minister of Energy and Mines 
and myself meet with the petroleum producers on an ongoing 
basis to discuss matters. And I might add that they have a 
variety of concerns. 
 
Royalties are not always the top of the list. There will be 
electrical power consumption concerns and others that we 
discuss on an ongoing basis, but our desire is to act in a 
co-operative fashion with the industry and to keep people 
working and to keep the royalties coming in. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’m not sure that 
you know this answer within your information right now, but 
maybe one of your officials do. Could you tell me what you 
used for a price of a barrel of oil in your estimates for last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Last year’s budget was $21, and in the 
mid-year report we adjusted that to $32.88. And now we’ve 

forecast that it will have been $31.25 for last year. And this year 
we’re projecting $23.36. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And while we look 
at your mid-year financial report and where we ended up in the 
government estimates and your forecast, I think you stated very 
clearly that the oil and gas sector grew significantly and that’s 
why you had a windfall of revenue. And your projections were 
that we would have about $447 million last year. Your mid-year 
report had adjusted that up to 774, and then now I see by your 
forecast, 794. 
 
We note now that you’re projecting only $511 million worth of 
revenue from that oil and gas sector, and you’ve explained the 
price differences. Yet I see that your projection for the price of 
a barrel of oil in these estimates is higher than it was last year. 
The two don’t seem to mix. 
 
You have greater production, you have a higher amount of 
revenue, and yet your increase from 447 to 511 is very, very 
small. The numbers don’t seem to add up. Could you explain 
that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Well I think the numbers do add up. 
It’s a simple matter of multiplying last year’s estimated price 
times last year’s estimated production. And the estimate was 
$447 million. And this year you’ve got the estimated price 
which in this book for the fiscal year I think is twenty-five fifty, 
but thereabouts. And I’ve mentioned the production estimate 
being up. And yes, they’re both higher and if you multiply 
them, they’re $511.5 million. 
 
But having said that I’ll join. Mr. Chair, with the member 
opposite in saying I hope it’s higher. I hope we make, you 
know, a hundred million more or two hundred million more. 
And if we do we’ll use that money, as we did this year with 
windfall profits, to do things that the people care about — this 
year we’re fixing the roads and so on. And if the member is 
saying that maybe we’re being overly cautious and prudent and 
that maybe we’ll get more money, all I can say is I hope he’s 
right. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, then 
if we look at your mid-year report of last year and if you will 
have a windfall oil and gas revenue and revenue of those kinds 
of numbers of $300 million additional revenues come 
November, will you be announcing tax cuts in the month of 
November? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we’ve already announced a lot of tax 
cuts, but what we will do is as we did last November when we 
had windfall profit decide what is the most important priority. 
And we made the decision obviously that the most important 
priority with windfall money was to fix the roads. So I 
announced that in November really, and it was confirmed in the 
budget, and we’ll have more to say in terms of the details of 
how the roads are going to be fixed. And we think taking the 
information highway to rural Saskatchewan is very important, 
and of course certain investments in education. 
 
The member says well if we get more money than we budget 
next year will we put it all into tax cuts or some of it into tax 
cuts, what I would say is that we will assess all of the priorities. 



466 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

And the public may want tax cuts or the public may want us to 
invest in some service that they’re concerned about — 
education, health care, and so on. 
 
But I would say that I certainly would welcome the advice and 
input of the members opposite. And I know that they’re very 
generous, Mr. Chair, in offering it. And as we go along, if we 
have more money than we project, I’ll be happy to sit down 
with the member opposite and take all of his ideas and discuss 
them. 
 
I should add though that when you get oil money that is of a 
windfall nature perhaps you could say it’s one-time money. 
You should not use that for ongoing tax cuts because you may 
not be able to sustain that. So we have to be cautious. 
 
But other than that, I hope we get some extra revenue. And if 
we do the member and I can have a discussion about what to do 
with it. And I know the member will have lots of advice for me. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, one 
of the other areas that is somewhat confusing when we look at 
your budget and what you did last year and what you project for 
this year — and I guess we again talk about an accumulation of 
funds — and that is in the CIC fund. We saw that you had 
projected that you would use $150 million last year to enable 
you to do the kinds of things that you outlined in the budget, 
and then your forecast for March 31 that just ended was that 
you did not transfer any monies from CIC. 
 
You are now again projecting a transfer of $200 million from 
CIC. Is there any standardization in the amount of monies that 
you are going to be transferring each and every year or is it a 
hit-and-miss kind of thing? And what decision came into play 
here for you when you started to look at where we were last 
year and why you actually made a decision to not transfer any 
money and now taking the decision that you want to indeed 
move 200 million from that fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well essentially, Mr. Chair, going back to 
what the member was saying earlier in his questioning, the 
revenues last year were about three-quarters of a billion dollars 
more than they are this year. 
 
If we had taken our budget at $150 million dividend from CIC 
then they would have been, you know, $925 million more last 
year than this year. So it seemed more reasonable and prudent 
to say, well, since it got a big surplus already last year, let’s not 
take that dividend but let’s spread that out into succeeding 
years. So that this year, for example, we planned to take a 
dividend of $200 million from CIC and spread that money out 
into the ensuing years to bring the revenue up, which I think 
only makes sense. 
 
But having said that, in terms of the way this has historically or 
traditionally been done, it’s actually quite common that in some 
years governments have taken larger dividends than they 
project. In some years they’ve taken smaller dividends than 
they project because basically they haven’t needed the money; 
they got more money than they projected. 
 
(15:15) 
 

And I can think back, for example, to 1997 when revenues were 
up very high because of oil but then dramatically dropped the 
next year. I believe in that year there was a big dividend that 
was supposed to come from the SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority). That’s a slightly different example, but 
the government didn’t take that because it was more important 
to take it in the years when you needed the money. And 
essentially what we’re doing with the Crown Investments 
Corporation is saying we didn’t need the money in last year’s 
budget. We do need the money more so this year and in the 
succeeding years, so we’ll take the money out as we need it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you indicate what the average growth is in the 
amount of dividends in the fund on an annual basis? How much 
does the fund grow? And when we look at that current amount 
right now, what is the amount of money that’s currently within 
the dividend fund of CIC? And when you take out the 200 
million, what do you expect to remain after the profits or the 
growth that will take place this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — There is no dividend fund at Crown 
Investments Corporation, Mr. Chair. The way that CIC works, 
as I understand it, is simply that the individual Crown 
corporations pay a dividend on an annual basis to CIC. It in turn 
pays a dividend to the Government of Saskatchewan. If a 
dividend is not taken by the Government of Saskatchewan in a 
given year, that may affect the retained earnings of CIC but 
there is no dividend fund as such. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. With that 
knowledge and the fact then that you did not take the $150 
million last year, did the debt of CIC decrease as a result of not 
taking that 150 million out of CIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well CIC will be tabling their annual 
report for the year ending December 31, 2000 shortly and they 
will in that document reflect as part of their retained earnings or 
otherwise all of the funds and monies they have. So in that 
sense it’s reflected there. 
 
But you have to bear in mind also that for the current calendar 
year which is — their year is the calendar year — for 2001, the 
dividend that they will be expected to pay to the General 
Revenue Fund will be $200 million, not $150 million. And so in 
the out years they will be expecting, and expected, to pay that. 
But there is no large amount of money allowed to accumulate 
there. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, under 
your expenditures, I want some clarification about two things 
that you’ve announced in two successive years. 
 
You’ve talked about a Forest Fire Contingency Fund and you 
announced the creation of that fund last year, and then if I 
listened to you carefully — and I’ve read your budget speech — 
you’ve announced the creation of the fund again. Last year you 
said it was created with $50 million and this year you 
announced that it was created by expending $40 million. Do we 
have that large a fund now that has 90? And what changes 
occurred from last year to this year that indicate that you didn’t 
put in place that $50 million for that fund? 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 467 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, we don’t have a $90 million fund. The 
way that this operates is that if you do not use the $50 million 
— and in fact, fortunately last year we only were required to 
use $3.8 million — then that money lapses at the end of the 
fiscal year. It lapses and it goes back into the General Revenue 
Fund to be allocated. 
 
And that money goes into the General Revenue Fund, but this 
year we’re putting $40 million into the forest fire contingency 
fund and also increasing the basic budget for forest firefighting. 
But the $50 million simply goes back to the General Revenue 
Fund. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Then, Mr. Minister, I guess I interpreted your 
remarks of last year slightly different. Because I recall you 
saying that you were setting aside $50 million in a fund and that 
if there was a severe forest fire season and that there was an 
expenditure of $20 million needed, then that the following year 
the budget item that would be additional would be a topping up 
of the fund back to 50 million and there would be a $20 million 
expenditure. Was I wrong in that interpretation, or did things 
change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I wouldn’t say the member was wrong, and 
I don’t recall the conversation the member’s referring to. But if 
I said what the member has said, then I was incorrect. And it 
actually was toward the end of the fiscal year that it was 
explained to me by the officials of the Department of Finance 
that according to the accounting rules, you couldn’t carry over 
the money from last year into the new fiscal year. 
 
The accounting rules require that the money be returned to the 
General Revenue Fund at the end of the year if not used, and if 
you want a fund, then you have to create the fund over again 
unless you pass a separate law to create the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund. 
 
And again this year if the $40 million is used for forest 
firefighting — and I hope it’s not, but if it was — then it would 
be gone. And it is our intention to have a contingency fund, you 
know, unless for some reason there’s some other way to fight 
forest fires. But if we still need a Forest Fire Contingency Fund 
and we spent the $40 million, then we would simply have to put 
another $40 million in next year. If we still have the $40 million 
at the end of this fiscal year, that money will have to go back 
into the General Revenue Fund and we would then at the 
beginning of the next fiscal year once again have to budget to 
put $40 million money into the fund. 
 
I’m not sure there’s a great deal of difference between the two, 
but if I did say something other than that, then I apologize to the 
member. But I am now advised that that is the way that it must 
be done. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, by 
that explanation, is that any different than the supplementary 
estimates that we’ve always been dealing with, dealing with 
that kind of an expenditure? Why do we create the Contingency 
Fund if we could have just done it under supplementary 
estimates? I thought this was going to improve things. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Simply because it’s better budgeting. It’s 
better to take into account that you may have to spend more 

money on forest firefighting and set that money aside to do that 
than just to ignore the issue, spend the money in an unplanned 
way. We want it to be taken into account at budget time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Okay. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, one of the other items in this year’s budget versus 
your mid-year report seems to . . . there’s numbers that are 
slightly different, and that’s in the area of Health. 
 
In your mid-term report, you talked about a federal 
announcement that occurred last September, the year 2000, 
where there were . . . there was about a billion dollars made 
available across Canada, and that Saskatchewan’s share was 
about 33.3 million and that you were taking that money into 
revenue. And if I look at your mid-year report, you projected 
that the mid-year revenue for Health was going to be increased 
to $183 million — that was the Transition Fund and the 
Medical Equipment Fund. 
 
I look now at your revenue that you have in your budget, and 
your forecast in fact is that that 33 million just seems to have 
disappeared. Because the Transition Fund money and the 33 
million were to total $183 million, and in the expenditure side 
now we look at the fact that last year you only are forecasting a 
total expenditure of about $51 million and for this year, zero. 
 
So could you tell us what happened to the Transition Fund of 
150, the $33.3 million of federal money that you obtained for 
the province of Saskatchewan, and the fact that for this coming 
fiscal year you’re spending zero dollars on that line item? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the federal money, the $33 million, is 
in fact being given to the health districts over a two-year period 
— some of it already given and some this fiscal year, is my 
understanding. 
 
With respect to the Transition Fund, the remaining money in the 
Transition Fund would have been like the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund, it lapses at the end of the year if it’s not 
spent. And what we’re simply doing this year instead of having 
a Transition Fund is using . . . is giving the Department of 
Health a larger budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, this seems that it allows you the 
opportunity to announce large amounts of money that are set 
aside for medical equipment, for Transition Fund, for a Fire 
Contingency Fund, but in the end you don’t really spend them. 
 
And I notice that you talked about the percentage of growth in 
health spending, this year’s estimates over last year’s estimates. 
But yet when I look at what you actually had expended last 
year, and you take a look at the expenditures of 2.48 billion plus 
the Transition Fund of 50 million, you’re almost at $2.1 billion 
that was spent. And in your estimates of your mid-year report, 
you had talked about a fact that you were going to spend almost 
$2.2 billion. 
 
So when you re-announce these numbers in your budget and 
say, well, over last year’s estimates we’re actually spending 
200-and-some million dollars — and my colleague, the critic 
for Health, will have, I’m sure, some questions for the Health 
minister. There’s tremendous amount of confusion because in 
one sense you’re talking about a huge increase in the dollars 



468 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

that you’re spending estimate over estimate, but reality is you 
have to look back at what did you spend last year. 
 
And I’d like some explanation as to how you adjust those 
numbers from what you expended last year to what you’re 
projecting this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well first of all, I’d like to say that in terms 
of the Health Transition Fund at the beginning of the member’s 
question he suggested that, you know, the use of that would 
mean that we wouldn’t spend the money. Well that obviously 
isn’t the case because we don’t have the Health Transition Fund 
any more. All of that money goes to the Department of Health; 
all of that money will be spent. There’s no problem there. And 
in that sense it’s different than the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund which is contingent upon whether you have fires needing 
to spend the money. But all of the Health money is going to be 
spent. 
 
In terms of the numbers — what we’re spending in Health, 
what we budgeted in Health — those numbers are completely 
disclosed, Mr. Chair, on page 82 of the budget book. And 
essentially I would acknowledge the point that the member’s 
making which is that budget over budget, the increase to Health 
may be 11.6 per cent, I think it is, but when you compare the 
budgeted amount for Health this year to what was actually 
spent, the difference is not as great because the estimate of what 
we spent is more than we budgeted last year. 
 
I would point out this is nothing new or unusual. Each year, and 
including this year, we disclose the estimate, what we said we 
would spend last year for every department and agency; then we 
put the forecast, what we actually think that we spend — of 
course the final figure comes out in the Public Accounts and 
then what we estimate this year. 
 
And the member is correct. Last year we would have spent 
about $2.1 billion. This year we’re budgeting $2.207 billion and 
the increase, therefore, is approximately $109 million more. 
And so the increase of budget this year over forecast of what we 
probably will spend is whatever that percentage would be, 
which I believe is in the range of 5.2 per cent. And nothing to 
apologize for. A 5.2 per cent increase is a 5.2 per cent increase. 
Not that bad. 
 
Everything the member says I think is accurate and that’s the 
way that the numbers roll out each and every year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
heard you talk about the transfer of monies to help districts and 
just for clarification, in the Transition Fund that you had 
indicated was there last year of 150 million, there was 33.3 
additional million of federal dollars, which meant 183. 
 
Has that money been actually transferred to the health districts? 
Because I’m reading that in your forecast you’re only expecting 
to spend $50 million of that 183. That’s the actual amount that 
you have expended up to March 31. 
 
So when you say you’ve transferred it to the health districts, I 
thought that you said that if you didn’t spend it, it went back 
into the General Revenue Fund. 
 

(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the numbers that appear at page 82 
are the estimate for the Transition Fund — 150 million — 
which is what we budgeted last year. Then you can see that the 
forecast of what was spent from that money was 50 million, but 
the 33 million was in addition to the 150 million. And I believe 
that we have just recently . . . before the end of the last fiscal 
year we gave 16-point-some million dollars to the health 
districts, which was part of the 33 million. 
 
And I’m advised by the officials here that the balance of that 
$33 million will go to the health districts for medical equipment 
in this current fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, then the question is: is that 
additional remaining monies in that Medical Equipment Fund, 
is that built into your expenditure of $2.207 billion? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes it is, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, let’s take a look at your projections for sustaining this 
budget not only this year but next year. You talk about a job 
growth, I believe, of about 3,800 new jobs for this year. And the 
record for January, February, and March is out already for 
2001; in fact, Saskatchewan is averaging about 10,000 fewer 
jobs than we had last year. Do you still expect to meet your 
target of 3,800 new jobs for the fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes we do. You know when you compare 
job numbers in one particular month this year to one particular 
month last year, I mean you can come up with different results 
— sometimes positive, sometimes negative. But year over year, 
we project that the employment level in this year will rise over 
last year and that that will continue year after year up until 
2005. 
 
And that will be notwithstanding the fact that we have job 
losses on the farm. We have to remember that in agriculture 
because of what’s happening there, there are job losses. But 
there are jobs being created in other areas, and overall we 
expect to meet our job projection numbers, and hopefully we’ll 
do better than that. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you. Mr. Minister, while you’re 
talking about trying to attain that number of 3,800 we see, as 
you’ve pointed out, that in fact we don’t have those job 
creations. And I’m wondering what would happen . . . let’s just 
assume that we have a zero job growth for this current fiscal 
year. How will that affect your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, I think that we have a fairly 
diversified economy, Mr. Chair, and I’m not going to speculate 
about zero job growth rate because I don’t think that’s going to 
happen, neither do the officials at the Department of Finance, 
neither do any of the banks that have projected what will 
happen in Saskatchewan. In fact, the private forecasters are 
more bullish on Saskatchewan than we are in the budget 
documents. They feel that we’ll do better. 
 
And I don’t think that much purpose will be served by any kind 
of a negative scenario on job growth. I think that jobs will 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 469 

 

continue to grow in Saskatchewan, as they have been for the 
last 10 years. And we stand by the projections that are in the 
budget, although we hope to exceed the projections that are in 
the budget. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, while 
I’m optimistic about the windfall in oil and gas revenue, I’m not 
quite as optimistic as you are about your projections of your job 
growth, but as we move through the next 12 months, we’ll see. 
 
Mr. Minister, a couple of final questions, you know, on the 
general side is around government debt, and I’m specifically 
referring to pages 53 and 54. 
 
Mr. Minister, in 2001, you’re projecting government debt and 
Crown debt to be totalling about $11.153 billion. And then, by 
2004, your projections, if I add those two numbers up that 
you’ve got on both of those pages, I think that debt is 11.328 
billion. It’s increasing. 
 
Mr. Minister, what’s happening to actually put the province of 
Saskatchewan into greater debt over the next three years time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, the taxpayer supported 
debt of the General Revenue Fund will continue to go down, 
but we see the debt of the Crown corporations as increasing. 
 
And I would say this to the member, that there is a difference in 
the opinion of this government — and I might add that this 
opinion is shared by the Institute of Chartered Accountants; the 
CMAs, that is the Certified Management Accountants; the 
Certified General Accountants; and the Provincial Auditor. And 
I have discussed with all of those organizations the fact that we 
are now separating the debt between tax supported debt and 
Crown corporation debt. 
 
Our belief is that there’s a difference because . . . Let me put it 
this way. If SaskEnergy, in distributing natural gas to the people 
of the province, wishes to build a gas line in the North, 
wherever, to take natural gas to people, we do not believe that 
we should be increasing taxes to pay for that. We believe that 
SaskEnergy can go, borrow the money to do that, and recover 
that money from its customers. 
 
The same applies to SaskTel if they want to build the 
telecommunications network, SaskPower if they want to 
upgrade the power system, build power plants, as they are doing 
in . . . at Queen Elizabeth power station, and so on. 
 
The question for the Crown corporations is this: do they have an 
appropriate debt-equity ratio according to generally accepted 
industry standards? And as a matter of fact, they do. One 
problem we had in the early ’90s was that the Crown 
corporations had an inappropriate debt-equity ratio. I forget 
what it was, but let’s say they had 90 per cent debt and 10 per 
cent equity. Now all of those corporations are within acceptable 
standards. Their debt is not too high according to those 
industries. 
 
If you argue that the Crown corporation debt should always go 
down, then, Mr. Chair, you would be arguing that the taxpayers 
should fund expansion by SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy. In 
fact those expansions should be funded by service charges, and 

in the meantime they should be financed by debt financing. 
 
Now if you wanted to get into the question, Mr. Chair, of why 
would the Crown corporations be borrowing this money, what 
are they doing in terms of building infrastructure, the Minister 
responsible for Crown Investments Corporation could get into 
those questions, but they will be building in the future. They 
will be borrowing to do the building. They will be paid by their 
customers to do the building. That’s why the Crown corporation 
debt will be going up, but the tax-supported debt, that has to be 
paid by the taxpayers through the taxes that come into the 
General Revenue Fund, will be going down. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we’re 
going to get into those discussions with the Minister responsible 
for CIC because, very clearly, your documents show that the 
Crown corporation debt, as estimated in 2001, was about 3.2 
billion, and we’re going to take that debt to 3.5, and then finally 
3.7 billion, as indicated on page 54, by the year, by . . . as you 
said, over the medium term. That’s an increase of a half a 
billion dollars in debt for the province of Saskatchewan, from 
3.2 to 3.7 billion. 
 
So clearly there has to be some move that takes place within 
government to incur a half a billion dollar debt. And I was 
wondering if the CIC minister through . . . from . . . based on 
your, you know, guidance, would be able to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan where we’re actually going to be expending all 
of this money. Will we be re-enacting the underground power 
corporation . . . the power lines, and creating rural distribution 
again that was cancelled. Are we in fact investing some of the 
money outside of the borders of Saskatchewan, or are we going 
to use huge amounts of money to compete with private industry 
right here in Saskatchewan as has occurred in the cable 
television network or the security system. Is there a general 
direction that you as Finance minister are encouraging by what 
you’re showing us in the budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in point of fact, the debt of the 
Crowns is now about 3.5 billion, not 3.2 billion as the member 
indicated, and it’s projected to grow by the year 2005 to 3.7 
billion, which is an increase of $200 million approximately, not 
half a billion dollars as the member indicated. 
 
But in answer to the question, the policy of this government is 
that the debt of the Crown corporations should reflect the 
amount of money required to provide services to the people of 
the province, which should include improved access to power 
generation, natural gas, telephones, to keep those systems 
maintained and working as they work very well for the people. 
And to do some of that costs money. But the debt of the Crown 
corporations should be within generally accepted industrial 
standards for those industries. And if they go beyond that, then 
their debt is too high. 
 
And the debt of the Crown corporations should decrease as a 
percentage of the gross domestic product. So that we also see 
on page 54 that whereas today, if you looked at the Crown debt, 
it’s 10.6 per cent of the gross domestic product, by 2005, it will 
drop to approximately 10.1 per cent. 
 
So that yes, the debt is higher but the economy is growing at the 
same time and the Crowns will also have a higher value at that 



470 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

time and can have more debt. 
 
So my answer is that if we need a telephone system to be fixed 
or installed, let’s fix or install it. And if we have to borrow 
money to do that, let’s do that too. As long as we don’t borrow 
so much that the debt equity ratio is more than it should be. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And, Mr. Minister, 
I would assume that many rural people will be looking for the 
overall plan of SaskPower as far as underground distribution of 
power takes place, and we’ll be looking forward to that. 
 
Mr. Minister, that was going to be my last question, but based 
on the fact that you’ve quoted other numbers, I have to point to 
you, point out to you where the numbers that I have read into 
the record are coming from. And I refer you to page 84, and on 
the bottom of page 84 — and we’ve been talking estimates to 
estimates; that’s what you’ve been saying all along that you’re 
using the percentage — your estimate for Crown corporation 
debt at the bottom of page 84 is $3.2 billion. And your 
paragraph on page 54 very clearing says that the debt, the 
Crown debt will rise gradually to 3.7 billion. Three point seven 
billion, three point two billion, Mr. Minister, that’s a difference 
of a half a billion dollars. 
 
So those are your numbers and I would ask you to, for the 
record, to clarify that indeed the numbers I used were contained 
in your document, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in point of fact, Mr. Chair, the 
numbers are the numbers. But the member says that my 
document at page 84 says that the Crown corporation debt is 
$3.2 billion. That’s the estimate. 
 
In fact it says clearly 3.289 billion, so the member is 90 million 
out. But my point is it’s a lot closer to 3.3 than 3.2. But it also 
says, as I indicated, that it is forecast at the present time — 
anybody can read this — that the debt of the Crown 
corporations is $3.5 billion. It’s not $3.2 billion; it’s not $3.3 
billion. The forecast at page 84 is our Crown corporations have 
a debt we forecast of $3.5 billion. That’s a matter of what the 
debt is right now. 
 
And the reality is that on page 54 — the member tells me to 
read page 54; well, I’m reading page 54 — it’s recorded that in 
2004 that that debt of 3.5 billion, Mr. Chair, will go to 3.726 as 
the member says. That is an increase, Mr. Chair, from 3.5 
billion to 3.726, which, by my quick calculation, is an increase 
in Crown corporation debt of some $225 million approximately. 
 
Well I’m just simply pointing out the member’s point is the 
Crown corporation debt is going up, he says at one point by half 
a billion dollars. It is going up, according to this, by $225 
million and $225 million is not as much as half a billion. I’m 
sure the member will agree with that. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, then I have to ask you to clarify 
then on page 82 . . . or 84, I’m sorry, is that you estimated in 
last year’s budget that we were going to have a Crown debt of 
3.289, and I will use your number exactly — 3.289. That was 
an estimate. It was a debt that was there. I’m sure it was a 

greater debt than previously. 
 
So what changed for you to move then from 3.289 to your 
forecast of 3.504? That, in fact, is about $215 million. What 
have we done in the Crowns in the last fiscal year to change 
your estimate to a forecast of over $215 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, because this is an estimate 
made a year ago for where we would be today. A year ago we 
estimated that the Crown corporation debt would be $3.3 
billion. It turns out it was $3.5 billion. But if the member goes 
to the next line, which he’s not asking me about, we also 
estimated that the government debt would be $7.9 billion and 
we see that we now forecast it is $7.649 billion — a decrease, a 
decrease by my quick calculation, Mr. Chair, of some 
approximately $250 million. And the reason is because these 
are estimates we made a year ago. 
 
So look, I’ll admit it to the world, Mr. Chair. The estimate of 
the Crown corporation debt . . . the Crown corporation debt is 
$200 million higher than estimated. Nothing unusual about it. 
The government debt is $250 million lower than estimated, Mr. 
Chair. And if we continue on to the next line, the total debt was 
estimated last year to be $11.2 billion and it turns out it will be 
$11.153 billion, Mr. Chair, and it’s approximately $34 million 
less than we projected. 
 
No apologies for that, Mr. Chair. Estimates are estimates and 
what is happening is what is happening. 
 
And in anticipation of another question from the member, 
where it was spent by the Crown corporations, I’m sure that at 
the appropriate time the minister in charge of the Crown 
corporations would be pleased to answer that question. I don’t 
have the information with me. I’m not the minister in charge of 
the Crown corporations, but that information will be disclosed 
to the member because we’re very proud of the Crown 
corporations and what they’re doing and the fact that they are 
building in the province. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I have some 
questions dealing with the area of agriculture. The Minister of 
Agriculture has announced the joining of the CFIP (Canadian 
Farm Income Program) program. Can you tell us what amount 
of resources will be dedicated to that from the provincial 
government, and what amount of resources will be dedicated as 
well to the CSAP (Canada-Saskatchewan Adjustment Program) 
program, and how soon you and your department expects those 
benefits to flow through to the farm folks in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — CFIP is 70 million. And with respect to 
CSAP, I’m advised by the officials that the Minister of 
Agriculture and Food is still in the process of some negotiations 
with the federal government and we don’t have the final 
number on that. But I’d be happy to undertake to get that 
number to the member whenever we do know the result of the 
negotiations and what the number is. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and, Mr. Minister. It’s my 
understanding that the Minister of Agriculture is telling people 
across the province that the province of Saskatchewan has 
anywhere from 2 to $400 million on the table in those 
negotiations. Can you confirm that? 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 471 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I think that that is a question 
that probably should be taken up with the Minister of 
Agriculture in terms of what he may be saying. I haven’t seen 
his statement. And with respect to interim supply, I don’t have 
that kind of detail. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Is the full 70 million, Mr. Minister, budgeted in 
this interim supply for the CFIP? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, Mr. Chair. It would be two-twelfths of 
that amount. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, with respect 
to the CSAP program, how soon do you and your officials 
expect those negotiations to conclude, and how soon do you 
expect the money to flow from the CSAP program? 
 
Obviously we’re approaching, or very, very close to, spring 
seeding and the farm community is waiting anxiously. As you 
know in the CFIP program, Saskatchewan was the last province 
in all of Canada to sign on and as a result of that is the last 
province that will expect benefits flowing through to their farm 
folks. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I can’t answer the question of when the 
negotiations will end or exactly when the money would go out, 
although I do know from talking to the Minister of Agriculture 
and Food that it is his desire that that money be sent out as soon 
as possible. So while I haven’t been involved in those 
negotiations, Mr. Chair, I believe the Minister of Agriculture 
and Food wants to bring them to a very rapid close and get us in 
a position where that money can go out as soon as possible. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, last spring 
when the CSAP One program was in effect the money was paid 
out through the Crop Insurance Corporation on a fairly simple 
formula plus a fairly straightforward application. Are you 
anticipating that same sort of process this spring, and can you 
confirm for us that the amount of benefits in the CSAP Two 
program will be based on NISA (Net Income Stabilization 
Account) contributions — an approximate figure of 5.7 per cent 
on the first $125,000 of contribution? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, those are very good questions 
and very important questions, but they’re really questions of 
detail that should be addressed to the Minister of Agriculture 
and Food, and they’re not questions that I’m in a position as 
Minister of Finance to answer. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, I see Sask Water is asking for 
two-twelfths of $1.469 million. Would you have the breakdown 
of how much will be going for operating expenses, how much 
will be going into water control and water quality programs, 
and also that’ll be going into water-based economic 
development? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Generally speaking, Mr. Chair, for the 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation or any other department or 
agency of government that is listed here, that money is 
two-twelfths of their annual budget and they would be spending 
it on all of their activities. It would keep them going for a few 
months. And so that money would be directed toward all of 
their activities, not any one particular activity. 

And if you looked at the Estimates book for the Saskatchewan 
Water Corporation, generally speaking, you could assume that 
for each area of activity some of this money would go into each 
of those activities. And generally speaking, you know, one-sixth 
of the amount listed for any activity would go to the activity as 
a result of the interim supply. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I have 
a few questions I’d like to direct to you and your officials in a 
general vein as they relate to Cypress Hills, the southwest area, 
and western Saskatchewan as a whole. And it pertains primarily 
to the provincial sales tax at the current 6 per cent rate, the 
expanded sales tax that was introduced in last year’s budget and 
the implications it has for the economy, not just of the 
southwest area but of the province in its entirety. 
 
I think that you can probably tell me what every percentage of 
provincial sales tax amounts to in actual dollars. But have you 
ever determined or have you ever considered the liability, the 
loss in tax revenue that a 6 per cent rate translates into, when 
you consider how much retail activity is lost to the southwest 
portion of the province? 
 
The city of Swift Current I believe undertook a study within the 
last year or two and they suggest that for the immediate Swift 
Current area, $20 million of retail activity is lost to that small 
urban centre alone. 
 
Now if you took the broader area of the southwest and moved 
up the border as far as Kindersley or even into the Lloydminster 
area and looked at the loss of retail sales from Saskatchewan 
into Alberta that is exacerbated by that 6 per cent, have you 
ever considered what the actual cost is to the provincial treasury 
because of that tax differential? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The sales tax expansion, Mr. Chair, was 
part of a move to substantially decrease income taxes in the 
province. 
 
And I mean, if we all had our druthers, we would have no sales 
tax and no income tax and no fuel tax and so on. 
 
But the reality is that we tried to operate at a balance and we 
need some revenue to come into the provincial coffers and pay 
for the highways and health care and education. So we have a 
sales tax. It’s gone from 9 per cent to 6 per cent. 
 
And although the member may be correct that, when you have 
any tax that may decrease the amount of consumption that 
people undertake. But the other side of the equation is that the 
expansion of the sales tax will enable us to substantially reduce 
income taxes which will put more money into people’s pockets, 
which they then can spend in southwest Saskatchewan and 
throughout the province. So that, in that sense, I think that 
there’s a positive impact on the economy because there’s 
money that people have to spend. 
 
And the member and I can certainly debate the merits of tax 
reform but that is how tax reform works. And we actually have 
the lowest sales tax of the nine provinces that have a sales tax, 
and we also apply it to a much narrower base than many 
provinces do. For example, many provinces will charge sales 
tax on children’s clothing, reading materials, home heating, 



472 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

home electrical, restaurant meals. We do not. But I believe that 
the balance we’ve achieved in having the sales tax but lowering 
income tax is a pretty good balance. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and, Mr. Minister, 
thank you for the answer. I don’t want you to misunderstand, 
we appreciate every drop in income tax that you grant us. But 
unfortunately for the small-business people in the region I 
represent, a lot of that money that will return to consumers will 
be spent in Alberta. And that’s the reality that we live with, and 
the consequences are ones that you and your government have 
to live with. The money flows directly out of southwest 
Saskatchewan into the Alberta economy. 
 
And for business people in that area, the sales tax, whether it 
was on the original format or under the expanded format, is one 
of the . . . probably the greatest liabilities to their overall 
success. And I think that when we look at the impact of sales 
tax of any kind — and I understand what you’re saying; you 
indicated that we have the lowest sales tax of any province that 
has sales tax — the reality is I live right next to the border and 
they have no sales tax. So the argument only works when you 
get a little further east. It doesn’t work so well in the south or 
the west part of the province. 
 
And unfortunately, my community, my people, my 
businessmen, are all paying a real price for the 6 per cent sales 
tax under the original regime or the expanded regime. 
 
I’d like to move to another area, if I may, just briefly. I noticed 
in the budget document that you are going to introduce some 
tax incentives for the sodium sulphate industry. And you may or 
may not be aware of it, but there was a mine in the . . . just 
outside of the community of Fox Valley that employed about 50 
people, and it served notice of a layoff and shutdown 
completely as of the end of the year. 
 
(16:00) 
 
When that mine closed, that was a devastating blow to that 
community. In fact I’m not sure, I’m really not sure how they 
will sustain the impact, whether they’ll survive the impact or 
not. 
 
But I would like to know, if you could explain in a little greater 
detail what the sodium sulphate tax incentive is and how it 
might benefit a mine like that that has been mothballed; and 
would this incentive in any way allow for a resurrection of that 
particular enterprise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With respect to that particular mine, I can’t 
answer the question whether the owners of that mine will 
reopen the mine. But this may provide them with the ability to 
reopen the mine and that is the intent, certainly, of what we’re 
trying to do. 
 
Essentially what has happened is that with the higher natural 
gas prices — which may come down — but as I understand it, 
the production of sodium sulphate is very much dependent 
upon, at the present time, natural gas because they use natural 
gas in the process. And because the price of natural gas is high, 
when they produce sodium sulphate they’ll be spending more 
producing it than it’s worth when they produce it. But there are 

other production technologies that may be available to the mine. 
 
And what this tax incentive is, is a capital incentive of 40 per 
cent of capital expenditures to fix the mine — in other words, to 
invest in new equipment, upgrades, to produce sodium sulphate 
— and that would be credited against royalties each year with 
an indefinite carry forward. In other words, they could go to the 
expense of fixing the mine and then as they produce, instead of 
paying royalties to the government, they would get the cost of 
the equipment back to the tune of 40 per cent. 
 
And of course we . . . officials at the Department of Finance 
were in contact with Energy and Mines officials, who in turn 
were in contact with the sodium sulphate industry, to try to find 
a way that it might be possible for them to refurbish their mines 
and be able to produce sodium sulphate profitably. And the 
advice we had from Energy and Mines was that if we did this, 
that it would give some hope to those companies and some hope 
to the communities that they could produce sodium sulphate 
and still make a profit. 
 
Now having said that . . . So that’s the hope. If for some reason 
— I mean we don’t think we’ve got it wrong — but if for some 
reason it needs to be adjusted in some way as they investigate 
the new technologies, then our door is certainly open to talk to 
them because we do have an interest in adjusting the taxation of 
those companies so that they can keep those mines going and 
keep those people employed. That’s what we want to do. 
 
So my hope is that that particular mine and the other one, I 
think there are two mines if not three, that those — two mines 
in particular I think are in danger, two operating mines — that 
they will be able to operate under this taxation regime. That’s 
my hope. 
 
Now I can’t go beyond that and say what they will do, whether 
they’ll reopen, but they have the chance to reopen. And as I 
said, if we haven’t got it right for some reason, then we’ll look 
at it again. But we think this will enable them to operate. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to follow that up with a supplementary question. 
 
As I understand it, the cost of natural gas was the straw that 
broke the camel’s back, possibly, in the closure of the Fox 
Valley mine. Now it was a fairly heavy straw as you can 
appreciate. But there were a lot of factors that came into play 
there. 
 
There was, as the minister opposite indicated, there are market 
factors that have come into play. But there are also 
labour-related costs, there are transportation costs, and there are 
also ways of producing sodium sulphate as a by-product that 
has undermined the value of the most pure products that the 
mine in Fox Valley was producing. 
 
Having said that, the 40 per cent tax credit may be very 
beneficial to the operator of the mine at Chaplin. I believe it’s 
the same company that owned the mine in Fox Valley. 
 
But if the natural gas prices happen to come down by some 
strange twist of fate, what would that do to your 40 per cent tax 
credit? Do you envision keeping it in place or will you . . . is 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 473 

 

that a program of ongoing consequence or will that be revised 
downward? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, the credit would stay in place even if 
the cost of natural gas comes down. Because the problems that 
these mines face, as I understand them, are yes, the price of 
natural gas, but also certain market pressures that have 
developed and old technology, the fact that they have old 
technology. 
 
And even if the price of natural gas came down, we would keep 
this tax credit in place because that would give the industry the 
ability to refurbish those plants and in the long term they would 
be more profitable and be able to deal with the other problems 
that they have, the market pressures. 
 
And so I think that from what I know of the situation, it’s time 
to refurbish those mines if in the long term they’re going to be 
successful. So we will keep that program in place and try to 
work with that industry to keep those people employed. 
 
Because I want the member to know, Mr. Chair, that when we 
heard from the people in those communities about the impact 
on their communities, we were very concerned about that 
impact and the job losses. And we know that those industries 
are important to those communities and we will work with them 
to try to do what we can, and we’ll do that on a continuing basis 
even if the current situation becomes not quite as bad as it is 
right now. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I’d 
like to turn my attention now to the Highways apportionment 
that is being considered here today. 
 
And I’d like to ask the Finance minister if he could tell us what 
portion of the current appropriation being considered for the 
Highways department is actually earmarked for additional 
employment opportunities within the department. And can you 
tell me, have these new positions already been specified by the 
department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, that question, detailed as it is, 
would more appropriately be put to the Minister of Highways 
and Transportation in her estimates. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, and Mr. Minister, I have a 
similar question related to the interim supply. I was wondering 
if you can tell me at this point how much of the money might be 
earmarked for brand new construction — that’s construction 
projects in addition to projects that were already on the drawing 
board before you increased the funding for Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well with respect to interim supply, Mr. 
Chairman, the money listed as interim supply to the Department 
of Highways and Transportation isn’t earmarked as such for 
anything in particular. It’s earmarked for that department to 
carry out its functions, and its functions are detailed in the 
Estimates book. 
 
And essentially what we’re doing is giving them two-twelfths 
of their budget so that they can pursue all of the things that 
they’re mandated to do. And we don’t earmark it for any 
particular subset of activities; they just use that to carry on. 

But I can tell the member that our plan includes — I don’t want 
to get into the details of the roads and everything that they will 
do — but the plan is, generally speaking, that we made money 
available in the fall. In the last fiscal year, we spent extra money 
in Highways to put the department in a position whereby they 
could start their spring work I believe four to five weeks earlier 
than usual so that we can get going and do more work. 
 
And also we signalled to them that we wanted them to put out a 
lot more tenders for roadwork through the winter tendering 
schedule than usual so that we could do more work this year. 
 
And in terms of the numbers and the kilometres and so on, I 
couldn’t answer those questions, but I do want the member to 
know that from the point of view of the Department of Finance, 
our objective since last fall, when we knew that we would have 
extra money, is to allow the Department of Highways and 
Transportation to do more and to do it in a more timely way. 
And that’s our objective. And that is what we hope the 
Department of Highways and Transportation will be doing. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, following up on the funding of 
Highways area, I’d like to ask the minister if his department 
does a cost/benefit analysis of the proposals that are brought to 
the Department of Finance by the other government 
departments. I’m thinking in particular of the strategic rural 
roads partnership initiative that the Department of Highways 
and Transportation has had in place for some time. 
 
Some of the proposals that are being put forward under this 
partnership program are, in my estimation and I think in the 
estimation of a lot of the individuals who are going to have to 
live by these agreements, are frankly a stop-gap measure, a 
short-term solution to a long-term problem that ultimately will 
cost everybody in this province more money than need be. 
 
And I’m just wondering if you just take the word of the 
Department of Highways and Transportation regarding the 
benefit or the cost of these programs, or do you run your own 
analysis and assessment of their ideas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the answer is, with respect to the 
Department of Highways and Transportation, Mr. Chair, or any 
other department or agency of government, when they propose 
spending to the Department of Finance, we have what is called 
the Treasury Board branch and that branch employs people who 
are Treasury Board analysts and they analyze the proposals of 
all the departments. 
 
So that in answer to the question, yes, we have people that look 
at the proposals of the departments and then give advice to the 
Treasury Board, which I chair, that says: well Highways is 
asking for this much money; this is what they say they want to 
do with it; we think, you know, here are the costs, these are the 
benefits; we agree with them or we don’t agree with them or we 
partly agree with them and partly don’t. 
 
And so when we prepare the budget . . . Actually at Treasury 
Board, we have the Treasury Board analysts before us and we 
have the departmental officials before us, and they both will 
present. And sometimes they disagree. So that we’ll have a 
presentation from Finance that will give one point of view and a 
presentation from Highways that may have another point of 



474 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

view. And then it’s our job to decide who we think is right. 
 
We then make a recommendation to the provincial cabinet and 
they may agree with the Treasury Board or disagree. But 
whatever the cabinet says, we then present that of course to the 
coalition government caucus and ultimately to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, can I assume, Mr. Minister, 
then that the Department of Highways people who did the 
cost/benefit analysis of the strategic roads program win the day 
in the argument or the tussle? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you can assume that whatever the 
Department of Highways and Transportation comes forward 
with is, generally speaking, a plan that has been approved by 
the government caucus, the cabinet, the Treasury Board. And, 
you know, we will all stand or fall on their plans and we 
obviously believe that — I don’t want to get into the details of 
their plans — but we believe that they do have a good plan. 
 
And the Minister of Highways and Transportation will be in the 
House defending her plan. And her plan is something that we 
all will defend, but she will answer the detailed questions with 
respect to it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, I would like to return to the 
amount of money that has been allocated to construction in the 
Department of Highways by this budget. I understand that . . . 
or by my calculations there’s about $41 million more for 
construction, and I’m wondering if the minister can tell us how 
much of that amount is actually going to be dedicated to the 
accelerated twinning project of the No. 1 Highway West? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That question, Mr. Chair, is a very good 
question and a very important question, but it is really a 
question of detail that should appropriately be answered by the 
Minister of Highways and Transportation in the estimates for 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, in the department’s planning for 
the future, I’d like to ask the minister if he can tell me how 
much weight did the government put on the possibility of 
getting federal funding for the expanded twinning initiative? I 
refer to an article that appeared in The StarPhoenix in which the 
Minister of Highways says that there is ongoing negotiations for 
funding. 
 
What are you expecting to get from the federal government and 
how much of a role did those expectations play in your decision 
to accelerate the twinning project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I am not expecting to get very much at all 
from the federal government, I’m sorry to say. There is no 
expectation of federal money with respect to the accelerated 
twinning. So whether or not we get any money from Ottawa, 
we’re doing the accelerated twinning. 
 
Now having said that, I also read the article in The StarPhoenix 
that the member is referring to. And when I worked it all out 
mentally as I read it the other day and which I had done before 

as well, I think they were talking about $600 million over four 
years for the whole country. And when you boil that down to 
Saskatchewan — I mean if they came up with their $600 
million for all of Canada from the federal government, probably 
amounts to, I mean over four years, 150 million a year I think it 
was roughly — we might get $5 million out of that if you 
assume, you know, we get 3 or 4 per cent. So it’s not a lot of 
money. 
 
We’re not relying on anything from the federal government and 
we’re going to accelerate that twinning whether we get a penny 
from Ottawa. 
 
But having said that, I want to tell the member that in my 
capacity as Minister of Finance, I have many, many times, to 
the point where they’re probably sick of hearing it, said to the 
federal Finance minister you know in person and in writing and 
also when I have met with the federal Transportation minister 
that we, along with all of the provinces in Canada, believe that 
there should be a national transportation policy. And that the 
federal government — which after all collects, I think, as much 
fuel tax now as we do — should put some of it back into the 
roads and, in particular, No. 1, No. 11, and No. 16. And I know 
the member will agree with that and we all do in this House. 
 
And my point is this, that if we are successful in getting money 
from the federal government over and above — I’m not talking 
$5 million a year but something actually substantial — then we 
will do our best to further accelerate twinning because we know 
it needs to be done. And I’d be quite happy if the federal 
government would come along and say, you know, here’s $50 
million for your national highways. And if they do that, I can 
assure you that we would want to put that money into the 
national highways and get them twinned. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I 
agree with the minister that $5 million from the federal 
government won’t go very far. I think by industry standards or 
by your department’s standard, that might build about 10 miles 
of road a year but . . . and that doesn’t go very far in western 
Saskatchewan, let alone in the other areas of need for our 
province. 
 
You raised an interesting question that I would like to have you 
address. You talked about the amount of fuel tax generated in 
this province for the province and for the federal government. I 
know there’s a fairly significant difference in the rate of tax, but 
could you tell us exactly what the dollars are for the provincial 
department and what you anticipate them to be this year, and 
also what you anticipate the federal government will take in 
fuel tax. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well for the province, we estimate this 
year that we will take $367.7 million in fuel tax. I should point 
out that that includes the fuel tax from the railways, which I 
don’t have the number for that in front of me at the moment, but 
about 367.7 or $368 million dollars. With respect to the federal 
government, I don’t have that number in front of me but it’s, I 
believe, that they would collect now a similar amount of fuel 
tax in the province of Saskatchewan. But if I’m wrong on that 
assumption, then I’ll get the right number for the member. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, one 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 475 

 

more question and then I think I’ll turn it over to my colleague 
from Humboldt. 
 
Somebody asked me just the other day and I couldn’t answer 
adequately. When you charge fuel tax to the railways that 
operate in this province, do they have to buy their fuel here? Or 
do they buy fuel elsewhere and you charge an apportionate 
amount, given the mileage they traverse through the province of 
Saskatchewan? Exactly how do you collect fuel tax from the 
railways? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It is based upon their mileage and the fuel 
that we estimate they use. And it doesn’t matter whether they 
buy it in Saskatchewan or not, they pay the tax. So whatever, 
whatever fuel consumption they have they pay 15 cents a litre. 
 
To add to my last response, it’s about . . . of the $367.7 million 
that we take in fuel tax, about 327.5 million is forecast to be on 
road — in other words, you know, what the drivers pay — and 
the rest would be railways and aviation fuel. And of course that 
is net of the effect of rebates to farmers and First Nations 
people. 
 
We estimate that our expenditures on roads this year will 
approximately be equal to 327.5 million because we’re putting 
the 311 million into Highways directly and then I think there’s 
23 million that goes to the RMs for roads and actually 5 million 
in the Centenary Fund. So actually we would be exceeding the 
revenue that we take for on-road fuel tax revenue, which is 
obviously better than where we used to be. 
 
So those are the answers to the two questions. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Sorry, Mr. Chairman. I’d like to ask the 
minister, with respect to the fuel tax paid by the railways, is that 
by agreement, written agreement with other provincial 
jurisdictions or is that something you have worked out with the 
railways directly? Are they on an honour system in terms of 
paying that fuel tax for the mileage travelled in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, there is, Mr. Chair, an interprovincial 
agreement that allocates the litres that would be allocated to 
each province with respect to railway consumption. And then 
the provinces agree, you know, how many litres of fuel would 
have been used in Saskatchewan by CP (Canadian Pacific) Rail, 
and then as a result of that agreement, we would then send a bill 
to CP Rail asking them to pay 15 cents a litre. And in the case 
of Manitoba, it’s much lower and Alberta, I think, has no tax on 
railway fuel. 
 
So that is in fact how it works. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Good afternoon, Mr. 
Minister, and good afternoon to your officials. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to refer to the two-twelfths interim 
supply for Education, and I see here that it is $89 million 
approximately, almost $90 million. And, Mr. Minister, if I 
could I’d just like to refer to your budget address regarding 
community schools. You have in your budget address stated 
that: 
 

Our commitment today means more community schools to 

help children with their futures. The number of community 
schools has doubled since 1995 and as a result of this 
budget, that number will double again this year . . . 
 
Forty-two new community schools, including for the first 
time, high schools and for the first time, rural community 
schools. 
 

Mr. Minister, does the $89 million, the two-twelfths interim 
supply that would come to $89 million, include construction of 
those community schools? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, it would not include construction of 
schools because the community schools are existing schools. 
What happens is that we give the school board where the 
community school is located additional money for an existing 
school, and we say we’d like you to use this money to put extra 
resources into that school to bring the . . . help the children get 
an education and so on. But we won’t actually be constructing 
any schools. We’ll be giving money to school boards to 
enhance the programs in some existing schools. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I bring that to your 
attention and to the attention of the Saskatchewan public 
because after the budget address there were a number of people 
who truly believed that there were going to be the construction 
of 42 new schools in Saskatchewan. And I think that the way 
the wording was put forth in the budget address is somewhat 
misleading and I needed to have that clarified for people that 
were asking me about it. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, then the 89 million designation, there will be 
two-twelfths of that that will be immediately utilized for 
community schools as such or will be designated towards 
getting those schools on their way with the special and extra 
services they need? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, that’s correct. Part of that money 
would be used by the Department of Education to give to school 
boards to then create the community schools within the schools 
that are designated as appropriate for community school 
funding. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Minister, I guess what I will do is take this 
into further discussion with the minister responsible later on 
during estimates. Because your statement that you will be now 
designating funding to rural community schools is a good one, 
but it leaves me a little bit surprised because in rural 
Saskatchewan the concept of community schools is already 
taking place within the existing budget. So unless there is a 
move towards integrated services and funding going towards 
that, there are a number of communities . . . or schools rather in 
rural Saskatchewan that already operate on the basis of what 
you would say is community schooling. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, and this funding is intended to 
complement that. It’s intended to say, in rural Saskatchewan 
where they do have some community schools on their own, that 
we should be supporting communities in the way determined by 
the Department of Education, and it shouldn’t just be in urban 
centres. So that’s what we’re doing. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and good afternoon 



476 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2001 

 

to the Finance minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, given 
that there will 673 management positions automatically 
unionized on May 1 and that an internal survey of employees at 
the Department of Health have showed that their costs will 
increase by 70 per cent, could you tell me how much it will cost 
to have these 673 management positions unionized? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That question would be appropriately 
addressed to the minister in charge of the Public Service 
Commission. I can’t answer the question. And it’s a very good 
question, an important question, and I’m sure that she in her 
estimates will be very happy to respond to the member. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, I’ve been listening attentively to your answers all 
afternoon and one of them caught my attention. Mr. Minister, 
you talked about the oil revenues. You might use the term 
windfall at the present time because they are much more than 
you had expected last year. And I believe you stated that you 
couldn’t do a tax cut at the present time based on those oil 
revenues because there was no guarantees in the future that they 
would be available for a long-term commitment. 
 
I wonder if you could clarify that for me. Are you saying that 
because the oil revenue is somewhat volatile, the prices, that a 
tax cut based on that can’t be projected into the future because 
the monies may not be there? Is that what you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Essentially, yes. I think that if you have 
volatile revenues that they’re going up and then down and then 
up and then down, and if you’re not guaranteed those revenues, 
it would be a dangerous thing to cut taxes on the basis of 
revenue in one year, Mr. Chair, as if you would have that 
revenue every year. On the other hand, that doesn’t mean to say 
that we shouldn’t be looking at competitive tax cuts and cutting 
taxes as in fact we are in this budget. But I wouldn’t think 
revenues are guaranteed at high levels every year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Would it be 
accurate to say that for last year and perhaps for this year, that 
an additional $500 million, half a billion dollars, would be the 
extra oil revenues coming in that you wouldn’t have projected 
for last year and may not have either this year or next year? I’m 
just looking for a rough number. I recognize that for those 
people who have to be down to the last decimal point, that may 
not be possible, but a rough number. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well for last year I think roughly, you 
know, we had roughly $350 million, I believe, more than we 
had estimated. So we had $350 million in what you might call 
unanticipated windfall revenue. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
over last year’s expenditures, what’s the increase this year in all 
departments, the total expenditures of government, what’s the 
increase? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The increase year over year for spending is 
up about 7 per cent. But if you take out what we consider to be 
one-time spending, it would be about 3.8 per cent. 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. 
Minister, it’s going up you say, those things that are not 
one-time spending, by about 4 per cent. This budget in part is 
based on projected oil revenues of, I think you said, what — 
$31 is what your projection is, for this year, or . . . okay, I may 
have got that number wrong. Anyways, Mr. Minister, you’re 
saying that you can’t cut taxes because the oil revenues are too 
volatile to count on. 
 
Wouldn’t it correspondingly also be true that you can’t put in 
place programs or expenditures on the expense side of 
operations based on those oil revenues? That you cannot count 
on that additional 385 to $500 million on an ongoing basis? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, I think generally, Mr. Chair, that’s 
true. I don’t think that you should plan either ongoing tax cuts 
or ongoing program expenditures on the basis of one-time 
revenues. 
 
Having said that, we are in fact cutting taxes on an ongoing 
basis and increasing spending on an ongoing basis, but we look 
at the whole picture and economic growth and I would not fund 
either of those things out of windfall revenues occurring in any 
one year. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Well, thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, I 
think that’s exactly what you’re doing with the 570 jobs that 
you’re projecting to hire in the next year. You’re funding that 
on the basis of the windfall revenues that are coming in from 
the oil industry. 
 
Mr. Minister, unless you’re only hiring these people for one 
year and letting them go at the end of the year based on a 
one-time expenditure, then that is exactly what you’re doing. 
The things that you said you can’t do to taxes is exactly what 
you’re doing on both programs, and hiring within the 
government. You’re basing that on those one-time revenues, 
turning around and hiring people. Mr. Minister, that program is 
not sustainable. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, I understand the member’s point of 
view, but I don’t agree with it. And I’ll just say, Mr. Chair, that 
the member and I will have to agree to disagree. 
 
But what I will say to the member is that the budget has been 
analyzed now by the Bank of Nova Scotia, the TD Bank, CIBC 
(Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce), and Nesbitt Burns. 
And those analysts from those institutions have said that the 
budget is prudent, and that Saskatchewan will stay in the black. 
That we’ll continue to operate with a balanced budget. 
 
So I respect the member’s point of view; it is not the point of 
view that I have, and it is not the point of view of others. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Minister, just a closing comment on behalf of the official 
opposition, all the colleagues that have asked you questions this 
afternoon. I want to thank you for most of your answers, even 
though some of them allow us to pursue that matter with 
specific ministers, and I look forward to discussion on the 
estimates of Finance when we get into Finance estimates with 
your department and greater clarity in some of the things that 
we’ve raised today. 



April 9, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 477 

 

But I do want to thank you and your officials for helping us 
better understand the budget and probably helping the people of 
Saskatchewan better understand where we’re going. Thank you 
very much. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair, and I’d like to 
thank the member, the Finance critic for the opposition and the 
other members of the opposition for their questions. 
 
And I agree with the member that it is beneficial for the public 
to hear this kind of discussion, and I thank them for their 
co-operation with respect to making interim supply. 
 
And I also want to thank the officials of the Department of 
Finance for assisting me today, but also for the very good work 
that they do throughout the entire year. 
 
And with that, Mr. Chair, I’d like to move: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service . . . 

 
The Chair: — Order. Order. We have to deal with the first 
issue first. 
 
The question before the Committee of Finance is interim supply 
resolution no. 1 moved by the Minister of Finance: 
 

Resolved that a sum not exceeding $923,290,000 be 
granted to Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ended 
March 31, 2002. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And now, I’d 
like to move: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2002, the sum 
of $923,290,000 be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read a first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 18, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 

Year ending on March 31, 2002 be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 

Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 
third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 

At 16:44 Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor entered the 
Chamber, took her seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent 
to the following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 18 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 2002. 

 
Her Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
Her Honour retired from the Chamber at 16:46. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
thank you to the members opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker seated in your gallery are three members who’ve 
been watching the proceedings for a while I understand, even 
though I didn’t notice them. But I’d like to introduce three 
constituents from Canora-Pelly. I’d like to introduce Peter 
Okrainetz, Rudolph Kresak, and Alex Dutchak. 
 
These people have been involved in local government for years 
and years and they’re active community members in the 
Invermay-Rama district and are strong constituents. And I want 
the Assembly to welcome them here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, it being near 5 
o’clock, I move this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:48. 
 
 
 


