















































Hansard: March 26, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 141 
 March 26, 2001 
 

 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall, 
and the proposed amendment moved by Mr. Hermanson. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before we recessed for 
a bit of a break, I was talking about the perspective that Swift 
Current people are looking at this Throne Speech on the issues 
of taxes and the economy. I was pointing out that people in 
Swift Current have made the link long ago between the two, 
that if we can achieve the lowest possible tax rate in various 
areas, we’re going to be better able to compete for more 
taxpayers and thereby providing the resources that we need to 
fund the things that have become so important to us here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was talking about the fact that many 
accountants in my home town have lamented the fact that they 
have to counsel their clients, when they’re considering selling 
out of an existing business, either to retire or maybe to invest it 
in another business, that they counsel them to get a Medicine 
Hat address first, to move to Alberta first because of the 
punitive nature of our taxes. Mr. Speaker, the accountants said 
they don’t want to advise their clients that. They want to give 
them good reason to stay here in the province, but the tax 
structure under this regime, Mr. Speaker, is not that good 
reason. It’s not good enough for them to be able to advise their 
clients to stay. 
 
And you know, sometimes it isn’t just the business people and 
the job creators . . . although we need every one that we can 
who are making a decision to vote with their feet. 
 
Right now, as we speak, Mr. Speaker, my cousins are planning 
to relocate to Medicine Hat from Swift Current. They will take 
their young family — two small children and a husband and 
wife — to Medicine Hat. And in that case they actually have a 
job currently in Swift Current at a local business. The job that 
my cousin-in-law is moving to in fact doesn’t afford him more 
pay. It’s a more interesting job that he’s interested in, but it’s 
about the same pay. But when you net it all out, when you take 
a look at the energy costs in Medicine Hat and the property 
taxes and the income taxes, it was easy for him to make the 
decision — too easy, Mr. Speaker, for him to make that 
decision. We have to do everything that we can to make that 
decision almost impossible for families in Swift Current and 
families in other Saskatchewan communities to make, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look at this Throne Speech, don’t get me 
wrong. People in Swift Current understand that we cannot beat 
Alberta at the tax game. They simply have had too long of a 
head start, about a 50-year head start on keeping their taxes low 
while still providing services to their citizens. But we have to 
try to pick our spots where we can win, Mr. Speaker, where we 
can beat Alberta and where we can compete against other 
jurisdictions like Manitoba. And sometimes it doesn’t cost a lot 

of money. Sometimes it doesn’t take too much of a tax cut to 
achieve that, and some businesses who wish to stay here but are 
faced with difficult decisions aren’t even looking for a tax cut at 
all. 
 
Some of them, and we met one earlier today, is simply looking 
for a road, a highway, Mr. Speaker. The manufacturer that was 
here today representing about 100 employees is looking for a 
better highway as a reason to stay here, to invest here, to grow 
here, and to employ people here. And it’s not too much to ask at 
all, Mr. Speaker. And he is joined by several other businesses in 
the Vanguard area. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, this government has gone to the extent 
of creating a Department of Rural Revitalization and there was 
a little bit about that in the Throne Speech as well. But, Mr. 
Speaker, I can tell you it doesn’t take a Department of Rural 
Revitalization to convince people like Mr. Brown and other 
businesses in that area to stay. It simply takes some action. 
That’s what it takes from this government. That’s what we’re 
asking for from this government. 
 
In this case they’re not asking for tax concessions. They’re even 
willing to live, at least until the next election, with the 
restrictive labour laws that we have in our province. But they 
need a highway. There are other businesses there. I think of 
Bickner Trucking in Vanguard, that have just made a huge 
investment in a brand new shop, just a huge shop in that town, 
Mr. Speaker, and they employ about 24 to 25 truckers in the 
community of Vanguard. Under this government’s restrictions 
on Highway 43, they will not even be able to run their empty 
trucks down the highway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s the issue we were raising with the minister today in 
question period — my colleague, the member for Cypress Hills 
and the member for Thunder Creek. It’s in the member for 
Thunder Creek’s constituency. And so we asked earnest and 
serious questions on behalf of these businesses and, more 
importantly, on behalf of the families that they employ, the 
people they employ. And the answer they got back today in 
question period was . . . well it was a non-answer. They will 
continue to be ignored. 
 
I think we will continue to make the case and I hope the 
government will respond appropriately in the future. Because 
there’s Bickner Trucking and there’s Trailtech manufacturing. 
There’s another entrepreneur down there who’s set up a 
welding operation. He has contracts with short-line agriculture 
manufacturers, and he’s very worried because his clients don’t 
really want to be running their brand-new equipment down to 
his welding and his manufacturing outlet on grid roads, Mr. 
Speaker. It just makes perfect sense that they wouldn’t want 
that to happen. 
 
So there’s three businesses, existing businesses, that are simply 
looking for a highway, a road, as a reason to stay here in the 
province of Saskatchewan, and in that rural area that 
desperately needs those jobs. And there’s one other business 
there, Mr. Speaker, it’s called Notekieu Processing. They’re just 
under way; they’re going to be, I think, they’re going to be 
processing pulse crops. And I just saw the advertisement in the 
Booster. They’re going to be looking for a manager for their 



142 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

operation. And they’re worried, too. They’re wondering if they 
located in the right place when they located in that rural portion 
of southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know the opposition hates talking about 
Alberta. And you know, I wish we weren’t next to them either, 
frankly. As someone who is in the economic development area 
in the city of Swift Current for about five years, I’d rather they 
weren’t our neighbours either. I’d rather be next to 
Newfoundland, although in most economic areas they’re also 
now outperforming us here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
But the fact is, that’s who we’re next to. That’s who we must 
compete with. 
 
In Swift Current, when they look at things from the government 
like a Throne Speech or the budget that’ll be coming up Friday, 
that’s the test they use. Will this help us compete? Will this help 
us retain our young people and our businesses and the people 
that create jobs and wealth in our area? And the answer to the 
question, Mr. Speaker, is no. There’s absolutely nothing in the 
Throne Speech, nothing that has come from this government 
certainly since the last election that would give those people 
hope. 
 
We simply have to try, Mr. Speaker. We understand the 
difficulty of trying to catch up with a province that’s had a 
50-year head start. But we have to give these people in our 
communities, and in Swift Current especially, we have to give 
them the hope that there’s a plan in place, that there’s a 
long-term vision, that there’s a government that understands 
that only by lowering taxes and being as competitive as we 
possibly can afford will we be able to grow our province, will 
we be able to create an environment for those businesses to 
want to stay, to stop planning their exit strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, you never . . . Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New 
Democratic Party) just doesn’t seem to talk much about creating 
jobs. Certainly there’s nothing in the Throne Speech. I think 
there’s a reference to a summer jobs program where they 
completely exclude the small-business sector despite all their 
lip service that small businesses are the engine of the economy 
that create the most jobs, certainly no evidence of their belief of 
that in the Throne Speech by the job-creation measure that they 
outlined there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I just really wonder, when I look at the Throne 
Speech or when I look at previous documents, when I looked at 
the labour legislation that came forward from this NDP 
government last session, I wonder if they really understand the 
magic that happens when just one single job is created. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the economic equivalent of conception. When 
just one job is created, there’s an energy that’s released. And 
that energy does many things. It provides for families. It saves 
for university. It invests potentially in another business. It 
supports charity. It brings ties. And yes, it pays taxes, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
That amazing act of job creation is what our entire system is 
dependent on, and when I speak of that I’m talking about health 
care and social services and the things that we have come to 
prize here in the province. And if you talk to these people who 
are considering an exit strategy, or even some who have already 

left, they cite, I think, as the reason for their decision as the 
complete lack of ideas or hope coming from this government 
that things will change. They simply don’t understand, this 
government simply doesn’t understand, that the only lasting and 
most effective way to create jobs is to lower taxes: income 
taxes, property taxes, royalties, sales taxes, small-business 
taxes. 
 
We simply must provide a long-term vision of achieving 
affordable tax relief, affordable tax relief in absolutely every 
area . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well the member from 
Regina Qu’Appelle says that there is absolutely no proof that 
lower taxes create jobs. That’s what he just said from his seat, 
Mr. Speaker. If you can believe it, if you can believe it, in every 
single jurisdiction where it has been tried in earnest, it has 
worked. It has worked in Canada. It has worked in the United 
States, and believe it or not — he’s shaking his head — but 
believe it or not, Mr. Speaker, it will work in Saskatchewan but 
only when the government changes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Only when the government changes. The Throne 
Speech is completely silent on this most important issue. It 
rehashes last year’s budget when it comes to taxes. 
 
On the sum and the total of its announcement on job creation, 
Mr. Speaker, is that student employment program I mentioned 
earlier which completely excludes the engine of the economy 
that, by their own admission, if you look in their campaign 
brochures, is the single greatest job creator in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Apparently it is good enough for their election brochures, Mr. 
Speaker. It’s good enough for their election-time hype, their 
credit to small business that they’ll give it as the job creator, but 
it’s not good enough for their Throne Speech. It’s not good 
enough for their budget. It’s not good enough for their action, 
Mr. Speaker, and that’s the problem. That’s exactly the problem 
with this government. 
 
For the people in my constituency, they desperately are seeking 
some sign of a vision for our economy, some clear plan to meet 
the challenge of competitive tax structures. And there is nothing 
in this Throne Speech and nothing coming from the government 
on that count, Mr. Speaker. This Throne Speech frankly has 
more to say about blooming crocus flowers than it does about 
job creation or a long-term plan for the future. 
 
There is nothing in the Throne Speech also, Mr. Speaker, about 
the burgeoning . . . well, the energy industry in the province of 
Saskatchewan. This government will benefit to the tune of 
hundreds of millions of dollars from the energy sector, but 
many of them will be surprised to know that in southwest 
Saskatchewan, there hasn’t been a drilling rig there for some 
time, for months really. It’s shocking when you consider the 
price of west Texas crude is where it’s at. 
 
The fact of the matter is . . . and this is what the oil companies 
have told us. They have said yes there is oil in the Southwest, 
and yes the price is right. But as long as Saskatchewan is the 
highest cost jurisdiction in which to explore for oil, we will go 
elsewhere, Mr. Speaker. That is what they have told us. That’s 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 143 

 

what they’ve said. It’s a matter of public record. And save for a 
few areas of strategic importance to the major drillers here in 
the province, in the Southwest the wheels are not turning in the 
oil service sector. They’re simply not turning. They need the 
government to be still more competitive with their royalty 
structures than they are. 
 
They need the government . . . if they’re not prepared to move 
on that, then, Mr. Speaker, they need some sign in the Throne 
Speech or some document from government that they’re at least 
willing to enforce the same laws that our own service 
companies live by on service companies from out of province. 
They need to have some surety that the PST (provincial sales 
tax) that our companies have to deal with in our province is also 
being levied against out-of-province firms. It’s not happening. 
We’ve asked the government that question. They say, well we 
don’t have enough people to enforce it. Well they better get it, 
Mr. Speaker, because they’re killing the goose that’s laying 
their golden egg, that’s single-handedly putting them in a 
surplus position, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve highlighted some major concerns as regards 
to the Throne Speech. But I do want to say this. As someone 
who has sat on the board, as a former board member of the 
TransCanada West Association, that the announcement in the 
Throne Speech about the expedition of the plan to twin the No. 
1 Highway is very, very positive indeed for my community and 
for the entire Southwest and for the entire province. And for 
that  . . . I’m sure the people are grateful for that. I know they 
were grateful when the member for Cypress Hills and our 
Highways critic raised this very plan to shorten that time frame 
in the last session during an emergency debate. And it’s 
certainly a positive aspect of a Throne Speech that otherwise is 
a major disappointment. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a disappointment because fundamentally it’s a 
tired rehash of Romanow initiatives that have either already 
been announced with the possible exception of one program 
which is a federal program funded fully by the federal 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this past winter we watched . . . I’m sure 
everybody interested in politics in Saskatchewan watched the 
NDP leadership unfold. And I have to admit, Mr. Speaker, that 
on the day that they chose the member for Riversdale as their 
new leader, I watched the proceedings on television, further 
giving my wife concern that indeed I need to go out and get a 
life. But I pretty much watched the entire thing unfold. And I 
noted when that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, apparently 
my colleagues are wondering if I might perhaps get a life as 
well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I was very interested to see during the coverage of that 
convention that the television commentators would take some 
time to describe some background of the candidates vying for 
this position of Leader of the NDP. And I noted with interest, 
Mr. Speaker, that among the hobbies listed of the leadership 
candidates, the one that stuck out to me was the proclivity that 
our now Premier has with the renovation of buses, with the 
acquiring of old buses and the renovation of the buses, and I 
don’t know maybe selling them, who knows, maybe at a profit 

even after he’s renovated . . . I don’t know. I can’t hardly 
imagine that that would be the case, but perhaps. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the Premier of all people should know 
that you can’t fool people for even a little while by simply 
putting a new coat of paint on a rundown, tired, old bus. Right 
up until the time that you need that bus to take you somewhere, 
maybe somewhere important, that’s when it will dawn on you, 
Mr. Speaker. When you go to start up that bus, that old, 
rundown bus that you simply put a new coat of paint on, it will 
become abundantly clear that without doing something major to 
the mechanics of the bus, maybe a major engine overhaul, it’s 
just going to sadly let you down. It’s not going to be able to 
take you where you need to go. And sadly, Mr. Speaker, this 
Throne Speech is nothing more than a new paint of coat on that 
. . . a new coat of paint on that tired, old, rundown bus that is 
the NDP government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The good news is that there are a whole number of members on 
this side of the House that are pretty handy with a wrench as it 
turns out, and I think we’ll be able to fix the bus up given the 
next chance . . . given a chance in the next election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech that we’re debating here 
today, and the coming debates that we’re going to have in this 
House that will lead us to the next election, are absolutely 
crucial to the people of my constituency, to the people of Swift 
Current that I have the great honour of representing here. And 
they’re important of course to everybody in the province. There 
is precious little time to lose. We need a long-term plan from a 
party that understands how to get the economy going, that 
understands the importance of job creation in a regime with the 
lowest taxes possible, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can think of no better way to start down that road than to 
indicate to you tonight, and to my colleagues, that I will be 
supporting the amendment put forward by the Leader of the 
Opposition and seconded by the member from Melfort-Tisdale, 
and I will be voting against this woeful, inadequate Throne 
Speech, Mr. Speaker. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed a 
pleasure for me to stand once again in this Assembly, and in 
particular to address you, sir, who as members in this Assembly 
and certainly all of us know, has served very a distinguished 
and excellent service to our caucus on this side and now has the 
ability to do the same for our Assembly as a whole. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would be remiss if I did not of course point out 
that you have had a very important role in my life, having at 
one point taught me, it seems to me, grade 10 algebra. Just to let 
you know that I did learn a thing or two when I was in your 
class, I would note that your hat is an isosceles triangle, sir. 
That may be the extent of all I’ve learned in math, but I’ve 
learned a great deal also from you politically and I’m 
particularly pleased to have a chance to address you today in 
your new role as Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to congratulate my colleague from 
Sherwood who I was elected with at the same time into this 
House, as he becomes now the Deputy Speaker in this 



144 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

Assembly. He too has served as well as our caucus Chair. And 
although he did tend to send me on a lot of pretty schlunky CPA 
(Commonwealth Parliamentary Association) trips, I 
nevertheless want to thank him for his always attentive eye 
when I was getting a little too out of control in the caucus. So 
congratulations also to him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a real pleasure to be here today. This is a very 
. . . I think in many ways an important moment in the Assembly 
but also in the history of our Province. And I think that the 
member for Swift Current started to talk about this a little bit 
tonight, and I want to pick up on that point, pick up on the 
theme, but I want to carry it forward in a somewhat different 
direction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a new bus. We have a new vehicle. We 
have a new team. We have a new theme. We have new energy. 
We are moving forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think all we need to do to 
point that out is simply take a look at this set of government 
benches versus that set of opposition benches. I would point out 
to you that not only do we have a new premier, not only we 
have appointed a new cabinet, but we have elected new 
members to this side. Today, Mr. Speaker, there are four of us 
on the government benches under the age of 40. Four of us 
under the age of 40. That is I think a good sign of what this 
province believes in, what the NDP believes in, and our 
commitment to seeing that this future is more than just empty 
words, hollow rhetoric, and tired-out Tory ideas. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have 
talked about a new paint job. Don’t worry that there’s a new 
paint job on the bus here because we see that no matter what 
colour they paint that vehicle over there — you can paint it 
green and gold if you want — it’s still Tory blue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — And as Tory blue as it is, we know the books 
of this province are red because of the members opposite, and 
the people of Saskatchewan will never ever, ever forget that or 
forgive them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I think the members here have 
heard this speech from me before, and I won’t go on at great 
length about it tonight because what I want to focus in on are 
some of the new initiatives, some of the new ideas, and some of 
the new approaches that this administration, that this premier 
has decided we will embark on. 
 
And I’m very proud of it. I am very proud of what we are doing 
on this side. We have gone through an exciting time as New 
Democrats. We’ve seen thousands of people join our movement 
and rejoin our movement in terms of finding ourselves a new 
direction. We have reconnected with Saskatchewan people. We 
have reconnected with our grassroots, and we are stronger 

because of it. The fact that 20,000 people would cast votes in 
our leadership convention to elect the member from Riversdale 
as the leader of our party I think speaks very well. 
 
But I think what also speaks very well is the fact that we had 
not one, not two, but seven excellent candidates vying for that 
job — anyone of whom could of assumed the job of premier 
and done an excellent job. And I want to congratulate my 
colleagues in the caucus who’ve put their name forward for 
that; who advanced new ideas, and I think did a lot in terms of 
making sure that people understood that the real home for 
Saskatchewan people is here in the New Democratic Party. To 
each of them I say congratulations; and of course, to the new 
member for Riversdale, our returning colleague in this House, 
the Premier, congratulations very much on a job well-done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, the members opposite I know 
have some difficulty in understanding how our party works. I 
know they have a difficulty understanding how we can have 
such a big tent to accommodate so many different ideas and 
views. 
 
How is it that you can have pro-business people, how is it you 
can have strong union activists, how is it that we can have 
people committed from all sorts of different sectors of our 
society and encompass them all in one political movement? 
We’re not simply the voice for the chamber of commerce, 
although we certainly represent their views. We’re not simply 
the voice for the SFL (Saskatchewan Federation of Labour), 
although certainly they find home here as well. We’re not 
simply the voice for farmers; not simply the voice for working 
men and women. We are the voice for Saskatchewan people 
and we have been for 40 of the last 60 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, when I look at this side of the 
House and I see the new member from Elphinstone, and I see 
my colleagues from other parts of Regina, and I see some of the 
new members that we elect in every single election, I know that 
we’re going to be the voice for Saskatchewan people in the next 
40 years as well. 
 
One of the reasons for that, and I think the members opposite 
missed this because they think that we’re a touchy-feely, 
social-gospel party only, the fact is — the fact is — that we 
understand how the economy works. We understand how to 
create jobs. We understand how the Saskatchewan people want 
to move forward. And it’s not simply a hack and slash taxes at 
all cost as they have proposed. It’s not simply as they talk about 
how you can deregulate your Crown corporations. It’s not 
selling them off at fire-sale prices. That’s what they believe. 
That’s what they believe. 
 
What we understand is that it is a combination of things that 
makes Saskatchewan a great place to live, that allows 
Saskatchewan people to create jobs, and allows Saskatchewan’s 
young people an ability to stay here; to work here; to raise their 
families here; and believe it or not they’re doing just that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 145 

 

Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, many others will speak on 
different parts of this speech . . . of the Throne Speech. I want 
to address in particular tonight the comments related to the 
economic growth of our province and the future of our 
province. 
 
I think it’s important to note that the very first set of principles 
and statements laid out in the Throne Speech related to the 
economy, and they talked about a thriving economy. An 
economy that was described in the Globe and Mail as: “the star 
of Canada through the ’90s.” 
 
Now the members opposite have fallen silent because they 
know they’ve heard this speech before. They don’t like it when 
there’s good news. They don’t like it when we talk about the 
successes of Saskatchewan people. I have to say, I find it 
passing strange that in their communities that everything has 
just gone down the drain since they got elected. You never hear 
good news from them — never hear good news. 
 
You’d never hear them stand up and celebrate the successes of 
the businesses in their community. You never hear them stand 
up and celebrate the successes of the non-government 
organizations. You never hear them celebrate the successes of 
their people who sent them here to this legislature. All you hear 
is doom and gloom — doom and gloom. It’s all bad news, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I think one of the reasons you don’t hear anything positive 
from them is because they know that everything positive going 
on in this province is bad news for them, Mr. Speaker. It’s bad 
news for the doom and gloom approach of the opposition. 
 
Saskatchewan is healthy. Saskatchewan is strong. It has a good, 
solid, diversified economy. And it has a population who are 
finding prosperity; they’re finding success; and they’re finding 
that they have a place here in Saskatchewan to grow. Now I 
think we need to take a look, Mr. Speaker, at some of the 
different things that our government is proposing to do in terms 
of making sure we continue to move forward. 
 
There’s no doubt that things are a little bit uncertain in the 
world right now. We need only to turn on the television and 
watch what’s happening on the TSE (Toronto Stock Exchange); 
watch what’s happening in the United States. And we 
understand that the challenges — the challenges that come from 
a softening economy in the United States. I’m very happy that 
Canada is not following the US (United States) into that 
recession. I am very happy that Saskatchewan is not following 
the US into that recession. 
 
And if the members opposite read what any of the economists 
across the country are saying, they are saying that it’s likely that 
Saskatchewan is very well positioned to make sure we don’t 
follow the US into that recession. Why? Because we have a 
good diversified base. Why? Because we’ve made smart 
investments in infrastructure. Why? Because we’ve made the 
investment in people who are the backbone of this economy so 
we have a labour force that can respond and can succeed and 
thrive through this time and, Mr. Speaker, they will. 
 
(19:30) 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — They will. I want to talk a little bit about 
some of these investments and I want to talk a little bit about 
some of the strengths of this province because I think the 
members opposite through all of the doom and gloom have 
missed it out. 
 
The members may say and people watching on television may 
say, well that’s their job is to be negative. That’s their job to be 
negative. The members opposite should know full well that one 
of the important pieces of keeping the economy running is 
consumer confidence. Consumer confidence is based on the 
belief that things will continue to move forward, that there’s a 
security that they can spend with relative certainty, and that 
there’s a stable economy. 
 
We are doing our best to make sure Saskatchewan people, when 
they make those decisions, are making them based on fact. 
Consumer confidence is in good shape. We have a variety of 
industries here in Saskatchewan. Certainly, one of them is in 
difficulty and has been for most of the last decade — that’s 
agriculture and I want to talk about that a little bit later on 
tonight. 
 
But I want to talk first and foremost about some of the things 
that we are doing to make sure that Saskatchewan continues to 
grow. Mr. Speaker, one of the great pleasures I have had since 
being elected in 1995 is to have the pleasure of voting for five 
consecutive budgets that have cut the tax rates in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Five consecutive budgets. I say that I’ve had 
the luxury of doing that because I know it was the tough 
decisions made by the people in front of me, elected from 1991 
to 1995, that allowed that to be so. I know there were tough 
decisions because they were tough times. But Saskatchewan 
people understood what we were doing. Saskatchewan people 
understood that we had to take control of our own destiny and 
they did that and they followed with us and we did it in 
partnership. 
 
The result of that, Mr. Speaker, as we all know has been a series 
of tax cuts. I think it was described not that many weeks ago in 
Saskatoon, one of the business leagues was saying why aren’t 
you guys doing more about that, why aren’t you making a 
bigger issue about it. Did you know that Saskatchewan has the 
fastest falling taxes in Canada? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — The fastest falling taxes in Canada. I think 
the only thing falling faster is the support for the opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — The fastest falling taxes in Canada. We’ve 
seen cuts to business taxes, we’ve seen cuts to income taxes, 
we’ve seen cuts to the sales tax. Even the member for 
Kindersley had to vote with us when we cut the sales tax. Even 
the member for Kindersley. You have to wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
why or whether that opposition party wouldn’t have been better 



146 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

off if they let him lead. At least he understood what was 
important to Saskatchewan people and he followed through 
with it. 
 
Those tax cuts laid a foundation for us to build a better 
Saskatchewan economy. They allowed us to bring in business. 
They allowed us to see massive investments in infrastructure — 
not just government infrastructure, Mr. Speaker — a private 
sector infrastructure. The capital investments private sector 
companies have been making over the last several years have 
been above $300 million a year in this province. Some years it’s 
been as high as a billion dollars. We have seen a tremendous 
influx of capital. 
 
Members opposite would let you believe, as the member for 
Swift Current was going on about tonight, that business wants 
nothing to do with this province. That’s not true. That’s not 
true. 
 
One of the reasons the oil sector is doing so well, and one of the 
reasons our budget is doing so well, is because of the 
investment of companies in the oil sector in Saskatchewan. If 
you listened to them you’d think there was just tumbleweeds 
blowing across the prairie. You’d think that that’s it — just 
tumbleweeds. That there’s not a single oil well out there. You’d 
think that they’re not pumping a single barrel. Well it’s not true. 
It’s not true. 
 
And the only time you hear that concession from them is when 
we bring up the consolidated statements that show that the 
province has reaped some reward from that and then they say, 
well spend it. Spend it. Spend it faster. Spend more. Spend it 
not once, spend it not twice, spend it three times. For every one 
of them over there they seem to have two or three different 
ideas on how to spend the whole shot. But that’s the only time 
you hear them say that the economy’s functioning well. 
 
You never hear them talk about the successes in the forestry 
sector. I can’t remember the last time . . . I can’t remember the 
last time I heard any of the members from the forest fringe 
stand up and say anything positive about what was happening in 
the forest sector. 
 
I have not heard any of them stand up and talk about the 
benefits to their constituency. All we hear is gloom and doom, 
gloom and doom. Mr. Speaker, I think it’s unfortunate. I think 
it’s unfortunate that all members in this House cannot stand up 
and salute the successes of Saskatchewan people as we move 
forward. 
 
And the fact that a so-called Saskatchewan Party refuses to do 
so is all the more repugnant. And I think that we need to make 
sure that the people of Saskatchewan understand exactly what’s 
going on in this economy because things are going fine, thank 
you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this year alone we will see more than a $300 
million reduction in the income tax bill over what it was about a 
year and a half ago. 
 
An Hon. Member: — How much? 
 
Mr. Thomson: — By the end of the changes that we have 

made, that this Assembly has voted for in terms of the income 
tax structure, we will see more than $442 million a year 
returned to taxpayers. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Oh, Lord, half a billion dollars, boys. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — More than half a billion dollars . . . almost 
half a billion dollars, Mr. Speaker, that we have been able to 
return to Saskatchewan people. 
 
Why have we been able to return that to Saskatchewan people? 
We’ve been able to return it because the economy is growing. 
We have been able to return it because we have more taxpayers. 
We’ve been able to return it because the investments we’ve 
been making are paying off. That’s called sound financial 
management. 
 
Saskatchewan today, Saskatchewan today draws the single 
lowest — the single lowest — proportion of its revenue from 
income taxes of any province in Canada. The member for 
Canora . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to repeat 
this one more time. Saskatchewan today achieves the lowest, 
and I want to repeat this, the lowest — write this down, 
members opposite — lowest percentage of its budgetary income 
from income tax of any province, any province in Canada . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, that includes Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have been able to do that, we have been able to 
do that because we have invested wisely and because our 
revenue sources are not dependent solely on income. 
 
The members opposite look dumfounded. These aren’t my 
figures. These aren’t the Department of Finance’s figures. 
These figures are from the Canada West Foundation. It’s not 
that hard to look up. They can simply look it up. This is a fact. 
This is a fact. 
 
I am proud of the fact that we have been able to reduce income 
taxes for Saskatchewan people. I am proud of the fact that we 
have been able to return a dividend to Saskatchewan people for 
the hard work that they put in trying to clean up the debt left by 
the predecessors of their party. That’s been the success that 
we’ve had in this government, one of the successes we’ve had 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have also been able to see growth — growth in 
our economy without having to sell the farm. We have not had 
to give away our resources as the members opposite, time and 
again that I’ve been in this House, have advocated. 
 
The member opposite from Swift Current tonight speaks about 
the oil companies. He talks about how, oh, the oil companies 
don’t want to do business in his riding. He blames us; he blames 
the provincial government. 
 
I think the member opposite should probably grab a bus ticket 
off to Calgary and go find out what they’re really saying 
because what they’re saying is not that they have a problem 
with the royalty regime. They’re not having a problem with the 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 147 

 

provincial government’s taxation scheme. What they’ve got a 
difficulty with is dealing with various different municipalities. 
Access is the biggest problem. 
 
If the members opposite talk to anybody in the industry, if the 
members opposite spent any time actually looking at the 
arguments before they put forward the rhetoric, they’d 
understand that. These are the problems we have in the 
industry, and yet even with that, even with that, Mr. Speaker, 
we have significant growth in terms of oil sector. 
 
We have been very, very fortunate in this province that 
diversification through mineral wealth has been able to offset 
the losses that we’ve seen on the farm side. We have been very 
fortunate in our economy that we’ve been able to see a growth 
in manufacturing that has offset some of the losses that we used 
to see . . . or some of the benefits that we used to see from 
agriculture now that it is slumped. 
 
We’ve been fortunate that we’ve been able to achieve additional 
provincial revenue to step in and help out those who have not 
been able to count on their traditional industries. We have been 
very fortunate that previous governments, previous members 
here on the NDP side . . . I noticed members here got worried 
that I was being too gracious to the members opposite. But that 
we have made wise investments and that when it was necessary, 
we stepped in and we did the right thing — not necessarily the 
politically expedient thing, but we did the right thing. And I 
think Saskatchewan people have appreciated that. Obviously 
they’ve appreciated that by returning us three times to the 
government side of this House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk a little bit about some of the 
Saskatchewan successes that we do have. I think it’s interesting 
to note that the Year 2000 was a good year for Saskatchewan 
people. It was a good year in terms of Saskatchewan people 
finding work. The members opposite have spent a lot of time 
complaining about the opportunities for young people. It might 
interest them to know that in the Year 2000, the year just ended, 
86,000 young people found work in this province; 86,000 
young people between the ages of 15 and 24 were working in 
this province — 3,000 more than the year before. 
 
But we hear nothing from them about that. To them, they want 
to tell these young people, well you’re losers because you’re 
still here. You’re losers because you won’t pick up and go to 
Alberta. Why would you invest in this province? Well they 
invest in this province because they believe in Saskatchewan, 
because they live here and they know the opportunities. They 
know the potential, and they know that this is home. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a success story for us — 86,000 young people 
working in Saskatchewan last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s also interesting to note that we’ve seen growth 
in employment in various sectors. Certainly the agriculture 
sector is hurting; there’s no doubt about it. And we’ve seen this 
happen for years now as we’ve seen a decline. Forestry, mining, 
a 14 per cent increase last year — 14 per cent increase in terms 
of the number of people working in mining. A twelve and a half 
per cent increase in the number of people working in 
transportation. A 10 per cent increase of professional and 
technical services. A 7 per cent increase in health and social 
services. 

Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people across the board are finding 
jobs here at home in the professions that they want to be 
working in. Is there more we can do? Absolutely. Is there more 
we’re going to do? Absolutely. But, Mr. Speaker, as long as we 
sit on these government benches, I can tell you that our first 
commitment is not to simply sullying the reputation of the 
province as the members opposite try to do. Our first 
commitment is to the people that sent us here and to the people 
frankly that sent them here. We will continue to look out for 
those people’s interests. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen great expansion in our province. 
You listen to the members opposite and you think that business 
is fleeing in record numbers. This isn’t true. You think that 
there’s no new opportunities here. That’s not true. The fact is 
that we’ve seen a real boost in terms of our manufacturing 
sector. Incidentally, a manufacturing sector that’s not centred 
just here in Regina, a manufacturing centre that’s not focused 
just in Saskatoon. 
 
As the members opposite know, there’s manufacturing 
throughout the small towns of this province. Manufacturing is 
one of the areas where rural Saskatchewan has been able to 
respond I think fairly effectively in terms of diversifying. It 
might interest them to know that three-quarters of the nearly 
3,000 manufacturing firms — 3,000 manufacturing firms in 
Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker — three-quarters of those 
have fewer than five employees. These are the small businesses 
that we talk about. These are the small businesses. 
 
They say the NDP has no interest in small business. Not true. 
We have small-business people on our government benches. 
We have an interest in small business. We have a 
pro-small-business tax policy. This is one of those sectors that 
we have done a great deal to invest in, whether it’s through the 
partnerships with our Crown investments, whether it’s through 
the support through our post-secondary institutions, whether it’s 
through the support through the Department of Finance’s tax 
policies. We are making sure Saskatchewan small business can 
stay and prosper here at home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and they are prospering. They are prospering. 
Production value increased this past year by 16 per cent. It 
accounted for over $6.1 billion in 1999 and by over $7 billion 
last year. A billion dollar growth in that industry alone. 
 
The members opposite again are dumbfounded. They tell us 
they’re in touch with their constituents and yet none of the 
success stories are brought forward. Where did that billion 
dollars come from? Well it came from good small businesses 
making smart business decisions. It came from being 
competitive. It came from good products. Oh yes, they think we 
can’t say the word competitive for fear it will, you know, be 
banished. 
 
(19:45) 
 
I listened this morning or earlier this afternoon to the comments 
from the member for Wood River and I was appalled. I was 
absolutely appalled, Mr. Speaker, and we did our best to be 
polite recognizing it was his maiden speech, recognizing that he 
has served our country well. And what I was impressed with is 
the — to be very honest — I was impressed by the comments 



148 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

afterwards by my colleague from Athabasca who I thought very 
eloquently addressed the issue by reminding members opposite 
and all members in this House that many of our parents, many 
of our grandparents, have served in the armed forces, both in 
times of war and in times of peace, and we are no communists. 
 
We are no communists. We are Canadians and I think the 
members opposite forget that. If the members opposite forget 
that, then they should simply go and take a look at the members 
sitting here and review the Hansard of what the member 
opposite had to say about us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that the member opposite was a 
distinguished pilot in the air force but I’ll tell you, when I was 
listening to his speech, it sounded an awful lot like Star Trek to 
me, because he seemed to hit some kind of time warp that took 
him right back to 1950, right back to the Cold War. 
 
Now I don’t remember a lot about the Cold War. I was just 
barely . . . I think I voted in my second election by the time the 
Berlin Wall had fallen. And I want you to know, members 
opposite, that the younger members on this side, we remember 
the lessons from that time and we appreciate the work that was 
being done. But I can tell you that the Red scare that the 
member opposite from Wood River attempted to use today has 
no place and no time in this Assembly now or ever. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — And I see the member from Rosthern 
opening his mouth. I see the member from Rosthern opening his 
mouth ready to say something and all I can say is that as I look 
at him, his colleague sitting on the bench next to him, the 
member from Maple Creek, I think he and the member for 
Wood River have more in common that you would think; and 
that commonality of course is that the member from Maple 
Creek has a fantastic tourist destination where people can go 
and take a look at T. Rex — Scotty, the T. Rex dinosaur. Well I 
would tell you, by listening to the speech from the member for 
Wood River, there’s a dinosaur over there too. 
 
And I just hope, and I just hope that the members opposite will 
sit down with that member and talk to him a little bit about what 
he had to say today because it was just appalling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to return to my comments about the 
economy and I want to turn to, in particular, some information 
in terms of how all Saskatchewan people really are sharing in 
the economic benefits of this province. The economists do 
something that they take a look at . . . the income inequality 
they call it. That’s basically the difference between rich and 
poor, the gap between rich and poor. We all know about it. In 
Canada of course that gap has been growing . 
 
I’m very pleased to tell members of this house that is not the 
case here in Saskatchewan. That we have in fact have made 
policies and programs which help make sure that people stay 
above . . . stay in step that the gap doesn’t grow. We have the 
second, we have the second lowest income inequality in 
Canada. Only PEI (Prince Edward Island). has a narrower gap 
between rich and poor, and I think that’s something we should 
be very proud of, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Members should know though it doesn’t just happen that way. 
It’s not simply built into the economy. That’s a result of 
conscious decisions we’ve made through things like the 
community schools program, things like the building 
independence program, things like the changes that we have 
done to make sure that people when they return to work, when 
they go from welfare to work, that their kids are able to stay out 
of poverty. Those are successes of programs in large part 
initiated by our new Premier when he was here in his previous 
capacity as a member of the cabinet. 
 
And I think people have recognized that. I know the members 
opposite don’t understand how is it that we can rack up nearly 
60 percent of the vote in Elphinstone and then a week later do 
the same thing in Riversdale. It’s because of that. It’s because 
of the fact that we are committed to making sure every single 
person in Saskatchewan is heard and has a place and a role to 
play in this province. 
 
It’s not always to say that people don’t fall behind. I think we 
all know that there are real problems in some parts of this 
province and we’re working on that. Certainly the member for 
Cumberland and the member for Athabasca have spoken at 
length about some of the unique problems facing northern 
Saskatchewan, concerns incidentally that we never hear 
anything from the opposition on. 
 
We’ve certainly heard from other members about some of the 
problems in smaller communities. We understand some of the 
problems that seniors are having. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, this government is working to put in place 
the programs that help make sure Saskatchewan people are 
looked after. And it’s something we should all be very proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a great deal to the question of how you 
deal with the income gap. The taxation policy when we made 
the change a year ago was criticized by some saying it was too 
sweet for the rich, that there were too many people on the upper 
end who were going to see too much benefit. 
 
It’s a tough thing for us to do, to find that right balance between 
making sure we’ve got enough revenue to run the government, 
to run the programs that people are dependent upon — the 
programs the members opposite speak in great terms about our 
need to expand — things like spending on health care although 
of course in their policy at the election there was no new money 
for it. They talk about the need for us to put more money into 
education. Again, I don’t believe there was any promise in their 
platform for new money. 
 
We need to work hard to find that balance, Mr. Speaker, that 
balance that allows us to bring in additional revenue but still 
sets the tax rate at a point where we can encourage business to 
grow, where we can encourage young professionals to stay in 
the province, and where we can retain many of the skilled 
labourers that we have. 
 
These are real challenges. I think we’ve found very much that 
balance. I think that the policies we’ve put forward have been 
very progressive in that sense and certainly over the years I’ve 
supported them. This Throne Speech builds on those. This 
Throne Speech builds on the great work that our province and 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 149 

 

our government has done. 
 
And I want to highlight in particular here in Regina some of the 
things that have happened which I think help make our city and 
our province remain very competitive, in particular the new 
investments in infrastructure that we’ve made over at the 
University of Regina. I don’t know if the members opposite 
have had an opportunity to be over there lately but we have 
seen very significant growth in terms of this new research park 
that is being put up there. 
 
I was very happy to attend earlier . . . or late last year, I guess 
— I was going to say earlier this year but I guess it was late last 
year — the opening of the new Petroleum Technology Research 
Centre. This is a real jewel for the campus and I think it really 
does speak to how we can move forward with the oil industry in 
our province. 
 
We have always had the benefit of having companies come in 
and simply pull the oil out, take it off to other places for 
refining. We’re fortunate now over the last 20 years, 15 years, 
to have the refinery here in Regina. We’re certainly seeing new 
methods of making our oil patch of greater value through things 
like the CO2 initiative down in Weyburn. 
 
The Petroleum Technology Research Centre builds on that but 
it also attracts in some of the bright, the real bright lights in 
Canadian science and it helps them work with industry, work 
with government in terms of finding solutions to make this 
resource both more profitable but also last longer. And I think 
that this is a very important initiative on our part. I’m very 
happy with the investment the province has made into it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our commitment to resources though is not simply 
from the extraction standpoint. We are also committed to 
ensuring that there is a sustainable component to it. We’re 
interested in not simply pulling every resource out and ripping 
down every tree for a quick profit. We’re committed of course 
to the environment as well. 
 
And I think in that regard we are showing again at the 
University of Regina how we can make that work with the 
announcement this past week of the new CO2 test centre which 
will be focusing on greenhouse gases at the U of R (University 
of Regina). This is I think very appropriate that the greenhouse 
gas centre will be located in very close proximity to the 
Petroleum Technology Research Centre. People understand 
obviously, from listening to debates over the last several years 
around Kyoto and others, that this is an important issue. 
Greenhouse gases are an important issue to our environment. 
And there’s certainly . . . the oil and gas industry, the 
petrochemicals, have a great deal to do with some of the 
problems that we are facing right now with CO2. 
 
The greenhouse gas centre, technology centre, that’s open at the 
U of R will take a look at this problem, and I think again will 
serve to attract some of the brightest Canadian scientists in 
terms of working on the solution. 
 
In that regard, I want to congratulate my Member of Parliament, 
Ralph Goodale, for the work that he has done in the Liberal 
government in Ottawa for ensuring that research dollars do 
come here to Regina. And I certainly want to congratulate the 

ministers on our front bench who have done a great deal to 
make sure provincial money is leveraged as well to make sure 
that we see this benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Regina is not obviously the only beneficiary of 
these investments on our campuses. Certainly the Canadian 
Synchrotron in Saskatoon will be a great boon to Canadian 
science. It will be a great boon to the University of 
Saskatchewan, which is my alma mater, and a place I have great 
affection for still. And it is I think again a great testament to the 
foresight that our community leaders, our scientific community, 
our academic community, and our ministers have to making 
sure Saskatchewan’s economy is more than simply a 
resource-based economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to talk tonight a little bit about how 
another set of investments fit into that economic platform. 
Those are our investments in our Crown corporations. Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased to serve as the Chair of our Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations. I am pleased to have spent 
many of the last several years in our caucus chairing the 
caucus’s committee on economic issues. And I think that it’s 
important that we highlight, because they are so much just a 
part of our everyday life, that we highlight some of the 
successes and some of the importance of these Crown 
investments to Saskatchewan. 
 
This afternoon in question period members spend a great deal 
of time talking about energy rates. And indeed over the 
weekend there was a discussion about what the appropriate rate 
should be for our power through the independent review panel 
and over the next few days obviously we’ll see how that turns 
out. 
 
But I think as people sit and take a look at these issues and take 
a look at where we’re at in Saskatchewan today and where other 
provinces are at in terms of how they’ve handled their energy 
sector, how they’ve handled their utilities, I think people will 
understand why it’s so vital that we maintain Crown ownership 
in this province and in our utilities in particular. 
 
We have . . . Let me start by saying we have one of the best 
telecommunications companies in the world — one of the best 
telecommunications company in the world — and that being of 
course SaskTel. SaskTel is an extremely good provider of 
telephone, of Internet, of high-tech services to Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
It’s successful in part because it’s diversified. It’s invested in 
new technology and new ideas. It’s invested and it has shared 
its insight around the world to show what Saskatchewan can do 
and those investments have paid off — those investments have 
paid off. The members opposite always like to point to the 
failures of our Crowns but I think we need to remember their 
many successes. 
 
I don’t think we spend enough time celebrating the successes in 
this province and certainly SaskTel has had a lot to do with 
them. I appreciate the comment by the member from 
Cannington, and he’ll know that while he and I were recently 
down in New Zealand on a study tour, which I hope to be able 
to report to the Assembly in due course, that he will know that 
SaskTel has an important role to play down in New Zealand 



150 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

through its investment in Saturn Communications. 
 
I can tell you, and I’m sure as the member for Cannington will 
know because we spent a great number of sleepless hours I’m 
sure sitting up staring at the television screen thinking it was 
noon back here when of course it was two in the morning there, 
that they need our help at least in terms of bringing in better 
television service. And I am sure that SaskTel through its work 
in Saturn will be able to do a great deal. I notice bipartisan 
support now on that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There are some places where we can just do good public service 
for people around this globe and that may be one of them. 
SaskTel has been a real world leader and it’s something that I 
know people throughout the province feel very proud of in 
small towns as they see the SaskTel trucks and they know that 
it’s local people working for this great company. 
 
SaskPower is also another place, Mr. Speaker, where I think we 
can celebrate some of the successes. And it’s here that I would 
draw the attention of members to the situation happening in 
Alberta. Several years ago, in fact about five years ago, there 
was an idea moving across North America that what we needed 
to go to was a deregulated energy market, that what we needed 
to have was we needed to free up the large utility giants, 
obviously SaskPower is not a utility giant, but the larger ones in 
the United States wanted to break themselves up and 
deregulate. They thought that this would increase their ability to 
maximize efficiency. They thought this was a way for them to 
find better capital investments for power generation which was 
becoming expensive. They thought it was a way to share 
resources between the various utility providers at greater 
efficiency. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Boy, were they wrong — were they wrong. All we need to do is 
turn on the television set and take a look at what’s happening 
down in California as they go through rolling blackouts. All we 
need to do is to pick up the phone and talk to friends in Alberta 
and listen to the problems that they’re having there in terms of 
both generations where they’ve got problems; of course we all 
know that there was threats of potential brownouts in Alberta 
this past fall. We know that there’s a problem in turns of the 
extreme cost that’s being rung up on utility bills as a result of 
the deregulation. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, that this is a very good case study of what 
happens when government simply pulls back and pulls out of 
industry. Deregulation alone is not to blame for the problems 
that we have seen in terms of the electrical utilities. One of the 
problems is that we did not have utility companies across North 
America with enough capital to invest and make sure there was 
generation. That was one of the problems. And one of the 
problems was because of the pressure from shareholders. 
 
One of the benefits of having SaskPower in Crown control and 
under the scrutiny of this Legislative Assembly is that we are 
able to make sure that the capital investments are able to be 
made. We are able to make sure that there is sufficient 
generating capacity. We are able to make that there is a policy 
framework which ensures the lights not only stay on in 
Saskatchewan but that Saskatchewan people can afford to flick 

the switch. That’s one of the great benefits of Crown 
ownership. And I think that’s something we need to be proud 
of. 
 
Now we have not taken the approach of our predecessors in 
terms of moving forward holus-bolus in terms of massive 
investments in new generating capacity. Instead what we have 
worked on is to build a partnership with private sectors. Private 
sector companies who have been able to generate power, 
relatively low cost, move it into the grid in terms of what their 
surplus is. 
 
This has been very successful; of course we all know that to be 
either called non-utility generation, non-generation, or 
cogeneration which is probably its more common name. This 
has been a real success, in terms of us being able to make sure 
Saskatchewan people are able to have stability and security in 
their power supply. Something that we never thought we would 
have to worry about at the start of the 21st century. Whether 
you are flicking on your computer or your light switch or your 
television or your radio or your toaster in the morning, you just 
expect it to be there. 
 
I think a lot of us have forgotten the lesson that our generation 
. . . that our parent’s generation or our grandparent’s generation 
went through when they were getting rural electrification. I 
know the members opposite always make fun of the former 
premier when he would tell the story about flying across the 
prairie and Tommy pointing out the new lights that had gone 
on. I wonder if maybe that message isn’t going to resonate a 
little more with the younger generation that sits there and 
thinks, gee what about rolling blackouts, what about brownouts, 
what happens if I flip the switch and nothing happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the good news is SaskPower is well positioned to 
make sure that doesn’t happen. SaskPower is well positioned to 
do that because it has sufficient capital at its disposal to make 
sure that we can build generating, transmission, and distribution 
facilities. It has the policy levers of government in an integrated 
way to make sure we can work with private sector industry to 
make sure that the needs of the industries are met across the 
province. 
 
I say this not only to toot the horn of the Crowns, but I say this 
because it’s also important to our economy, Mr. Speaker. I was 
interested to read a story in The Leader-Post on December 21 of 
last year talking about the situation in Alberta, and in particular 
the situation as it was brought forward by a vice-president of 
one of their ironworks companies in Lethbridge. He was talking 
about some of the problems that they’re having. 
 
Obviously, as we know with IPSCO on our boundaries here in 
Regina, they’re a large user of the electrical utility. It takes an 
awful lot of electricity to create steel. What we were seeing 
these people talk about is the fact that because of deregulation, 
because of that competition now that’s been introduced into this 
system, and a little bit I’d say it’s false competition but 
nevertheless competition, has driven up the price. 
 
We’ve seen that many of these industries are no longer able to 
afford to do business — where? Believe it or not, in Alberta. 
They’re not able to do business in Alberta. Why? Because they 
have not made sufficient investment in their infrastructure 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 151 

 

because they deregulated and sold off their Crown investments. 
There was no foresight there in exchange for the quick gain. 
 
Manitoba as we know is probably the lowest cost producer of 
electricity in Canada. Quebec would be perhaps a little lower at 
about two and a half cents per kilowatt hour. Alberta now, if 
you can believe it, has just capped theirs, has just capped the 
rate that their utilities can charge at 11 cents per kilowatt hour. 
 
I’m not sure what exactly SaskPower’s is at. I think it’s 
probably about four and a half. I don’t see the Minister of CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) handy to me 
who would have the answer to that. But what we know is that 
we are still able to produce relatively inexpensive electricity 
here and this is something which is good for Saskatchewan 
business. 
 
It’s good for Saskatchewan business to have SaskPower 
operating it because they’re able to make the investment in 
infrastructure and they’re able to do it under public scrutiny. 
The rate utility review panel has come forward with a proposal 
for a — I’m not sure what it is — I think a one and a half per 
cent increase in the rate. I’m a very strong supporter of the 
independent panel. I think it is important for us to be able to 
have experts to go in and take a look at what the Crown 
corporations request for in terms of rates, in terms of what the 
public believe the appetite is, in terms of being able to pay it, 
and then report back to the shareholders, report back to the 
government with a rate that they believe is fair. 
 
I think that’s a real benefit, and it’s much better than the 45-day 
rate review process that we used to have in place. Members 
opposite will say, well it was their idea; they asked for it — 
whatever they may say. Mr. Speaker, the fact is we 
implemented it. The fact is I know that we are all relatively 
pleased with the way that this has worked, and I want to 
congratulate that panel for the work that they’ve done in each of 
the cases they’ve taken a look at. 
 
Rates in this province, whether it’s SaskPower, whether it’s 
SaskTel, whether it’s SaskEnergy, are among the lowest in 
Canada, and that is something we should be proud of. It’s 
among the lowest in Canada because these are Saskatchewan 
companies with a Saskatchewan product working for 
Saskatchewan people. How else would it be? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t want to go on at too great a length tonight, 
but I did want to highlight some of those points that I thought 
were extremely important for us to understand. We have a very 
strong economy. We have a very positive, I think, economic 
outlook. It’s interesting that while the U.S. is looking at a 
recession, all other parts of the world are suffering in terms of 
potential recessions as well, Saskatchewan is still looking at a 
growth, at economic growth, real economic growth. And while 
it may be small this year, we know that that growth is going to 
continue to translate into jobs. We know it’s going to continue 
to translate into opportunity, and we know that it is going to 
continue to mean security and prosperity for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate the Premier and his 
ministers on a job well done in this Throne Speech and in a job 
well done in making sure Saskatchewan people, rich or poor, of 

all backgrounds, have a place in this province. With that, I will 
be voting against the amendment proposed by the Leader of the 
Opposition. I will be voting for the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
behalf of the constituency of Shellbrook-Spiritwood, it gives me 
great pleasure to stand in this Assembly today to bring forth 
some concerns of my citizens in regard to the Throne Speech. 
But before I go on, I would like to take this time, Mr. Speaker, 
to first of all congratulate you in your new role as Speaker. I 
also want to take this time to congratulate the member opposite 
from Regina Sherwood in his role as Deputy Speaker. I also 
want to congratulate both you two, especially you, Mr. Speaker, 
for standing up and making sure the democratic process is 
served by having your name sent in for Speaker. Both you did 
that, and it’s the way the democratic process should be. For 
Speaker, it not should be by one person designated who should 
be the Speaker. So congratulations to both of you for doing that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speeches are kept . . . are meant, 
pardon me, to set forth some sort of legislative agenda for the 
government and give the people of Saskatchewan a sense of 
where the government wants to take the province. This is 
particularly true when there’s a new government or in this case 
a new Premier. However those wanting to get the sense of 
where this government is going was disappointed by the Speech 
from the Throne. Mr. Speaker, this Speech from the Throne 
does not give no vision and does not give no direction. This 
speech, Mr. Speaker, is basically a rerun of last year’s speech 
given by the Premier Roy Romanow. 
 
In economic development, a thriving economy in our province 
according to them is strong and growing. Well if it’s strong and 
growing, it must be in rural Saskatchewan because it’s sure not 
in rural Saskatchewan. According to the figures here — and 
these figures are so stifling and blinding I actually had to put 
my glasses on — there were 485,000 people working in 
Saskatchewan last year which is an increase of approximately 
5,000. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I know in my constituency there are many, 
many kids that work from Spiritwood and area in the province 
of Alberta. Many people do that, and they travel back and forth 
on the weekends. Are those kids that are working in Alberta 
still classified as Saskatchewan-working people? 
 
I would like to go on and talk about job creation, job creation in 
Saskatchewan. New figures released today — actually this is 
dated March 9 — by Statistics Canada show that Saskatchewan 
lost 13,200 jobs last year. Meanwhile, every other province had 
an increase in job creation. 
 
While Saskatchewan lost 13,200 jobs, Mr. Speaker, Manitoba 
added some 7,000 and Alberta created 42,000 new jobs. Not 
only are they creating new jobs, they are buying services from 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in rural Saskatchewan the government says that it 
has created a new office of Rural Revitalization, to support 
economic development in rural Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
there will be no growth if there are no jobs. And if there’s no 



152 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

jobs, there’s no people there. So why do we need rural 
revitalization? 
 
There’s a sign just outside my constituency, going west, and the 
sign says: go west young people to the land of milk and honey. 
Go to Klein’s world. And that would be Ralph Klein’s world. 
 
Also in rural Saskatchewan, the new government came out with 
the Saskatchewan Conservation Cover Program. Well to many 
of my constituencies who phoned me and talked about this, it 
was a joke and they laughed about it. They said it should be 
called the lawn cover program because many of my 
constituencies who are farmers have lawns that are bigger than 
50 acres. 
 
In northern Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, in northern 
Saskatchewan the government is working with communities in 
northern Saskatchewan to connect them to the future. Well a 
while ago, my member from Saskatchewan Rivers and the 
Leader of the Opposition took a drive up to northern 
Saskatchewan. We ended up in Mr. . . . pardon me, the member 
from . . . Minister of SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) constituency. 
 
And when we were up there . . . we were actually impressed 
with the highway going up because we heard horror stories that 
the highway going up was in bad shape. But really, Mr. 
Speaker, at that point in time it wasn’t. But since then we’ve 
been up there a second time and it’s been full of potholes just 
like it was the first time. 
 
(20:15) 
 
When we travelled to the Northwest, Mr. Speaker, what an eye 
opener — what an eye opener. And the Leader of the 
Opposition also said, what an eye opener. And it was. What a 
social-welfare society up there, Mr. Speaker. I couldn’t believe 
it. Them poor people up there. They need housing; desperately 
need housing. They need housing because there’s children up 
there having children. 
 
And talking with some of the members of the band at La Loche, 
they said you know, we bought a sawmill, we have able-bodied 
people up in La Loche that could do the work and saw the 
lumber and make the houses. But you know something? We 
can’t even go out and cut a Christmas tree for the simple reason 
Mistik owns all the power to the trees. That’s why it’s such a 
social-welfare place up there. 
 
It also states in forestry that there was 10,000 jobs going to be 
created. Well this is the same as it was last year, and the same 
Speech from the Throne, that they were going to create 10,000 
jobs in forestry. It’s not happening. 
 
An Hon. Member: — That’s consistency. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — That is consistency. You are exactly right. 
Zero for zero. 
 
In the forestry industry, Mr. Speaker, the new . . . the 
government just signed a contract up at Chitek Lake which will 
allow a mill to be built and it will be utilized to harvest and look 
after the salvaged timber. Well they forget, Mr. Speaker, that 

just a short time ago up in Meadow Lake that there was a mill 
up there called the Clearwater mill. And that mill was shut 
down because they couldn’t get access to this timber. And it 
was set up for salvaged timber also. So why promise people at 
Chitek Lake the same thing that just failed — and that’s only 45 
miles from where they’re building one. That’s what’s good in 
forestry, promises, that’s all. 
 
I’d like to also talk about in the lumber industry. An official 
from Weyerhaeuser Canada says Saskatchewan cannot afford 
being affected by whatever replaces the 5-year-old US-Canada 
softwood lumber agreement that expires at the end of this 
month, in just a few more days. Saskatchewan dimension 
lumber exports were not part of this previous deal signed in 
1996, which was aimed at placing quotas on the exports from 
four main producing provinces. The deal imposes heavy duties 
on exports beyond the annual quota; a deal Canadian producers 
say is unfair. Ottawa has said it will not redo this contract. The 
previous softwood lumber agreement targeted British 
Columbia, Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec. It did not target 
Saskatchewan as we speak yet. Weyerhaeuser is the province’s 
biggest exporter of dimensional lumber such as two-by-fours 
and two-by-six studs from mills at Carrot River, Big River and 
the jointly-owned Wapawekka Lumber Company mill at Prince 
Albert. 
 
An official, Mr. Speaker, speaking on background only, agrees 
that even though Saskatchewan is a major player in the 
softwood exports, there’s an expectation Saskatchewan will no 
longer be immune. The provincial official also says that if a 
trade action is launched Saskatchewan will be expected to fill 
out a questionnaire produced by the investigation working in 
the US commerce department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our view of forestry is that no new jobs — no new 
forestry jobs — as the government said there will be 10,000. 
There are no forestry jobs. So maybe let’s save existing ones. 
Just before the last provincial election Saskatchewan people 
were treated to a series of optimistic announcements about 
forestry. Partnerships between forestry companies and 
Aboriginal groups would create thousands of jobs, then . . . and 
when Economic Development minister, member from Idylwyld, 
promised . . . two years later the question is, where are the jobs? 
Where are those projects? Where even is the word allocation 
that would allow existing jobs to continue? 
 
The forestry plan of the NDP government has become nothing 
more than a dream. Just a dream, Mr. Speaker. Nothing more 
than wishes of a party wanting to believe that it could do 
something dramatic to turn around the fortunes of a province 
and win itself the confidence of another . . . confidence of 
northern people. A short time ago, Mr. Speaker, it barely 
achieved the second goal, never mind the first. 
 
A local sawmill operator, Carrier Forest Products, said that 
we’ll have a look at packing up the equipment and moving out 
if it cannot get an allocation. The company came to 
Saskatchewan in good faith several years ago and has provided 
about 60 jobs for people in Prince Albert area. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you know all too well what I’m saying. It had plans 
for a finger joint plant to give further value to the wood 
products from the sawmill. 
 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 153 

 

Without an Aboriginal partner, however — and the company 
has tried to find one without success to date — it cannot receive 
a timber allocation and must purchase private wood. That is not 
enough to maintain a business. There must be a steady, secure 
supply of raw material to continue operating. 
 
And what of the partnerships that were announced two years 
ago? For the most part, they are stalled in financing 
arrangements and delays due to the depressed forest product 
markets. The forest allocated is not being cut. That might cheer 
the ardent environmentalists but it does not do nothing to 
provide paycheques to northern people. Carrier and Prince 
Albert deserve better than a lip serve received from 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management. Also, 
Mr. Speaker, Ainsworth, a lumber company, also quoted and 
said, we cannot do business in Saskatchewan any longer. We 
cannot work with the government. It’s time to pull out. 
 
Prove to us, Mr. Speaker, prove to us that there is something in 
this truth and the promises made in ’99 about the wonders of 
the new forestry plans for the province. If the province can’t 
deliver the new jobs yet, then at least make sure that the jobs 
already aren’t lost for the sake of bureaucracy. 
 
I’d like to turn myself on to economic planning. In my 
constituency, in Saskatchewan, the economy, they say 
according to the government, is strong and growing. “My 
government will make strategic investments in people and 
infrastructure connecting to a prosperous future.” Well, Mr. 
Speaker, in my constituency, a group of people from Parkside 
dealing with hemp — not marijuana, hemp — decided to grow 
this business. They went to the government; they went to Sask 
Ag and asked if they would help. Well after a number of years 
of talking with them, nothing happened. 
 
Finally a group from Alberta, a group from Alberta — Alberta 
Ag — contacted them to come visit them. And they went there 
and sat down, told them of their plan, and, Mr. Speaker, as we 
speak now, they are working with hemp but it is all done in 
Alberta. Not in Saskatchewan. Not in Parkside, my constituents, 
where it should have been taken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also put in the speech connecting with young 
people. Connecting to young people means connecting to the 
future for there they will shape the future of our century. Well, 
this is true, Mr. Speaker, very true. They are right. But the 
young are moving out, Mr. Speaker. They are moving to 
Alberta and elsewhere because you know why? That’s where 
the jobs are. 
 
I recently heard in my constituency that a nurse, an RN 
(Registered Nurse), who has been trying to find a job in 
Saskatchewan, in my constituency, found a part-time job, has 
recently been offered a job in Alberta. And listen to this, Mr. 
Speaker. She’s going there for two years — she signed a 
contract for two years — and she is getting a bonus, a signing 
bonus of $8,500. They are also going to move her free of 
charge. Well what more can you say when this lady says I’m 
going to Alberta and get this kind of a bonus. More nurses of 
the same are going to do the same and go there. Why not? 
 
That’s where our young people are going. They are going where 
the money is. They’re going where the jobs are. This 

government here has not created jobs in this province. When the 
young people leave, the tax bases leave. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition has constantly harped on the 
government about cutting taxes. Cutting taxes will increase the 
economic growth in Saskatchewan but it’s never going to 
happen. Not with the government we have today. 
 
Also in the Speech from the Throne, Mr. Speaker, it talks that, 
“My government will introduce The Métis Act.” Well this is 
close to me and I am very interested in it. But until I get a draft 
of it, I have no idea what’s coming down the pipelines. But I 
would really hope that this Metis Act is far different from the 
federal government Indian Act. And I see the member from 
Northern Affairs nodding and I’m sure he agrees. I hope it 
doesn’t have anything to do with the Indian Act because that is 
one of the main reasons why those people are hindered is 
because of the Indian Act. 
 
In conclusion, I would be remiss if I didn’t talk a little bit about 
agriculture. During the 1999 election and subsequent Speech 
from the Throne, the NDP promised at long last to bring in a 
much needed safety net program for Saskatchewan farmers, 
something our province has been without since GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) was cancelled. However since then 
nothing has been done and the issue has not been risen in the 
Throne Speech either. Any time the agricultural crisis seems to 
be raised by this previous government . . . or this present 
government is if there is an election coming on. That’s the only 
time. 
 
Once again, the NDP has turned its back on the past promises 
and rural Saskatchewan. You know, Mr. Speaker, there’s an old 
saying; you never slap the hand that feeds you. And in this case, 
Mr. Speaker, don’t slap the hand of the farmers because they’re 
feeding this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — The government of today is not slapping the 
farmers. They’re also kicking them. If you keep kicking 
something, soon it will not get up. If this government soon 
doesn’t quite kicking rural Saskatchewan, it won’t get up. It 
will do what most of them have done and that is move out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting the Speech from the 
Throne but I will be supporting the amendment put forward by 
the Leader of the Opposition. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(20:30) 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, how quickly time flies. It 
seems like no time ago that we were here during our last session 
with our differing backgrounds, varying ideologies, and very 
contrary ideas on significant issues. Here we are, all the elected 
representatives, gathered to turn our attention to dealing with 
the people’s business. I am confident that each of us have at 
heart the best interests of not only the people we serve but also 
the best interests of our province. 
 
Now it’s with a great deal of pleasure that I have this 



154 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

opportunity to address the Speech from the Throne but, Mr. 
Speaker, before I begin, I would like to take a few minutes to 
express my congratulations to you on your newly elected 
position. This House has voted its confidence in you and I’m 
sure that confidence is well placed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, besides a congratulations, I would like to pass on 
a heartfelt thank you for the many times that you have given 
freely of your time and experience over this previous 16 months 
to help many of us newer members of this Legislative 
Assembly through the maze of rules, regulations, and protocol. 
Your advice has been invaluable and greatly appreciated, and 
we look forward to your continued guidance as you place your 
mark on this Legislative Assembly in your new role as Speaker. 
 
And I would also like to pass along a congratulations to the 
member from Regina Sherwood . . . wherever he is. Oh, there 
he is. Congratulations on your election. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech spoke of this 
government’s plans and vision for the future of our province to 
continue to build on our successes and to initiate new programs 
to enhance the lives of all Saskatchewan residents. A new 
beginning, Mr. Speaker. As spring creeps over this wonderful 
province of ours, we look forward to a year of growth and 
productivity, both personally and throughout the province, 
expanding that connection to the future — a future of 
prosperity. 
 
Many changes have taken place over the last few months. Not 
the least of which was our selection of a new Premier from a 
very impressive list of New Democratic candidates. These 
candidates travelled throughout our province during the 
leadership campaign, meeting with the people of Saskatchewan 
and beginning that important step of reconnecting with those 
very same citizens. Citizens, Mr. Speaker, in every walk of life 
and sector of our economy. In return those citizens gave a 
resounding vote of confidence to our present New Democratic 
government and our new Premier. Mr. Speaker, the residents of 
Regina Elphinstone responded to that new beginning and 
renewed connection in the by-election held in their 
constituency. I would like to take this opportunity to 
congratulate our new colleague from Regina Elphinstone on his 
victory. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — In a short time in this House he has shown 
himself as an able representative. I’m sure he will serve the 
people of Regina Elphinstone with dedication and diligence. 
Congratulations, and I look forward to spending many years in 
government with this hon. member. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, this vote of confidence and 
renewed connection with the people of Saskatchewan was again 
displayed in brilliant fashion when our new Premier was elected 
as the MLA for Saskatoon Riversdale. Despite negative, 
American-style tactics on the part of one candidate and the 
party he represented, and articles in the media talking about a 
campaign of nice guys, the people of Saskatoon Riversdale 
recognized the real substance of our new Premier and elected 

the best candidate as their new MLA. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I have read some quotes from the 
opposition before and during the Riversdale by-election stating 
that the by-election was an excellent opportunity for the people 
to express their opinion of the representation they have received 
from the New Democratic government, a report card, so to 
speak, on our government’s performance. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I agree with the opposition 100 per cent. 
This was a wonderful opportunity for the people to express their 
opinion and they expressed in a most definite manner. Two 
by-elections; two wins. It’s a report card, Mr. Speaker, we are 
proud to show anyone, any time — straight A’s. 
 
Mr. Speaker, now this isn’t all good news. There is a wee bit of 
sadness in Moose Jaw. We in Moose Jaw have known for a 
number of years that this man, our Premier, who was born and 
raised in Moose Jaw Wakamow, is a man of integrity, 
intelligence, and dedication. He has a great deal to contribute to 
our province. We also know that we no longer have a monopoly 
on his time or energy, for he is now truly our provincial leader 
and Premier of the province of Saskatchewan. While we may be 
a little bit sad to lose a remarkable citizen of our city, Moose 
Jaw congratulates the new member of the Legislative Assembly 
for Saskatoon Riversdale. We know he is the right man to lead 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to represent the people 
of Moose Jaw Wakamow. Our city has come a long way over 
the past few years. Our city’s story of success is well-known 
right across North America — from a city losing business and 
opportunity to a city with world-famous tourist attractions, the 
NATO (North Atlantic Treaty Organization) flight training 
centre, art galleries, the world-famous tunnels, museums, 
murals, and a thriving hospitality industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some might expect that to be the end of our story, 
that the people of Moose Jaw would stop and be happy to rest 
on their laurels, just take it easy for a while. Mr. Speaker, 
nothing could be farther from the truth. This journey that Moose 
Jaw has embarked on is growing every day. Our citizens’ 
dedication and commitment to our city is boundless. Their 
dreams and ideas for projects are limitless. There isn’t a day go 
by that I’m not amazed by the people within our community. 
Plans to revive and restore our colourful history on River Street 
are well underway. Authentic building facades, an outdoor 
amphitheatre for period productions, expansion of the famous 
Moose Jaw tunnels, and plans for a cultural arts centre, are all 
in the works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the change in Moose Jaw physically has been 
nothing short of remarkable. The change in the attitude of our 
citizens is phenomenal. We began our connection to the future 
of prosperity through our past but, Mr. Speaker, we are a city 
where the sky is the limit. 
 
The theme of our Throne Speech, connecting to the future of 
prosperity, began with the commitment by this government to 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 155 

 

listen closely to people and a commitment to being a partner 
with them in creating a prosperity that provides opportunity for 
all. That connection to the future of prosperity will be made by 
focusing on three areas: a thriving economy; healthy citizens, 
families, and communities; and finally, responsive and effective 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in spite of tough times in the agricultural sector, 
the economy of our province is strong and growing. The 
average growth rate for the Saskatchewan economy from 1992 
to ’99 was 3.4 per cent, matching the Canadian average and 
ranking third highest amongst the provinces. Exports, 
manufacturing shipments, oil and gas production, production of 
potash and other minerals, and retail sales, all show increases. 
Saskatchewan’s labour force has increased and our 
unemployment rate in January 2001 was the third lowest in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these are all positive indications of a strong and 
growing economy. We will achieve even greater success with 
investments in technologies, the information highway to ensure 
Saskatchewan communities are connected to high-speed 
Internet services, a community infrastructure with investments 
in our municipalities, increased expenditures in rural 
Saskatchewan on research and development, and transportation 
by embarking on the largest ever highway renewals program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, healthy citizens, families, and communities are 
also a focus of the Throne Speech. It is our government’s 
responsibility to ensure that every person can enjoy the fruits of 
prosperity. Early childhood development programs will be 
expanded and labour standards will be amended to increase 
maternity and parental leave provisions. Both of these 
commitments emphasize the importance of, and our 
government’s commitment to, our families and our children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s intention to expand community 
school programs and to significant investments in renovating, 
expanding, and building new schools and post-secondary 
facilities was also highlighted. Along with the implementation 
of the five-year centennial summer employment program, this 
government stressed the importance of our youth — youth who 
will be the leaders of tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, of great importance to us all will be the report and 
recommendations of the commission on medicare to be released 
this spring. This government will listen to feedback from 
communities and stakeholders and then make appropriate 
changes to ensure that our health care system works well for the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve heard over the last few days people who 
believe this Throne Speech has no vision or plan for 
Saskatchewan. I just shake my head and wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
and I challenge these people to think out of the box, re-read the 
Throne Speech, or maybe read it for the first time with an open 
mind and see all the possibilities laid out for our citizens and 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we recognize the links between the quality of our 
environment, the strength of our economy, and the health of our 
people. This government is dedicated to providing responsible 
and effective administration. Saskatchewan citizens expect and 

deserve no less. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be opposing the amendment and supporting 
the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And before I 
begin I would like to congratulate you on your position as 
Deputy Speaker, and I would also like to congratulate the 
member from Prince Albert Carlton on his election as Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I prepared my speech to last week’s 
Throne Speech, I thought that perhaps I should just find last 
year’s response; I know that you have heard it before, but it 
would not be any different that this year’s Throne Speech. 
We’ve all heard it before. 
 
None the less, Mr. Speaker, I’m happy to reply to the Throne 
Speech on behalf of the constituents of Estevan. Mr. Speaker, 
Estevan is a constituency of vast grain fields, oil fields, 
Boundary and Rafferty dams, coal mines, the Souris Valley 
Theatre, and the Johner Brothers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech is totally uninspiring, totally 
lacking in vision, and optimism. This NDP government that 60 
per cent of the people of this province voted against in 1999 
promised the creation of 30,000 jobs last year. And what 
happened to all of those jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker? We actually 
lost 13,000 jobs last year. 
 
The promise of strength in regional hospitals failed as beds are 
closing. The promise of reduced waiting times for surgery 
failed, as the waiting lists are getting longer. Mr. Speaker, just 
the other day a constituent called me. This gentleman was 
extremely frustrated as he explained to me how his son who is 
an engineering student at the University of Saskatchewan had 
broken his ankle on March 13. This injury required a pin to be 
put in his ankle, but guess what, Mr. Speaker? He has to wait 
until a bed is available to have the surgery done. He was told 
possibly — and I stress possibly — he may get it done on 
March 28. That’s over two weeks after the accident, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. People waiting for hip and knee replacements have 
been neglected by this government’s wellness plan as usual. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agriculture crisis is going from bad to worse. 
We have heard stories from all the instant authorities on 
agriculture on the government side. Their stories remind me of 
the song, “Chasing the Neon Rainbow.” On this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker, most of the members are directly involved 
in agriculture, and I do not mean visiting a cousin’s farm. And 
to the members on this side, the song “Here in the Real World” 
comes to mind. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, every year since 1992, the year GRIP contracts 
were torn up by the government opposite, the NDP has been 
promising farmers a long-term safety net program. Every year 
since 1992, except for this Throne Speech, they have never 
acted upon it and are obviously backing down. 
 
The details of the Conservation Cover Program which the 



156 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

Throne Speech says, and I quote, “will provide direct payment 
to farmers.” Well, Mr. Speaker, the details were released last 
week, and this will pay farmers $15 an acre, a minimum of 5 
acres and a maximum of 50 acres. The most you can get from 
this program is $750. 
 
Do you know what the farmers in my area are saying, Mr. 
Speaker? They are saying that if this was not so dim-witted, it 
would be laughable. That won’t even pay their increased energy 
and power bills or their high-speed Internet hook-up. And if the 
members opposite ever visited the rural areas, like they claim 
they do, they would know that is what the people out there are 
saying, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The farmers need a concrete program, a bankable program. The 
member from Saskatoon Meewasin says, and I quote, “there is 
no such thing as an instant solution.” She also states that, quote, 
“the Saskatchewan Party is looking for (an) instant win . . .” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farmers of this province have been waiting a 
long time for this government’s long-term safety net. And I do 
not believe that a nine-year wait qualifies as instant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every month and year that goes by, we lose more 
and more farmers. People that produce the highest quality 
grains in the world are going broke. Almost everyday there is 
an auction sale scheduled this spring — people having to get 
out. In the RM in which I live, there are almost a hundred 
quarters of land for sale, young farmers quitting because they 
just cannot go on. A few of the farmers who thought they were 
fortunate enough to receive AIDA (Agricultural Income 
Disaster Assistance) cheques have now received letters asking 
for repayment, plus interest. 
 
The members opposite constantly point their fingers when 
blaming. And I say to them; when you want to see who’s to 
blame, look in the mirror. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — We got the blame for negotiations regarding 
AIDA while their Minister of Agriculture was holidaying in 
Mexico. The people of this province were so fed up that they 
gave him a permanent holiday, as they did many other members 
that used to sit on that side of the House. And those 
constituencies are now represented by Sask Party, Mr. Speaker. 
And why? Because the people of this province have had it with 
empty promises, promises from a government that does not 
deliver. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the farm economy affects every sector in this 
province. Whether it be the grocery store in Midale, Bienfait, or 
Torquay, or the implement or car dealership in Estevan, they all 
feel it. And we have to work together on this one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I won’t prolong this. I realize that there are several 
other people waiting to respond to the Speech from the Throne. 
But I would like to say how honoured I am to represent the 
constituents of Estevan, and the trust that they have bestowed 
on me is very humbling. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in closing, the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle criticizes the Saskatchewan Party for their 

candidates in the last provincial election. But I ask the member, 
where are his candidates? We beat them. 
 
And with that, Mr. Speaker, I cannot support the Throne Speech 
but I will be supporting the amendment put forth by the Leader 
of the Official Opposition, the member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, it’s truly a pleasure for me to rise and to participate in 
the Throne Speech debate here on behalf of constituents of 
Regina Northeast. 
 
First of all I want to congratulate the Speaker on his recent 
election to the role of Speaker in this House. We all know that 
just by his nature he will provide us fair and reasonable and 
quality judgments from that chair and I really appreciate that. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to congratulate you on 
your election as the Deputy Speaker. We know that you have 
those same traits and will continue in the footsteps of very hon. 
Deputy Speakers who have gone before you in providing fair 
and quality decisions from that chair in your role. 
 
I also want to take this opportunity to congratulate the new 
member from Saskatoon Riversdale and the Premier on his 
recent election in Riversdale, and I know that we all — and 
when I say that, not just only the members from this side of the 
House but I’m sure many of the members from that side of the 
House — will know that he is certainly the man for the hour, 
the man that will lead us into the new millennium with a vision, 
a new vision of prosperity and opportunity for this entire 
province. 
 
I also want to congratulate the new member from Elphinstone 
on his recent election to this fine House. I suppose, Mr. 
Speaker, when he spoke in his maiden speech here and he 
informed us that he was born in 1972, he made many, many of 
us very enviable. I’ve had the pleasure of knowing the member 
from Elphinstone for a number of years now, first working with 
him in the federal election in 1997 and then having him as a 
colleague of mine from ’97 . . . for about two and a half years 
from ’97 until September ’99, as a co-worker in the Member of 
Parliament’s office in . . . I was in Regina and he was in 
Ottawa. And of course we were working for Lorne Nystrom 
who is the Member of Parliament for Regina Qu’Appelle. 
 
During that period of time I really got to appreciate the member 
because not only is he a very sharp, young, bright individual, he 
also has a very, very big and compassionate heart. And I know, 
I know, Mr. Speaker, that in my conversations with the member 
that he really enjoys the view of this House from these benches. 
And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve assured him that 
he’ll enjoy that same view for decades to come. 
 
But it’s truly a pleasure for me to stand here and represent the 
fine people of Regina Northeast. The constituency is a unique 
constituency, Mr. Speaker, as it is a constituency I think that 
has a good cross-section of the community. The boundary lines 
of the constituency is Albert Street to the south . . . to the west, 
Victoria Avenue to the south, for all intents and purposes 
Winnipeg Street to the east. It goes all the way out to the end of 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 157 

 

the city limits and includes Uplands. 
 
So it’s a large constituency, and I say it’s unique because it has 
over 900 businesses in my constituency. And it represents . . . 
it’s a good cross-section of the community. So I have the 
opportunity of representing some very, very fine people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks ago I had the opportunity to 
attend citizenship court that was held at M.J. Coldwell School 
which is in my constituency. My first opportunity to attend 
citizenship court, and I found it very, very moving. Her 
Worship the Lieutenant Governor was there to preside over the 
court proceedings, and there was 25 new Canadian citizens who 
received their citizenship that day. 
 
And I was very pleased to be there and to take part in it, but 
there was one aspect of it that really moved me. There was a 
lady, I would say middle-aged probably a lady that came 
forward to received her certificate and the pins from the federal 
representative and a pin from myself the provincial 
representative. She was smiling, Mr. Speaker, with a big, broad 
smile that’s very hard to describe. The same time there was 
tears coming down her cheeks. 
 
That made me think, Mr. Speaker, that how much we in Canada 
here and in Saskatchewan here take the citizenship of this great 
country and this great province so much for granted. And I 
think it’s something we should give some thought to on 
occasions as we perhaps in our life feel that we’re being hard 
done by or experiencing some difficulties that there are people 
in this world that fight and die for the right to vote. There are 
people who go through untold perils in order to escape the 
oppression that they are living under in their home country 
simply to come to Canada to enjoy the freedom that we have 
here. 
 
And one has to think about these folks and the changes that they 
must go through to leave their homeland, in many cases their 
family, to come to a strange country with a strange and different 
language. And to do all that, they have to be prepared to accept 
change in some of the . . . in a very grand manner. 
 
And change, Mr. Speaker, is something that’s about us all the 
time. We experience change from day to day. We experience 
change in our life in many aspects. Change is what government 
is all about. Government is to manage change, so it has positive 
effects on citizenship. We have seen a fair amount of change in 
our lifetime, Mr. Speaker. And somebody once said that the 
amount of change that we have seen in the last 100 years, we’ll 
see that much change again in the next ten. And I believe that’s 
to be true because if you look at our history, the amount of 
change . . . and there’s always been change in history, but never 
more than presently. We’re seeing change and very rapid 
change. We’re seeing change particularly in technology. We’re 
seeing change in communications. 
 
And I’m sure many of us can think back not all that many years 
ago that when we were looking for entertainment, we would 
turn the TV on and at best, we would get what? Two, maybe 
three channels? And if we wanted to watch a movie, we’d have 
a choice of watching the late movie on TV, or we could go to a 
theatre and watch a movie there. And at that time, if somebody 
would have told us that we would soon have the ability to go to 

a corner store and for a couple dollars, rent a little plastic box 
and plug it into a machine and could watch a full length movie 
without commercials, we would have probably thought they 
were smoking something strange. 
 
But that came to be, Mr. Speaker, and today we have even more 
rapid change between cable and satellite TV. We have the 
ability to watch a sporting event happen halfways around the 
world and watch it instantaneously. So we’re seeing some fairly 
massive changes in our society and in our ways of 
communications. 
 
In fact in recent years . . . and we all, I’m sure, have a 
cellphone, and we all use that cellphone as part of our duties. 
We now have the ability to get our e-mail messages on our 
cellphone. So we’re seeing some very, very rapid change. And 
change has very positive, very positive effects to it if it’s 
managed in the best interest of the people. Government has a 
responsibility to help manage that change, and thusly, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re moving forward to meet those challenges. We’re 
moving forward in expanding our education and giving 
educational opportunities to our young people, so they can be 
best equipped with the tools to meet the challenges of that 
change. Through our excellent public institutions and 
innovative technology, our post-secondary system provides our 
young people with affordable access to education and training 
that leads to success. Opportunities for young people in rural 
and northern Saskatchewan, as well as larger cities that leads to 
jobs. Opportunities to learn, live, and work right here and 
participate fully in our economic and cultural and social life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s very important because in order to have a 
strong economy for the future we have to equip our young 
people today with the tools to meet those challenges. And that’s 
exactly what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Education is certainly the highway to success in the future. 
Education is certainly the cornerstone of any strong economy 
and, Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to say that Saskatchewan is 
leading the way in providing the best of quality of education to 
the students of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Speaker, we all know . . . full, fully aware 
that the home of medicare is right here in Saskatchewan. We all 
know and fully aware that health care services are under 
pressure right across this great country and then through North 
America. We all, Mr. Speaker, know that changes to the 
technology and changes to the service in health care were able 
to provide even better health care than ever before to the 
citizens of Saskatchewan. And you know as well as I know, Mr. 
Speaker, that that’s exactly what Saskatchewan people deserve 
and that is what they are receiving. 
 
The health care budget for the 2000-2001 is 1.978 billion, the 
highest ever in the history of our province, and it is 5.9 per cent 
higher than last year. We’ve experienced last year, 4,761,800 
visits and consultations with family physicians and 920,700 
visits and consultations with specialists. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
think that clearly indicates that we are providing top-notch 
health care services to the fine people of Saskatchewan. 
 



158 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

(21:00) 
 
I think another indicator, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve had some 
personal experience with this over this last summer, is that . . . 
and I know the opposition members keep saying our health care 
waiting lists are long and at some point in time in the past they 
were long, Mr. Speaker, but they have shortened dramatically in 
the last year, year and a half. 
 
About a year and a half ago the MIR waiting list for elective 
MIR would have been twelve months. For urgent would have 
been three months and for emergency would have been as much 
as three weeks. Today, Mr. Speaker, that’s not the case. Today 
the MIR waiting list where elective is six months, for urgent is 
three weeks, and for emergency is less than three days. That I 
can attest to personally, Mr. Speaker, because I had some 
experiences at that over this summer with some family 
members of mine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we provide in our health care system a lot of 
services that perhaps aren’t noticed by the general public right 
off the hop. Over 800,000 days of in-hospital care services, Mr. 
Speaker, and an estimated 650,000 emergency room and clinic 
visits, Mr. Speaker. Those are the exact numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
And what we need to do, Mr. Speaker, is look at providing 
some type of assistance for prescription drugs, and I would urge 
the opposition members to join with the government members 
to pressure the federal government in bringing forward a 
prescription drug program to serve all the needs of all 
Canadians including Saskatchewan residents. 
 
We are committed to providing accessible quality health care 
services that are within financial means. We also believe in a 
publicly funded, publicly administrated health care system. Mr. 
Speaker, we believe that a family’s health should not depend on 
the family’s wealth. 
 
In order to provide these services, Mr. Speaker, we need a tax 
base. In order to have that tax base we must have a strong and 
growing economy. Mr. Speaker, I am sure it comes as no great 
surprise to you, no great surprise to you, Mr. Speaker, but it 
probably comes as a bit of a disappointment to the opposition 
members over there when they look at the actual factual 
numbers of our Saskatchewan economy. And I find it 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, that a story that was carried in the 
Toronto Globe and Mail on Monday, November 6, and as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, the Toronto Globe and Mail could hardly 
be accused of being an NDP rag. And the headline was 
“Saskatchewan emerges as a star of the ’90s”. 
 
When we look back on the ’90s which province will be 
remembered as the star economic performer of the decade? The 
winner is Saskatchewan followed by Newfoundland. Canada’s 
economy as a whole expanded by just over 25 per cent between 
1989 and 1999; Saskatchewan’s economy grew by more than 
32 per cent over that decade. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s a clear indication of the growth in this 
province. That growth came about because of good quality 
fiscal management put forward by this government, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Harper: — And I guess, Mr. Speaker, it could be said that 
what . . . you haven’t seen anything yet. Hang around, we’ll 
show you a lot more in the future. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I also want to draw the attention of this 
House to an article that was in The Leader-Post, Regina 
Leader-Post, Thursday, March 22, 2001, headline: “Regina’s 
economy looks good.” 
 

Regina will “buck the trend” by posting (a) 2.5 per cent 
economic growth in 2001, slightly ahead of the projected 
provincial growth rate of 2.3 per cent, according to the 
Conference Board of Canada. 
 

Once again, Mr. Speaker — independent opinion, nothing to do 
with us as government except the results are shown from our 
good management. 
 
“You can expect good things for this year,” was quoted by the 
associate director of the Ottawa-based Conference Board. 
Expect good things this year, Mr. Speaker, and we’re seeing 
them. 
 
And in the last week, I’ve had the opportunity of bringing a 
couple of good news stories from Regina to this Assembly. 
“The number . . .” and it was also in the same article, Mr. 
Speaker, it says and I quote: 
 

The number of jobs in 2001 that we’ve forecast (is) — 
2100 — is essentially in the bank. If anything, that would 
be relatively (a) conservative figure, he added. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this is the result of not only good fiscal 
management, this is the ability of this province to reduce its 
taxes over the last half a dozen years. 
 
It also goes on to say here that: 
 

Spurred by (the) tax cuts at the federal and provincial 
levels, disposable income levels will rise by 5.1 per cent 
this year. (This year.) 
 
Retail sales in Regina make up one-third of the total retail 
sales in the province. So the retail market is to a large 
extent driven by activity coming from outside Regina.” 

 
Indicating, Mr. Speaker, that not only is the Regina economy 
strong but so is the economy of the entire province. 
 
Another article, Mr. Speaker, on Thursday, March 22, 2001, 
“Sask. retail sales up.” And I’ll just quote from that article: 
 

The retail (sales) jump . . . accompanied by a 5.7 per cent 
increase in wholesale sales (January 2001 over January 
2000). Wholesale trade is made up one-third by 
wholesalers who supply retailers, one-third farm equipment 
(sales) . . . and a group of other businesses including 
lumber yards.” 

 
All positive signs of the strong growth in the Saskatchewan 
economy. And I know that’s not what we’ve been hearing from 
the members opposite; we’ve been hearing doom and gloom 
from those members, Mr. Speaker. 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 159 

 

Mr. Speaker, I know that many of the forecasters are talking 
about the present weather conditions we’re experiencing this 
winter here in Saskatchewan, but they’re also making 
predictions into the summer. And I know that many of the 
forecasters are suggesting that with the present weather patterns 
that we have here today, and if that carries on into the summer 
months, that we could experience a drought in the western half 
of this province. That’s what they’re suggesting. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve been doing some thinking about that 
and I haven’t shared my thoughts yet with the Minister of 
Agriculture and the other ministers, but I’m beginning to think 
that perhaps if that is the case that we should be putting in place 
contingency programs or contingency mechanisms to address 
that event in case we do have a drought in this great province. 
 
And I’m thinking this, Mr. Speaker, that if we took a half inch 
hose, a plastic line, a half inch diameter, dropped one end of it 
in the middle of Lake Superior and gave the other end to the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, and if they can suck as well as they 
can blow, we can irrigate all of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is truly a pleasure for me to be here and to take 
part in this Throne Speech debate. And Mr. Speaker, I will not 
be voting for the amendment; I will be voting for the main 
motion. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 
great pleasure to come to this distinguished House tonight to 
present a reply to the Speech from the Throne on behalf of the 
people of Cypress Hills. And I’d like to, before I get started, 
acknowledge the contribution that you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and the newly elected Speaker of the House have made to this 
institution by allowing your names to stand for election to the 
various positions. 
 
So many kind things have been said about both of you already 
in the last couple of days that I’m not sure there’s anything 
more I can add. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s good for 
democracy to have more than one person involved in an 
election. It takes two to have an election, and I want to 
commend you and the Speaker for allowing your names to 
stand for the respective positions for which you were selected. 
 
I’d like to also mention just in passing that I’ve been in this 
House for less than two years and in that short period of time 
we have already had three Speakers. So it stands to reason that 
more of us will get a chance at that position over the next 
decade or so. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I listened intently to the Speech from the 
Throne a couple of days ago hoping to hear some clear 
delineation of this government’s plan for the immediate future 
of this province. I was deeply disappointed. What I did hear was 
a recitation of well-worn platitudes and maybe even a little 
political rhetoric. What was missing was the pronouncement of 
any focused strategy to allow this province to become what it so 
clearly has the potential to be. 
 
I heard a restatement of past promises that are as yet unkept. I 
heard credit being taken for projects and expenditures that 

haven’t happened as yet, and allowances made for policies that 
have clearly failed. I heard thundering silence on issues of 
tremendous importance to the future of this province, and only 
passing acknowledgement of several others. 
 
This Speech from the Throne, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was long on 
rhetoric but short on substance. It did not set out a vision for the 
province or its future but borrowed heavily on the past. The 
speech was bereft of new ideas and short on leadership. It failed 
in just about every area with one possible exception and that is 
the twinning of the No. 1 Highway West from Tompkins to the 
Alberta border. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe it’s important to give credit 
where credit is due, and so I want to say to the government that 
I welcome this initiative and appreciate its promise to deal with 
this problem stretch of road in a timely fashion. Even on this 
point though, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to remind the 
members of this Assembly, the public at large, and the 
provincial media that the promise to twin the No. 1 Highway 
West in four years is not a new idea. It’s a long overdue idea 
that has cost dozens of people their lives to bring to fruition — 
26 people died on this stretch of road known as suicide alley 
from 1987 to 1998, and 350 more were injured. In the past 
couple of years, several more people have paid the price of lost 
lives, a reality which has become all too common on No. 1 
West. 
 
Just last year in April, one of the most horrific accidents ever 
happened along that stretch of road between the junction at 121, 
north of Maple Creek and the town of Piapot. The tally from 
that incident included three dead and five more injured. And I 
would like to recount the chain of events as best I can for this 
House as a result of an accident scene reconstruction by experts 
in such matters. This reconstruction was just recently released 
to the public, and I would like to quote from the Maple Creek 
Advance Times edition of last week, dated 19 March: 
 

Experts have pieced together the chain of events which led 
to a grisly, multi-vehicle accident. The five-vehicle 
collision occurred on April 14, 2000, approximately 16 
kilometres west of Maple Creek. 
 
The scene for the accident was apparently set when a 
snowplow was clearing snow on the north shoulder of the 
No. 1 Highway. A gentle wind was blowing from the 
northeast to the southwest at the time, but it was not 
sufficient to quickly disperse the airborne snow particles. 
 
The weather conditions at the time were preserved on 
videotape by a trucker who came upon the accident 
immediately after it happened. The film footage provided 
information which accident reconstructionists could not 
obtain due to the time required to reach the actual scene. 
 
A westbound semi, with a B-train carrying 80,000 pounds, 
drove into the whiteout conditions and slowed down. 
 
A westbound pickup truck, en route to a nearby residence, 
then entered the whiteout and collided with the rear of that 
B-train. The driver of the fully loaded B-train, who was 
slowing at the time, never felt the impact and continued 
west, unaware a series of deadly collisions was about to 



160 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

occur. 
 
It’s believed the driver of an empty passenger bus, which 
was being delivered to Calgary, saw the pickup and 
swerved into the oncoming lane in an attempt to avoid 
rear-ending the half-ton truck. However, the bus caught the 
corner of the truck box, causing significant damage to the 
driver’s side of the pickup. 
 
At the same time, an eastbound semi, loaded with hogs, 
entered the whiteout from the west, and collided with the 
bus. A second eastbound semi, a Sears transport truck, then 
collided with the hog truck, causing the vehicles to crumple 
in accordion fashion before the bus was driven backwards 
by the force of the impact. In a matter of seconds, the bus 
went from travelling west to being catapulted back east. 

 
(21:15) 
 

A second westbound bus also en route to Calgary followed 
the lead bus and crossed into the oncoming lane however 
the force of the collision with the two semi trucks 
catapulted the lead bus backwards and right into the path of 
the oncoming bus. Both bus drivers were killed although 
the driver of the lead bus was ejected and found on the 
shoulder of the highway and he died later. 
 
Experts believe the driver of the hog truck was killed upon 
impact. A fuel tank on the semi ruptured creating a fire that 
engulfed all the vehicles except the pickup which was 
pulled out of the flaming wreckage by the first motorist 
who came upon the scene. Damage on the front of the 
pickup matched the light sequence of the transport trailer 
which led investigators to believe another vehicle was 
involved, most likely a grain trailer. 
 
Over 100 kilometres away, employees at the Dunmore 
weigh scale — Dunmore, Alberta — noticed something 
hanging from the rear of the B-train and informed the 
driver. The operator discovered part of a block heater cord 
and pieces of a pickup grill on the rear of the trailer. The 
driver immediately notified the RCMP (Royal Canadian 
Mounted Police) and later that afternoon two Transport 
Canada personnel and RCMP Sgt. Murray Klatt drove to 
Dunmore. The team also found tempered glass from the 
pickup on the side of the trailer. 
 
It was at Dunmore where they first learned a snowplow had 
been involved. Klatt, who works in traffic collision 
analysis, said the snowplow was simply doing its job and 
visibility may have been improved if the wind had been 
blowing stronger and dispersed snow particles which 
became airborne. Klatt said seven fatalities in one year is a 
high number of deaths for a short section of highway 
stretching from the Alberta border to Tompkins. He goes 
on to say that the first responders in Maple Creek need a 
big pat on the back. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I wanted to read this into the record today 
because it shows clearly how horrendous that particular 
accident was on the stretch of road known as suicide alley. It 
also indicates clearly that twinning that stretch of road may 
have prevented that particular accident. Twinning will not 

prevent all accidents; we need to make that clear. But twinning 
will prevent serious head-on collisions of this type and will save 
lives. Too many people have suffered the consequences of 
direct head-on collisions on that piece of road. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Deputy Speaker, I’m sorry, the government’s 
promise to twin the No. 1 Highway West is a direct result of the 
accident that I just detailed for this House. An emergency 
debate that was conducted in this House last April under Rule 
46. Now at that time I introduced a motion which read as 
follows: 
 

That this Assembly, in light of yet another tragedy on the 
untwinned portion of the TransCanada Highway in 
Saskatchewan, urges the provincial government and federal 
government to immediately develop a plan to complete the 
twinning of No. 1 within three years, and that the 
transcripts of this debate this afternoon be sent to the Prime 
Minister, the federal Minister of Transportation, all 
Saskatchewan members of parliament, and all federal party 
leaders in the House of Commons. 

 
The then Minister of Highways, the member from Meadow 
Lake, seconded the motion, but an amendment was put forward 
by the member from North Battleford essentially changing it to 
include twinning of all of the No. 1 Highway, both east and 
west, as well as Highway 16 over a period of not three, but four 
years. That motion was passed unanimously. 
 
As you can plainly see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the twinning idea 
has been around for some time, in fact enjoying the unanimous 
support of this House less than a year ago. As a result of the 
Throne Speech, we have partial fulfilment of that agreement 
from nearly one year ago. Albeit we still don’t have the half 
share of funding from the federal government, but we only 
achieved one-third of the project in that promise. So while I’m 
happy to accept the government’s intention with regard to the 
western portion, it has fallen short of its own support of last 
year’s motion. I believe the public needs to be aware of this 
detail which might otherwise be lost in the euphoria of this 
Throne Speech promise. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are many good reasons for the 
decision by the NDP government to forge ahead with the 
western section of this highway over and above, of course, the 
tragic death and injury statistics. Some of the reasons why the 
government may want to proceed with the western leg of this 
twinning project include the ease of land assembly for the 
project. A lot of the land along that particular stretch of road is 
Crown land; and of course, the government pays very little to 
assemble Crown land for a Crown project. So in effect the cost 
of doing that portion of highway will be considerably lessened 
by that factor 
 
Another interesting contribution to their decision might be the 
fact that yard sites of ranches and farms along that stretch of 
road are set quite a distance back from the right-of-way, so 
again it would be less costly and much less difficult for the 
government to proceed with that project. Negotiations often get 
rigorous and difficult when you have to relocate yards. There’s 
the relative ease of construction in that particular area, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. There are no major topographical obstacles to 
the project and I think that that would have considerably 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 161 

 

lessened the cost once again and certainly would allow the 
timetable to be kept. 
 
And quite possibly the most important and final reason in my 
estimation is the psychological justifications of doing the 
western end of No. 1. Not only will people see the highway as 
safer, but the government won’t have to put up with those 
comments about knowing when you’ve arrived in 
Saskatchewan by the worsening highway and driving 
conditions. The psychological factor is very important, and I 
believe members in the Department of Highways have agreed 
that that was a contributing factor to the decision to do Highway 
No. 1 West. 
 
As I said earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, twinning the No. 1 
Highway will not in itself eliminate the potential for serious 
accidents, but it will greatly minimize the potential for serious, 
life-taking, head-on mishaps. I want to quote anecdotally a 
member of the RCMP from the town of Gull Lake who I had a 
conversation with in this regard just recently. 
 
That gentleman told me that since the highway was twinned 
from the town of Gull Lake west to just past the town of 
Tompkins, he has found the workload diminished significantly. 
He’s not indicating that there are less accidents, but what he is 
saying is that the results from the accidents are much less 
debilitating, much less serious. And as a consequence, the 
heavy workload and onerousness of the workload has been 
transferred to the RCMP detachment in Maple Creek which still 
has to attend to the kinds of accidents we talked about earlier 
tonight. 
 
With regard to other highway initiatives, the Throne Speech is 
mute except to say that spending will be at an all-time high. No 
specifics are mentioned. No plan is proposed. The Highways 
and Transportation Amendment Act which will be introduced 
as part of a broader, truck-route, management strategy, 
according to the speech, does have me concerned about the 
wisdom of alternate route proposals, their costs, and the impact 
this concept will have on all of rural Saskatchewan. I can see no 
good coming out of such a proposal, not in the short term and 
certainly not in the long run. It’s a recipe for costly disaster, 
with RM councils and taxpayers ultimately bearing the largest 
portion of maintenance costs for roads that ought to have been 
the responsibility of the provincial government through the 
Department of Highways. 
 
There is much more I’d like to add about the highway 
discussion arising from the Throne Speech, but due to time 
constraints I want to move on to some other very important 
areas that need to be mentioned on behalf of the people of 
Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, agriculture, so often said to be the number 
one industry in Saskatchewan, had so little said about it in the 
Throne Speech. The government’s initiatives in this area are 
woefully inadequate. I don’t know if you’re aware of it, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, but the word agriculture is used one time, only 
once in the entire Throne Speech. I think that’s quite alarming 
considering the impact that agriculture has and the role it plays 
in the provincial economy. The fact that it was only mentioned 
once was brought to my attention, coincidentally, by some 
individuals who visited this particular Chamber to hear the 

Throne Speech from the community of Leader. 
 
There was a school group of grade 8’s that were brought here. 
They participated in the event, they watched the procedures 
from the galleries and were quite entranced by the pomp and 
ceremony and circumstance of that particular event. But after 
the formalities were over, when I had a chance to visit with the 
students and their tutors and drivers and teachers, one of the 
first things that they said to me was: where is agriculture in this 
Throne Speech? We didn’t hear it. 
 
Now these are young people and these are adults whose lives 
depend on agriculture and to have the government completely 
disregard the significance of that industry in a Speech from the 
Throne in view of the difficulties facing that industry at this 
time is just incomprehensible. I can’t believe a government in 
good conscience could be that deleterious in their responsibility. 
I think this is an indication that the government of the day, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, talks a lot about agriculture but does very 
little, and in fact they didn’t even talk about it in the Throne 
Speech. 
 
One of the issues that is brought to my attention frequently 
through my constituency office is the failures of the AIDA 
program. If I could count the number of calls that have come to 
my office on that one issue alone, I think I would be in the 
several dozen area. AIDA has been a colossal failure. You, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, have heard that before I’m sure in this House, 
and I’m sure members opposite must be aware of it from all the 
times we’ve raised it, not that many of them would have had 
calls on the issue, but nevertheless it is a significant issue in my 
constituency. 
 
There is tremendous frustration among the farming populous of 
this province with the program commonly known as AIDA. Not 
only does it not work adequately here but the individual farmers 
who have made time available to apply, who have paid the cost 
of an application, who have forked out considerable dollars to 
their accountants to make sure the applications were done 
properly in accordance with the rules and regulations, have been 
absolutely appalled by the level of knowledge exhibited by 
people in the AIDA office. So many of those farmers who have 
made application have been harassed, frankly, by individuals 
working in the AIDA office, calling them for additional 
information. It is frustrating beyond belief to be called many, 
many times on the same issue with the most absurd kinds of 
questions that anybody with just a rudimentary knowledge of 
agriculture would already know. 
 
I would like to ask — not that this government is able to do 
much about it except exercise some influence — I would like to 
ask what kind of people are hired, what knowledge 
requirements are expected of the people who work in the AIDA 
office? What do they have to know about agriculture to qualify 
for a job there? 
 
It’s evident from the calls I’m getting that the individuals 
working in the AIDA office don’t know much about the subject, 
frankly. And some of the questions get to the point of being 
bizarre, if not uninformed. 
 
One of the other things that has been brought to my attention as 
it concerns AIDA, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the blatant 



162 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

unreliability of the program and the disparity of the program. 
 
I’d like to tell you just briefly the story of a gentleman in my 
constituency who I’ve asked his permission to name in this 
speech tonight — Mr. Alan Dumontel. Farms in the area of 
Claydon, which is in the extreme southwest of my constituency. 
He is a very frustrated and unhappy man today as it concerns 
AIDA. 
 
Here is a man who’s spent considerable sums of money having 
his accountants fill out the forms. Here is a man who believed 
once the documents were filled out that he would be receiving 
some financial support from the program. Here is a man who 
was in need of the kind of support that would be forthcoming 
based on his accountant’s best estimates. 
 
This is a man who got a cheque from the AIDA office in the 
first year of his application for $17,000. He spent the money 
quickly; paying bills that had accumulated from his operation 
over the previous season. 
 
The second year he applied once again and was told he would 
qualify for funding. True to form, AIDA sent him a cheque for 
$11,000. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, only days following receipt of the second 
cheque, Mr. Dumontel got a call from the AIDA office saying 
that they had miscalculated his apportionment, and a letter 
demanding full repayment of the $28,000, plus — adding insult 
to injury — interest due immediately. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, a program that works like that is not only 
unfair to farmers, it is tantamount to psychological abuse. I 
can’t think of any other way to describe it. A program that 
would do that to individuals, set them up and allow them to fall, 
is just unbelievable. And I don’t believe that we as a provincial 
government, as people concerned about individuals in the 
agricultural industry, should stand for that kind of a situation. 
And I would urge the government to address the issue as best 
they can so that these kinds of things don’t happen again. 
 
Now we hear talk about the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program) which in pejorative terms is known as the son of 
AIDA or any other close relative. And we feel that particular 
program is a potential minefield. I feel that very definitely from 
my constituents. I know there are some who think any help is 
worth trying to get and is better than nothing at all, but if this 
program works no better than AIDA did, I can’t in good 
conscience support it, and I’m just wondering where the 
government stands on this. 
 
We see clearly the necessity for changes to the program before 
we can support it. We don’t want Saskatchewan’s involvement 
in CFIP without some changes to it. But we hope also that the 
minister does not back us into a corner on this one by making 
our involvement provincially an either/or proposition. 
 
As I mentioned earlier, agriculture got short shrift in the Throne 
Speech. And while I find that disturbing, I think that we need to 
make it plainly and keenly clear to this government that there 
are other issues beginning to develop in the agricultural industry 

that are going to have to be addressed at some point. I’m 
thinking most specifically, as was referred to by the member 
from the side opposite, about the potential for drought in 
western Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the potential for drought is not the right 
word. Unless we get major, major wet snowfall or early spring 
rains, we will be in the midst of a serious drought. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, right now there is a dearth of moisture in the Cypress 
Hills constituency. We have ranchers who have experienced 
completely dry dugouts for this past winter going back to last 
summer. 
 
We have dams that have not had any water run into them for a 
couple of years now. We have ranchers who are actually buying 
water from commercial outlets. Some even have bought water 
from the city of Medicine Hat and have had it trucked to their 
ranches in order for their cattle to have the water necessary for 
survival this past winter. We are in the midst of what could 
become a very critical drought-related problem in the 
southwest. 
 
Right now the problem is most acute in the immediate area of 
Maple Creek, in the region of Golden Prairie, north of Maple 
Creek, and in the far south around Consul and Govenlock. And 
right now there are several RMs already declared as 
drought-affected and several more which are applying to the 
federal government for drought-affected status. 
 
This leads me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the cover conservation 
program that was announced with little fanfare in the Throne 
Speech. I would like to say tonight that this program is what I 
would call a small step, a small incremental step in the right 
direction. But larger acreages, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are 
seriously required to accomplish the benefits foreseen for the 
cattle industry. The question I would like to ask the Minister of 
Agriculture, Minister of Agriculture through your Chair, is how 
many years will it take for this program to provide any 
significant benefit to the expanded cowherd in Saskatchewan. A 
minimum of 5 acres, a maximum of 50 acres, a four-year 
program — as you can see, we’re not going to get much land 
into cover crop situations given those kind of limitations. Fifty 
acres is simply not enough to turn some of the needs of ranchers 
into reality into terms of an expanded cowherd. It isn’t enough. 
 
In fact, I had, I would say, eight . . . seven or eight ranchers and 
farmers waiting for clear indications of what this program 
would entail. They’ve been asking me about this program since 
it was announced in last spring’s session. I remember the 
deputy premier at that time indicated that we would have a 
cover program and ever since that time, people have just been 
waiting anxiously to hear what the provisions of that program 
might be. My office, when we got the details, phoned every one 
of those constituents and gave them a clear breakdown on what 
the expected remunerations might be and what the total 
acreages might be. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What did they say, Wayne? 
 
Mr. Elhard: — It’s impolite for me to say at this time what 
their response was, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It would be 
unparliamentary as a minimum, and maybe just hilarious on the 
other hand. However, having said that, maybe the best response 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 163 

 

I got from one individual was, “Fifty acres? Are you kidding? 
That’s not enough for me to turn my machinery around.” Now 
we have big ranches and big farms in the southwest. Fifty acres 
is not much land. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to turn now to the issue of rural 
revitalization. This is one of the most critical areas facing the 
provincial government, I believe, and in view of the importance 
of rural revitalization and the initiatives that could be 
undertaken by such a department, I find it disappointing that it’s 
been instituted as a mere secretariat. The significance of this 
particular issue really required a full-fledged ministry. 
Furthermore it required a full-fledged minister. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to see you’re back on the throne and I’m 
sure that you’ll enjoy the rest of my speech as much as the 
Deputy Speaker enjoyed the first part. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Start over. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — As a matter of fact I understand that some of 
the members opposite enjoyed the speech so much they are 
encouraging me to start over, which I’d be happy to do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an important issue and I don’t want to 
minimize the importance of it with levity right now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I must admit that the appointment of the current 
Minister of Rural Revitalization has a certain bitter irony about 
it for the people of Cypress Hills, indeed all of rural 
Saskatchewan. This minister has a track record, Mr. Speaker. 
This minister has a history that spoke volumes about her 
commitment to the well-being of rural Saskatchewan. 
 
This minister has been the undoing of much of the vitality of 
rural Saskatchewan as a former Health minister. She was the 
one who presided over the closure of many rural hospital beds, 
who cut services in community after community, who 
underfunded the health districts, and who commissioned the 
EMS (emergency medical services) report which has raised 
further fears about ambulance availability in small-town 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Minister of Highways and Rural 
Revitalization has a record in the country and it’s not a good 
one. The massive groan, which was raised from the reaches 
beyond Ring Road when word of her appointment was heard, 
was not one of anticipation, but one of disdain. The people of 
rural Saskatchewan know that if she does for rural revitalization 
what she did for health care, there won’t be a vital sign left in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Proof of my assertion, Mr. Speaker, was heard this afternoon in 
question period when we asked her to reconsider her 
department’s plans for alternate truck routes in the region 
around Vanguard while letting the highway suffer from 
continued neglect. What was her response, Mr. Speaker? Not a 
willingness to look at the situation for possibly better solutions, 
not an admission that things could be done differently or with 
more efficiency. She indicated that the department was going to 
go ahead with this absurd plan without any regard to the 
negative impact it will have on the residents and businesses in 
that area. The businesses don’t count when it comes to 

decisions by this minister on behalf of the NDP government. 
And rural revitalization is just another pretty word for lip 
service to the problems facing rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was appalled with the minister’s first response to 
the issues of rural Saskatchewan when I heard her interviewed 
following her swearing-in as Minister of Highways and Rural 
Revitalization. I heard her say, clearly, that cell service was the 
first thing that came to her mind when she was asked about 
rural revitalization. 
 
Of all the desperate needs crying for the attention of this 
government, cell service is not the first priority in rural 
Saskatchewan, nor is high-speed Internet. Both of those features 
might be nice, Mr. Speaker, but what is this government doing 
for the real problems that exist right now? What really are the 
priorities of this government? 
 
Rural revitalization requires dependable infrastructure, 
especially highways and working railways. Rural revitalization 
requires policies that encourage people to stay in smaller 
communities and further encourages people to relocate there. 
Rural revitalization demands that policies be put in place to 
make it easier to do business, not more difficult. And, Mr. 
Speaker, services need to be maintained in smaller 
communities, not steadily eroded or eliminated. 
 
Crown corporations need to encourage expansion opportunities 
with realistic costs for services. This particular issue has been 
alluded to by several of my colleagues. The member from 
Humboldt addressed it directly in her response to the Speech 
from the Throne. I have had several constituents appeal to my 
office for my intervention because of the outrageous costs 
associated with expansion projects that they had proposed for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In one instance, I can think of a rancher who was looking to add 
another yard site to his operation, from which he would feed 
cattle. An expanded cattle industry is something that’s 
important to this province. It’s even part of your own 
government’s plans for agriculture expansion and 
diversification. I know that as a matter of fact. But when this 
gentleman wanted to put in a second site for feeding cattle, 
when he approached SaskPower to see what it would cost him 
to bring electricity to that particular site, he was quoted 
somewhere in the range of $20,000. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, you can understand that $20,000 is a 
prohibitive amount of money, and it’s unacceptable for this 
government to talk about rural revitalization as though they own 
the subject on one hand while on the other hand the agencies of 
this government are quoting outrageous amounts of money for 
installations of SaskPower. 
 
I want to give you another example, Mr. Speaker, another 
rancher just south of my community — and I find this very 
disturbing — another rancher just south of my community 
phoned SaskPower and asked about a similar installation. This 
individual had to run a power line less than two miles, but it 
would again allow for a significant increase in his operational 
capabilities which would be good for that individual and for 
Saskatchewan generally. When he asked the representative from 
SaskPower for a cost estimate, the individual on the other end 



164 Saskatchewan Hansard March 26, 2001 

 

of the line said, $40,000. When the constituent came to my 
office and quoted me that number and told me about his call 
and the response he had gotten I said to him, that’s an 
outrageous figure, go back to SaskPower and demand a quote in 
writing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a result of having suggested that to him the 
constituent did just that and got a quote in writing for exactly 
half of the amount. The written quote was $20,000; the verbal 
quote had been 40. If my constituent had not gone back and 
asked for written confirmation he’d have believed to this day 
that it cost $40,000 to run a power line less than two miles in 
rural Saskatchewan. There cannot be appropriate or extensive 
rural revitalization when the Crowns are making those kinds of 
estimates and sometimes just pulling numbers out of the air. 
That is a very negative and debilitating response to the real 
needs of people in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the high cost of natural gas and electricity has 
another important and undermining affect in rural 
Saskatchewan today. Social costs to a community are about to 
get higher with the latest rounds of utility cost increases. 
Increases to SaskPower rates and natural gas costs are going to 
force several community arenas to close or severely curtail their 
activities. 
 
(21:45) 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, most of those arenas in small town 
Saskatchewan run on the basis of volunteer labour and local 
fund raising efforts to just keep their doors open. They’re not 
money-making projects. They just barely scrape by. But utility 
costs have doubled over the past several months for most of 
those arenas putting them at unsustainable levels. 
 
These not-for-profit facilities are the social centres of many 
small towns in the winter and they get by on just a shoestring. 
And today as a result of the horrific increases in the power and 
natural gas costs, the recreation centres in Eastend, in Frontier, 
in the town of Cabri, in the town of Leader, are all under severe 
financial pressure. And others are just as likely to be hurt by 
this turn of events. A brand new complex in the town of Maple 
Creek may be put in jeopardy because of unexpectedly 
high-operational costs even before it is built. Mr. Speaker, if 
rural revitalization really is an important element in this 
government’s agenda, let it take the initiative to address the 
impossible situation these arenas and other not-for-profit 
facilities face each and every day. 
 
There are other areas too that could be addressed, Mr. Speaker, 
but will no doubt escape the attention of the less than friendly 
anti-business minds of the government members opposite. We 
have reassessment activities which are making rural hotels 
unsustainable business ventures in the communities of Leader, 
Maple Creek, and Cabri. 
 
Mr. Speaker, using as an yet undecipherable formula, the 
Saskatchewan Assessment Management Authority has 
arbitrarily increased assessments on property owners in the 
communities aforementioned, making their take burden 
impossibly high. Room rents will have to go up to the hundreds 
of dollars per night of use to even allow recovery of the 
increased tax bill. Now I ask you the question, Mr. Speaker, 

what kind of effect will that have on business in rural 
Saskatchewan? Who on the government side will take 
responsibility for the revitalization of those businesses? 
 
In a similar vain, Mr. Speaker, the new owner of the motel in 
the community of Leader wrote to the Saskatchewan Federation 
of Independent Business seeking their assistance to resolve a 
tax matter which came quite unexpectedly with his recent 
purchase of the property. And I would like to quote for the 
record, Mr. Speaker, some of the concerns outlined in this 
particular example by the CFIB (Canadian Federation of 
Independent Business) to our finance critic, the member from 
Canora-Pelly. And I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

In your capacity as finance critic, I thought it important for 
you to be aware of our members’ concerns. (This letter as I 
mentioned was written by the CFIB to . . . I’m sorry to our 
Finance critic from Canora-Pelly). I am therefore enclosing 
for your information and interest a copy of correspondence 
I received from our member who owns a motel in Leader 
and which outlines the concerns regarding Saskatchewan’s 
fees and licences. 
 

This gentleman recently moved from Spruce Grove, Alberta, 
and purchased a motel in Leader. Mr. Speaker, that ought to be 
good news. That ought to be good news. I haven’t heard 
anybody cheering from the side opposite. 
 
In his correspondence however he notes the difference of fees in 
Alberta and Saskatchewan as it relates to land titles registration 
and mortgage fees. He paid $1,116 in registration of transfer of 
land and $836 in registration of mortgage at the Land Titles 
Office in Saskatchewan. As well on top of the fees, this 
gentleman received a letter from Saskatchewan Finance 
requesting him to fill out a business assets declaration form to 
charge him PST on used goods including business assets. In a 
letter to us, this gentleman states, and I quote again, “If I had 
known this, I would not have closed this sale. This motel would 
still be for sale, and it would most definitely not have been 
purchased by a person from Alberta. What has happened to this 
province? It is obviously not open for business,” and then in 
bold print the word “Help.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, that last line or that last word help speaks 
volumes, I think, about what business people in this province 
are feeling. And I would like to just conclude this particular 
example in preparation for moving adjournment tonight. This 
individual in a separate letter indicates that he sold a business 
worth $312,000 before coming to Saskatchewan and paid a 
grand total of $400 in fees. Now you compare that to nearly 
$2000 in fees for a sale significantly lesser in value in this 
province. 
 
Once again, rural revitalization is in peril because of the 
inequities between Saskatchewan and other jurisdictions in 
simple business transactions. I think the owner’s plaintive cry 
of help is really the telling item here. Businessmen and women 
throughout Saskatchewan — whether they be in a store, on a 
farm, or anywhere in between — are crying help. Rural 
revitalization is higher on their agenda than it is on the agenda 
of this government, Mr. Speaker, but no one is listening. 
There’s just more lip service being paid to the matter. 
 



March 26, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 165 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’m only part way through my speech tonight, but 
it’s getting late, and I know that the white flag is being waved 
across the way. So I would move that we adjourn the debate for 
tonight. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:51. 
 
 


