















































Hansard: July 05, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2347 
 July 5, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today I have a 
pile of petitions from people right across my constituency who 
are concerned about the Fyke report and the effect these 
recommendations are going to have on health care in our 
constituency: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Kelvington health 
care centre be maintained at its current level, offering 
24-hour acute care, emergency and physician services, and 
that laboratory, physiotherapy, public health, home care, 
and long-term care services be readily accessible to users 
from Kelvington and district. 
 

The people who have signed these petitions are from Rose 
Valley, Archerwill, Kelvington, Lintlaw, and Nut Mountain. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present 19 petitions signed by citizens concerned with the 
condition of Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from all over southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about the EMS (emergency medical services) report. 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Radville, Kelvington, 
Sturgis, Oungre. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present regarding the EMS service in the province. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Storthoaks, 
Fertile, Redvers, and Antler area. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today dealing with health care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, and long-term care services 
available to the users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from Storthoaks, Carnduff, 
Redvers, Bellegarde, Alida, Wakaw, Regina, Antler, Maryfield, 
Fairlight, Gainsborough, and a number of places across 
Saskatchewan and Manitoba, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about high utility 
rates. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide more 
substantial power and energy relief to Saskatchewan 
customers. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Paynton, Battleford, North 
Battleford, and Delmas, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to do with the lack of funding to non-profit personal care 
homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Bangor, 



2348 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

Stockholm, Churchbridge, and Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here signed by 
the citizens concerned about the high energy costs of 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Regina, Saskatoon, and 
Elbow. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again I rise in the Assembly to bring forth a petition for the 
improvement of cellular telephone coverage in the 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood constituency. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood, from Leoville, from Shell Lake, and Mildred. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are petitions of citizens of the provinces on eight matters 
that are tabled as addendums to previously tabled sessional 
papers. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it gives me great pleasure today 
to introduce to you some special people in my life who are in 
your gallery today. My mom, Cherry Lackey from Weyburn; 
and my niece, Dayna Ryan, and her children Brendan, 
Katherine, and Lauren. 
 
And they’re here to visit with us today and see and observe in 
the House, so I’d like all members to help me welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 

to introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly today, Mr. Ken Miller who’s seated in the east 
gallery, accompanied by his son Ben. 
 
Mr. Miller is one of our farmers from southwest of Avonlea. He 
raises cattle, and particularly Belgian Blue cattle. Ken is the 
past president of the Canadian Belgian Blue Association and 
presently the manager of that association. One of the fellows 
who keeps rural Saskatchewan going out there. 
 
His son, Ben, is attending grade 10 at Avonlea High School. 
 
I hope that all members will welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to other members of the 
Assembly a constituent of mine sitting in your gallery, Mr. Ken 
Rauch, who as many members will know is quite a keen and 
astute follower of Saskatchewan politics. 
 
And I’d like other members to join with me in welcoming Ken 
to the Assembly here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of this Assembly 
a guest in your gallery. Mr. Charles Day is the president of 
Battlefords Community Cablevision. 
 
They employ about 25 full-time staff, Mr. Speaker, and a 
number of summer students as well. And they provide cable 
service of course in the Battlefords, Biggar, Kindersley, 
Rosetown, Unity, Wilkie, Lashburn, Maidstone, and Meadow 
Lake. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I just ask all members to join with me in 
welcoming Mr. Day to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Big Sky Farms Opens New Hog Operation 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday I had the opportunity along with 500 other 
individuals to attend the grand opening ceremony of Big Sky 
Farms latest hog operation near Rama — their fifth such 
project. 
 
This 5,000-sow operation has six barns in total and it is 
expected to produce about 120,000 pigs per year. Also this 
operation will employ 40 people year round in the Rama and 
Hazel Dell areas, with an annual payroll of $1.4 million. 
 
Local farmers will also benefit from this operation since about 
800,000 bushels of feed grain will be required for a large feed 
mill being constructed at a seventh location also near Rama. 
Needless to say, this will be for the most part a benefit for my 
constituency. 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2349 

 

However, Mr. Speaker, such a large hog operation does not 
come without a great deal of controversy. Since this idea was 
presented to area residents a few years ago, some have become 
concerned about matters with health and the environment, many 
of which I have raised with the Minister of Agriculture. 
Residents living in the immediate area of the barns are 
concerned with potential air, ground, and water pollution. It will 
be the task of Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food to ensure 
that these concerns are addressed with the utmost safety and 
well-being of area residents in mind, now and in the future. 
 
I would like to extend my congratulations to the members of the 
Rama Hog Ventures Committee for their vision and 
commitment to this idea. I would especially like to recognize 
two members of that committee. Louis Korchenski and Lorne 
Matsalla are two area farmers who have dedicated much of their 
time in ensuring that this dream has become reality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of this legislature to join me in 
congratulating Big Sky Farms on the opening of their new 
operation near Rama and wish them the best of luck in their 
future endeavours. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Birth Announcement 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to tell this House and people that are watching us 
some more good news in Saskatchewan. And I just want to 
point . . . it’s not about health care or highways or economic 
development, Mr. Speaker but another subject that the 
opposition likes to talk about and that’s the Saskatchewan 
population. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the opposition has all kinds of reports from 
all kinds of agencies but I would like to tell them about a report 
I received last night at 10:50 and it came from Melville hospital 
and not in a brown envelope, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last night, July 4, at 10:50 p.m. my daughter, Kim 
Osika-Schick gave birth to my second grandchild, a boy, Colby 
Ron Osika-Schick who weighed in at 8 pounds and 5 ounces 
thereby solidifying the city of Melville’s status as a city and 
adding one more to the population of this great province of 
ours, Saskatchewan. 
 
Needless to say, my wife Barb and I are thrilled and I look 
forward to meeting the newest member of our family tomorrow. 
 
And you know something, Mr. Speaker, we talked about this, 
these marvellous events in our lifetime, and it’s as if the circle 
of life in my family has been completed. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Aurora Karate Club Recognized in 
Guinness Book of World Records 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I appreciate the 
enthusiastic applause from the government. 

Mr. Speaker, I rise this afternoon to bring our Hon. Assembly 
some interesting news of an extraordinary event that took place 
last Saturday, June 30, in the village of Paddockwood. The 
village needed their old museum demolished and acquired the 
services of the Prince Albert Aurora Karate Club for their 
assistance in this endeavour. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Aurora Karate Club had already achieved 
worldwide acclaim for their demolition abilities as they were 
already recognized by the Guinness Book of World Records for 
their speed of demolition for a 1996 event. Approximately 500 
people attended the demolition, Mr. Speaker, but the most 
notable attendee was a camera crew from the television series, 
Ripley’s Believe It or Not! The camera crew from the United 
States were on hand as the karate club tried to set a new record 
in the demolition of a condemned building. 
 
Although the walls were built of double reinforced lumber and 
contained twice as many nails as today’s modern structures, the 
museum did indeed come down in record time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the old record of three hours and six minutes 
established in Watson was easily beaten by a new time of two 
hours and thirteen minutes. The demolition will be aired in 
October, Mr. Speaker, for the viewing of all members. 
 
But more importantly, Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to 
join me in congratulating the Prince Albert Aurora Karate Club 
on establishing themselves once again in the Guinness Book of 
World Records. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

IPSCO Joins Aboriginal Employment Program 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the Premier, Roger 
Phillips, and the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs signed an 
important agreement on Aboriginal employment. Including 
Saskatchewan’s growing Aboriginal population in a meaningful 
and constructive way in Saskatchewan’s bright future is a goal 
that this government is committed to achieving. And we want to 
ensure that Aboriginal people are fully able to participate in and 
contribute to the social and economic fabric of this province. 
 
The Government of Saskatchewan’s Aboriginal Employment 
Development Program is helping achieve this goal. To date, the 
Aboriginal Employment Development Program has helped over 
900 Aboriginal people find employment across Saskatchewan. 
This program allows Aboriginal people to compete for jobs 
based on their skills and qualifications. The goal is to have a 
proportional number of Aboriginals, based on the numbers in 
the province’s population, employed at all occupational levels. 
 
And yesterday, IPSCO Saskatchewan became the 32nd partner 
to join the Aboriginal Employment Development Program. This 
new partnership will ensure that IPSCO’s workplace will 
become more accessible to Aboriginal people. IPSCO will also 
be working with the Aboriginal community to promote 
employment opportunities and to provide training linked to 
employment. 
 



2350 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate IPSCO for becoming 
involved in such a worthy partnership. Initiatives like this will 
enable Saskatchewan’s workplaces to become more inclusive 
and attractive places to be. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Hafford Central Athletes Earn Silver at Provincials 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations are 
in order for Hafford Central’s Wendy Linnell and Joleen 
Saccucci who returned with silver medals from the Provincial 
Track and Field held in Yorkton’s Century Field on June 1 and 
2. This is the first year the provincial track and field meet was 
held in Yorkton. Over 1,000 high school track and field 
superstars flooded the hotel and restaurant chains in the city for 
this two-day event. 
 
Two students were able to represent Hafford Central on the 
central district team to participate in this final climb to track and 
field stardom. A grade 9 student in junior athletics, Joleen 
Saccucci shows outstanding upper body strength and promise 
for future medals in competitive field events. Joleen obtained a 
provincial silver standing in shot put and remains in the junior 
category for another year. 
 
Four silver medals were achieved in each of the track and field 
events Wendy Linnell participated in. A grade 10 student at 
Hafford Central, Wendy is another young athlete who shows 
tremendous promise. Her long legs and endurance do well for 
her in long-distance running and jumping events. Her ambition 
and stamina give foundation to her great athletic prowess. 
Wendy received a silver standing in the 800 metre, 1,500 metre 
long distance runs, and silver medals in long and triple jump — 
outstanding. 
 
And once again congratulations to Wendy and Joleen. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Star Wars Proposal by United States 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I rise today to express my opposition to the United 
States government’s proposals to build a missile defence shield 
commonly referred to as Star Wars. 
 
If constructed, the US (United States) Star Wars plan will 
violate the anti-ballistic missile treaty and has the potential to 
trigger another round of nuclear weapons proliferation. It also 
threatens to damage relations between the United States and 
both China and the Soviet Union. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the position that the Government of Canada takes 
on Star Wars will be extremely important because if approved 
the Star Wars technology will become a central part of our 
NORAD (North American Aerospace Defence Command) 
operations. 
 
The former minister of External Affairs, Mr. Lloyd Axworthy, 
was a strong opponent of Star Wars, and it is important that the 
federal government be urged to maintain that strong position 
when a final decision on Star Wars is made. 

It is thus urgent that citizens press Ottawa to reject the US Star 
Wars plan. And I’m anxious to support citizens groups who are 
working on this issue. Star Wars involves spending tens of 
billions of dollars on unproven defence shield technology that 
has failed much of the testing done it so far. 
 
I invite all hon. members to think of the potential that exists to 
invest that money instead in measures that will genuinely 
address human needs and build a more peaceful world. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Annual Fête Fransaskoise in Willow Bunch 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday I had a chance to stand and talk about the 11th annual 
German Sommerfest that’s taking place in Humboldt later this 
summer, and today I’m very pleased to stand today and talk 
about the 22nd annual Fête fransaskoise that’s taking place in 
Willow Bunch. And if you’ll permit me, Mr. Speaker, and 
colleagues, I’d like to read a little bit of a description of the Fête 
fransaskoise. 
 
La Fête fransaskoise est un événement culturel majeur, où 
francophones et francophiles se rassemblent pout célébrer et 
promouvoir la vitalité de la culture fransaskoise en 
Saskatchewan. Pour cette occasion, la population francophone 
de la Saskatchewan se réunit dans un climat familial afin de 
développer un sentiment d’appartenance à la communauté 
francais. La Fête offre une occasion idéale aux artistes locaux et 
à ceux des autres provinces de se faire connaître. Chaque année, 
cette célébration accueille au delà de 1000 personnes et quelque 
120 artistes. La 22e Fête fransaskoise se déroulera du vendredi 
3 août au dimanche 5 août 2001 dans le magnifique village de 
Willow Bunch. 
 
(Translation: The Fête fransaskoise is a major annual cultural 
event where Francophones and Francophiles get together to 
celebrate and promote French culture in Saskatchewan. On this 
occasion, Saskatchewan's Francophones gather in a family 
atmosphere to develop a sense of belonging to the French 
community. The Fête provides an ideal opportunity for local 
artists and those from other provinces to make a name for 
themselves. Each year, the Fête welcomes over a thousand 
people and a hundred and twenty artists. The 22nd Fête 
fransaskoise will be held from Friday, August 3 to Sunday, 
August 5, 2001, in the magnificent village of Willow Bunch.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, and colleagues, I hope everybody who’s in the 
area would take in the Fête fransaskoise the first weekend in 
August. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Surgical Waiting Lists 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today my 
question is for the Premier. On March 17, 1999, the NDP’s 
(New Democratic Party) then minister of Health made the 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2351 

 

following announcement, and I will quote: 
 

The government will move quickly to shorten waiting times 
for surgery based on the recommendations of the task team 
on surgical waiting lists. 

 
Today, which is more than two years later, Saskatchewan has 
the longest surgical waiting lists in all of Canada and they are 
getting longer, Mr. Speaker, every day. 
 
Obviously, not only has the NDP not moved to quickly address 
the growing waiting list, but it’s also obvious that the NDP 
hasn’t moved at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier explain to the thousands of 
Saskatchewan families who are suffering on Canada’s longest 
waiting lists why the NDP has failed to take any action to 
shorten surgical waiting times and why things are actually 
getting worse day by day? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a real honour to have the 
Leader of the Opposition ask some health questions. We had a 
whole month of May with questions only on the last day of the 
month about health. So it’s a real honour to have him ask these 
questions. 
 
What we have been doing is we have been working with all of 
the provinces in western Canada around the wait list issue 
because it’s a problem in every one of these provinces that has 
to be addressed. 
 
What we know is that 51 per cent, approximately, of the people 
on the wait list are for ophthalmology — cataracts — or for 
orthopedic hip and knee replacements. That’s about half of 
those numbers. 
 
But what I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, is that if we had 
followed the plan that those members opposite had set out in 
1999, we would have $292 million less in our health budget 
right now. If we took that money out of the acute care area, 
where we spend 784 million that would be a 37 per cent cut in 
acute care right now. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the opposition has been asking dozens and dozens of 
questions on health care. I only remember getting one answer 
and that’s when the Health minister said it was SERM’s 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) fault 
that there was bad water in North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the problem with the NDP is that they glibly 
promise a lot of things, but they don’t deliver. The NDP said 
they would hire nurses. What did they do? They fired nurses. 
Then they said they would reduce waiting lists. I read the quote. 
But now, waiting lists have mushroomed out of control. The 
NDP record on health care is their record, whether they want to 
admit it or not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we found out that the surgical waiting 

lists in Saskatoon have increased by 50 per cent — 50 per cent, 
since 1999. Today, we find out that surgical waiting lists in 
Regina are also at an all-time high. 
 
Will the Premier stand up and admit that his NDP government’s 
management of the health care system has been a complete 
failure? And will he tell the House and Saskatchewan people 
how he plans to pick up the pieces of the NDP’s crumbling 
health care system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have been working with 
many of the challenges in the health care system, but we are 
very proud of the people who work in that system, who have 
provided good care in this province, and they’re continuing to 
work with us to solve the problems. 
 
What we know from the statistics is that Saskatchewan has the 
highest rate of cataract surgery in the country. We’re providing 
more of those surgeries than any other place. But I want to 
remind people that if we had $292 million less in our budget 
this year, which is what those members opposite proposed, then 
we would be not . . . we would not have our home care program 
— $86 million. We wouldn’t have our prescription . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, $292 million. Home care, 
$86 million that would . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, there’s $201 million just in 
the prescription drug plan and home care — that would be all 
gone if their $292 million was taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Minister of Health is pretty shaky on his facts, 
particularly when it comes to the government record. He will 
not like the facts, Mr. Speaker, but the truth is that according to 
the Saskatoon Health District, surgical waiting lists in that city 
have increased by 50 per cent since 1999. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, according to the Dr. Mark Ogrady, 
chief of surgery for the Regina Health District, waiting lists in 
Regina have tripled in just the past four or five years — that’s a 
300 per cent increase. According to Dr. Ogrady, someone 
needing a hip or knee replacement can expect to wait up to two 
years, by far the longest waiting time in the entire country and 
getting worse every day. 
 
Obviously whatever action the NDP has taken over the past two 
years has been a dramatic failure. Mr. Speaker, will the Premier 
finally face the facts and admit that the NDP’s management of 
waiting lists has been a dismal failure and hurting people are 
neglected for far too long? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’m extremely pleased that 
the member opposite asks about hip and knee surgery because 
that is an area where there is much demand. But what we know 



2352 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

from the CIHI, the Canadian Institute for Health Information 
report on health care in Canada, they indicate that 
Saskatchewan’s rate of hip replacement surgery is 70.9 for a 
hundred thousand population compared to the national average 
of 55.8. 
 
Similarly the rate for knee replacement surgery is 78.2 for a 
hundred thousand population . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the knee 
replacement surgery, we provide 78.2 per hundred thousand 
population compared to a national average of 59.9. So we have 
the second-highest rate for both of those kinds of surgery in the 
country as to the amounts. 
 
We know that from 1990 to the year 1999, about a 10-year 
period, there was an increase of surgeries from 80,000 to 
94,000. What we’re going to do is we’re going to continue to 
work with the professionals and others who do this work. We’re 
not going to go with the kind of plan that they had which was to 
cut everything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Premier. Yesterday when the 
Saskatchewan Party raised the issue of Saskatchewan’s growing 
waiting lists, the Minister of Health actually tried to argue that 
waiting lists are improving. It is obvious that the minister is not 
paying attention because everyone else in Saskatchewan knows 
that our waiting lists are growing out of control. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP should be embarrassed about this 
massive mismanagement of our health care system. Long 
waiting lists hurt individuals and their families; long waiting 
lists hurt our children and our seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the Premier going to do for the thousands 
of families whose lives are on hold because of ever-growing 
waiting lists? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we are 
doing is we are working with the professionals in the system to 
keep improving the management of the surgical spaces. 
 
We know we have challenges around getting sufficient staff to 
run all the operating rooms that are available. We know we 
have challenges in doing scheduling; we know we have 
challenges in recruiting specialists across the country. But we’re 
not alone. We share that problem with all across the country. 
 
What I would say though is, the members opposite talk about 
wiping out health district administration. That’s only $50 
million. With their proposed cuts of 292 million, you could 
wipe out all the health districts and still have a shortfall of $242 
million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(14:00) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it sounds like the Minister of 
Health has forgotten his NDP government’s promises of two 
years ago. 
 
In the 1999 election the NDP promised to reduce waiting lists 
by 30 per cent. Instead, waiting lists have grown in Regina and 
Saskatoon by as much as 50 per cent. People are suffering. And 
the problem is getting worse because waiting lists are getting 
longer every day. And yet the Minister of Health is trying to 
claim that waiting lists are improving. Mr. Speaker, that simply 
is not true. 
 
People deserve better than the excuses we keep hearing from 
the Premier and his NDP government. Families suffering on 
seemingly endless waiting lists. They deserve better. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, will the Premier agree that his 
government has failed Saskatchewan families? And will he 
share with the House what specific steps he plans to take to fix 
his government’s health care mess? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the proposal that those 
members opposite made would have resulted in $292 million 
less for health care than we presently have. The only result of 
that would have been a privatization that the member from 
Weyburn was very much in favour of. 
 
We know that in that . . . in 1999 she said, I think that it should 
be an option. Why should we continue down the path we are 
when people are driven out of the province to look for health 
care? Why are we not looking at having privatized care in 
Saskatchewan and keeping the money here if that’s what we’re 
going to do? 
 
Mr. Speaker, as long as we are here in this government, we’re 
not going down that path because we know that it doesn’t work. 
We want to build on the solid work that has been done in this 
province for decades. We’re going to work with the people who 
have provided good health care and make it even better. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Does this government and the Minister of 
Health realize the impact and the suffering that they are causing 
to Saskatchewan families and seniors? And will they start 
taking responsibility for their actions? 
 
Every day we hear words coming out of the Premier’s mouth, 
but there is not any action to back up all the talk. Saskatchewan 
families continue to suffer through the longest waiting lists in 
Canada. Thousands of children, like the 7-year-old boy we 
talked about yesterday, suffering and waiting. 
 
Is there a family in the province that has not watched helplessly 
as a parent or grandparent struggled to live with the crippling 
pain of a knee or hip that just does not work any more. 
 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2353 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s growing surgical waiting lists are not 
just a political problem for this government, but massive 
waiting lists create unnecessary pain and anguish for families in 
every community in our province. This government is all about 
talk with no action. 
 
Will the Premier explain why the NDP has stood idly by while 
Saskatchewan waiting lists keep growing and families keep 
suffering? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, what we like to do on this 
side of the House is provide facts because that’s the way that 
you can answer these questions. What we know is since 
1991-92 to the present, the percentage annual increase of the . . . 
the percentage increase of the volume of hip and knee surgery 
performed in the province has increased by 21 per cent. We do 
21 per cent more hip and knee surgeries this year than we did in 
1991-92. 
 
But as it relates to cataract surgery, over the same period, the 
increase has been 88 per cent — almost a doubling of the 
amount of surgeries. 
 
So what we are doing is we’re doing more surgeries, but we’re 
continuing to work with the professionals because we have 
more to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment in the Cable Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for SaskTel. Last year 
the NDP announced that SaskTel would be getting into the 
cable television business in the province of Saskatchewan 
where they apparently have no qualms about competing with 
existing Saskatchewan businesses providing employment for 
Saskatchewan families across this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other telephone companies have spent millions of 
dollars looking at cable TV and they have . . . many have 
stepped away from pursuing that business, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question to the minister is how much of the 
taxpayers’ money is SaskTel prepared to spend on this risky 
venture, all to compete with Saskatchewan businesses already 
in business in the province? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to provide the member with 
some factual information. 
 
It’s true that SaskTel had applied to the CRTC (Canadian 
Radio-television and Telecommunications Commission) to 
provide digital interactive video service in our province. They 
did this because they know that customers want to watch TV 
and movies, surf the Internet, send and receive e-mail, and 
participate in electronic commerce such as home banking and 
shopping all in one bundle and all through SaskTel’s Highspeed 
Internet network, and all on a television because not everyone 
has access to personal computers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what I can also tell the member is that SaskTel 
was involved in the cable industry in this province beginning in 
1973, and they provided the network to cable companies in this 
province up until the PCs (Progressive Conservative Party) 
came to power in 1986. 
 
But I can also tell the member that Forrester Research predicts 
that interactive television will become a $20 billion a year 
industry and SaskTel is now a competitive Crown, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is right, 
SaskTel has certainly had a foray into the cable industry in the 
past, but now they will be going head-to-head, directly 
competing with Saskatchewan businesses in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The minister, at the end of her answer, then went on to talk 
about how sound the technology is. Mr. Speaker, on May 17, 
the president of SaskTel appeared before the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations, and here’s what he had to 
say about SaskTel getting into the cable TV business: 
 

The fact of the matter is (he says) this is a murky area. 
Nobody’s quite certain of whether or not there is a sound 
and valid business case here. 
 

And he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker, “. . . there’s a lot of loose 
ends.” That’s what Mr. Ching had to say. But apparently 
SaskTel is plodding ahead into this murky area anyway. 
 
They will be competing with private sector companies 
including the Battleford Community Cablevision, which is a 
co-operative, Mr. Speaker. No doubt the 20-plus families who 
benefit from the jobs created by BCC (Battleford Community 
Cablevision) are wondering why their own government would 
directly compete with their employer. 
 
The question to the minister is this: why does the . . . what does 
the minister have to say to these families who benefit from 
employment at Battleford Community Cablevision? Why are 
the NDP using Crowns to compete with co-operatives in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I’d like to remind the member, and 
obviously if they care to listen, that SaskTel is the only entity in 
the province that has the kind of infrastructure that can go to all 
communities in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re trying to do as a government is to 
connect Saskatchewan to the future. And in fact that was the 
theme of our Throne Speech and our budget. We’re connecting 
people to the future in terms of our physical infrastructure, 
information highway, and highways, education, health care, 
economic development, and agri-value, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government is all about going forward and not going 
backwards, as those members of the opposition would want us 
to do. 
 



2354 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, if it’s the economic development 
strategy of this government and that minister to compete with 
Saskatchewan business and co-ops, the only thing they’re 
connecting people to is the highway out of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the question to the Premier, the 
NDP recently released its so-called economic development 
strategy, the Partnership for Prosperity. As each day pass, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s becoming clear that this document is all walk and 
no talk. Consider that on page 12, the NDP pay lip service to 
the importance of the co-op sector. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, the Partnership for Prosperity goes on to 
say and I quote: 
 

Crown corporations help existing businesses grow and also 
attract new businesses to the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, how in the world can the NDP justify SaskTel 
getting into cable TV and competing with the co-op sector 
when it flies in the face of their Partnership for Prosperity, 
their own document, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The question to the Premier is this, who’s right in this case? Is it 
the Minister of Economic Development and his Partnership for 
Prosperity or is it SaskTel who is defying the very statements 
within their own economic development plan? Who’s in charge 
over there? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, as the members will 
know, our government is investing $70.9 million in the new 
CommunityNet. We are connecting community across 
community in this province to the high-speed Internet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government believes that if we are to make 
progress in economic and social development in this province, 
our citizens must have access to the information highway and 
the new knowledge economy. 
 
Now I know the member from Kindersley does not believe in 
the Internet, because he has said so in this House on several 
occasions. But we know, from listening to businesses in this 
province and listening to our citizens, that they want access to 
this new tool in order that we can compete in an international 
economy. It’s not only for urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
but it’s for rural Saskatchewan as well. 
 
This is a government that’s looking to the future and these 
members want to take us back to the past, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Assistance 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. 

Mr. Speaker, with every hot, dry, windy day out there, the 
drought situation in this province gets worse — 2001 has been 
the driest year on record in the Saskatoon area, Kindersley has 
had just 34 per cent of normal precipitation, and Swift Current 
has had just 36 per cent. The drought has reached the crisis 
level in many parts of this province and the NDP appears to be 
doing nothing and has no plan to address this situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the NDP doing to address the growing 
drought problem in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I’d answered this question 
for the member and I answer it again for the member. And I 
say, Mr. Speaker, that in this province today we just recently 
announced the kinds of programming that we’re going to do for 
livestock and the cattle people, and we’ve announced that. And 
we’ve received a fair bit of positive response, Mr. Speaker, on 
that piece. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that we have today safety 
net programs for the grains and oilseed side. And yesterday the 
member . . . and I quote what he said, he said that 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, indeed . . . or Alberta indeed pays 
the highest percentage per capita of any province in this nation, 
not Saskatchewan any longer. 

 
And I say to the member opposite that’s absolutely wrong. In 
this province today, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the 
farm income financial expenditures done by Ag Canada, today 
Saskatchewan leads the nation in province’s contributing — 
leads the nation — making it $4.36 per capita, Mr. Speaker; 
leading Alberta by two times as much as what they do, Mr. 
Speaker — two times as much as what they do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the fact is 
the NDP is doing nothing as usual. The minister didn’t even 
raise the issue in any substantive way at Whitehorse when he 
met with Agriculture ministers. The current safety net programs 
are inadequate to deal with the problem and the NDP has 
completely backtracked on the Premier’s call for $500 million 
in emergency farm aid. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP abandoned farm families in this 
province? Why is the government doing nothing to address the 
drought crises that we are experiencing in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — To the House, Mr. Speaker. In this 
province this budget, this government put in 95 million brand 
new dollars; 95 million brand new dollars that are going to help 
with the safety net. And also, Mr. Speaker, are going to help 
Saskatchewan farmers, grain and oilseed farmers, in helping 
them with . . . through CSAP (Canada-Saskatchewan 
Adjustment Program). 
 
And I want to quote one more time, Mr. Speaker, what the 
member opposite said at the standing committee, because he’s 
the guy who said that we have enough money today for farmers. 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2355 

 

This is what he said: 
 

Programs have been put into place in our province like 
AIDA and CFIP and others, and have been in large 
measure, I think, very well accepted in terms of the amount 
of money generated. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, today the member stands up in the House 
and says why aren’t you going to put more money into CSAP, 
why aren’t you putting more money in for farmers, when he 
goes to Ottawa and talks to the standing committee and says we 
got enough money, Mr. Speaker. How does that work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Agriculture minister knows full well that when there are dollars 
coming from Ottawa, either in the form of AIDA (Agricultural 
Income Disaster Assistance) or CFIP (Canadian Farm Income 
Program), they are very well accepted — yes. The farmers 
gratefully accept those dollars, gratefully accept those dollars. 
And that’s indeed what I said, Mr. Minister. They accept those 
dollars gratefully because they have been given to them by the 
taxpayers of this, of the country of Canada. 
 
The NDP have been promising, Mr. Speaker, a long-term safety 
net for 10 years, ever since they ripped up the GRIP (gross 
revenue insurance program) contracts. And that minister, along 
with every other minister you have had in the NDP 
administration, have sat on their hands and have done nothing, 
nothing, to put in terms a long-term safety net to replace that. 
And you know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Would the member put 
his question through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, this minister has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Would the member put his question. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — This minister has accomplished nothing to do 
any substantive help for agriculture in this province. The NDP 
have not put in place a long-term safety net as they promised 
they would. Mr. Speaker, what is this minister and this 
government going to do with the very serious drought situation 
that farmers are faced with in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s interesting 
that that member has got so passionate about agriculture. And I 
say this, Mr. Speaker, very seriously. Because this member here 
today, he supports his leader, the opposition leader. And the 
problem that we have in this province today is partly due to, 
with that member who sat in the opposition benches in Ottawa. 
 
Because when provinces, Mr. Speaker, were in Ottawa — when 
provinces were in Ottawa — saying we need money, more 
money for Saskatchewan-Canadian farmers, the Leader of the 

Opposition says, we’re not providing any more money for 
Saskatchewan-Canadian farmers, Mr. Speaker. And he votes 
against $300 million that comes out of Saskatchewan-Canadian 
farmers in the loss of the Crow. 
 
That’s what that leader supports. And then the member opposite 
gets on his feet today and he supports the member opposite and 
the leader of that party. Because today, Mr. Speaker, the critic 
of Agriculture is married to Mr. Day’s policies; is married to 
the Reform policies of the past. And they, Mr. Speaker, are not 
any different than the people in Ottawa because it’s them that 
have cost Saskatchewan farm families their dollars in this 
province today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order! Order. Order, order. Order. Order. 
Order! Order! Order! Order, please. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 224 — The Government Accountability Act 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to move first reading of Bill No. 224, The 
Government Accountability Act. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Premier to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
assist us in the process of the committee this afternoon, I’m 
very glad to welcome to the House Mr. Dan Perrins, who is 
deputy minister to the Premier. Behind Dan, Ms. Bonita Heidt, 
who is the director of administration and information systems. 
Just behind me, the assistant director in senior management 
services and executive assistant to the deputy minister, Mr. Jim 
Nicol. And to my right, my chief of staff, Kathie 
Maher-Wolbaum. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I would like to 
welcome the Premier with his officials into the legislature to 
account for the entire government, because of course we know 
Executive Council does oversee the entire government of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d also like to welcome his officials here today. We have 
opportunity to bump shoulders once in a while in the corridors 
of the marble palace here and we’re certainly pleased that they 



2356 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

could accompany the Premier to assist him in answering 
questions today. 
 
Mr. Chairman, I’d like to start out with perhaps some general 
questions of principle and philosophy. I think we all know that 
it’s important that we in elected life strengthen the public trust 
in elected representatives. 
 
And we also know that the government has a responsibility to 
strengthen the public trust in governments. And that includes 
the Premier, the Premier’s ministers, the staff of the various 
departments, and so on right down to the service providers on 
the front line. We recognize that they all play a very key role, 
but certainly the buck always does stop at the Premier’s desk. 
And his views on issues of public trust are extremely important. 
 
My first question then to the Premier is simply, does he support 
and does he agree with the principle of ministerial 
accountability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair, yes, I would 
support that relatively age-old concept in the British 
parliamentary system of ministerial responsibility. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Then simply 
my next question will be, is, under what circumstances would 
he demand a resignation of a minister for, in his words, not 
complying with the principle of ministerial accountability? 
 
What would . . . where would the lines be drawn in the sand, so 
that the people of Saskatchewan might know when he would 
call his ministers into question about their performance and in 
fact would exercise ministerial accountability and ask for the 
resignation of the minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think the member 
opposite, the Leader of the Opposition, is obviously leading to a 
conclusion where he’ll ask me at the end of this line of 
questioning to challenge one or other of the current ministers of 
the Crown in this province. I think that’s where we’re coming 
to so perhaps we should just go there right away, Mr. Chair. 
 
Obviously ministers of this government — ministers, I believe, 
of every government — take their responsibilities very, very 
seriously. If the Leader of the Opposition has any particular 
concern about any particular minister or ministry, I invite him 
to address the concern. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And we may get 
there, Mr. Premier, but really we need to know first of all where 
do we draw the lines. I think obviously you must have told this 
to your ministers. 
 
I think in order to increase public confidence and public trust in 
government, it would be very good for the Premier to put on the 
record what he considers to be the crossing of the line where 
ministerial accountability, or the principle of ministerial 
accountability, would cause him to request the resignation of a 
member. I think that’s a very appropriate question. No matter 
where it’s leading, I think everyone in Saskatchewan has the 
right to know the answer to that question. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Would the committee please come to 

order for a moment. The Chair’s very fortunate to have guests 
here in the gallery today. And the Chair requests leave to 
introduce guests, to introduce guests that are in the Speaker’s 
gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much. 
 
It’s not very often that I have visitors in Regina and I’m happy 
to have the most important people in my life. It’s the love of my 
life, Karen Addley, and my sons David, Eric, and Connor 
Addley. And I’d ask the committee to please warmly welcome 
them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker or Mr. Chair, I think the 
member opposite would understand — as all members would 
— that in the functioning of a government there is the 
administration and ongoing daily functioning of government. 
There is the political role in government which is the role of 
setting of policy. Ministerial responsibility is fundamental in the 
setting of policy for government; in the assurance that the 
policy is being adhered to and followed; that the policy is 
explained to the legislature; is responsible to the legislature to 
answer for that policy and the expenditure of public dollars; is 
equally responsible to explain public policy and commitments 
made to the general public and be available to that general 
public either through the press or face to face. 
 
Those are very significant components of the minister’s role in 
government. There is a role for the administration of 
government and for civil servants and for public service who 
will be charged with responsibilities, and have a responsibility 
to fulfill those responsibilities in a dutiful manner that serves 
the public well; that adheres to all the policy and the principle, 
and the law of the land. 
 
(14:30) 
 
There are areas of government, which we set aside as judicial, 
and quasi-judicial, where, in the instance of the courts, all 
decisions will be made by the courts without ministerial or 
political influence. 
 
There will be issues of prosecutions within government. There 
will be regulatory bodies within government who are charged to 
carry out their responsibilities without the political input or 
direction from the minister of the Crown. 
 
And so I think in this broad range of responsibility, we provide 
government’s responsibility. And then we appear to this 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2357 

 

legislature, and are available to answer all of the questions of 
the opposition. We appear to members of the public, and 
ultimately we all go before the people for their test. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And thank you to 
the Premier for starting down the road towards answering the 
question. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan often ask me, as the Leader of the 
Opposition, what’s the new Premier like. Perhaps he gets 
similar questions about, you know, what’s the Saskatchewan 
Party official opposition like. And those are fair questions, and I 
think the public has a right to insight as to what makes us tick, 
what our values are, and where we do draw lines as far as 
responsibility is concerned. 
 
I certainly have expectations of my colleagues in caucus, and 
my staff. And I’m sure they have expectations of myself as a 
leader. So I think it’s very important that the Premier perhaps 
be a little more explicit. And he’s talked about what he 
considers to be the good proponents that would cause one to 
have confidence in a minister, but he still hasn’t told this 
Assembly and the people of Saskatchewan where they cross the 
line. 
 
For instance, if a minister commits a Criminal Code offence and 
is convicted of a crime, I would expect that he would consider 
that a matter of ministerial accountability where the line had 
been crossed and he would demand a resignation. 
 
He can confirm or give a different opinion here in the House. 
But I’d like to also know what other conditions he would 
consider to be so serious on the part of his ministers that he 
would call for their resignation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, in my experience which has 
been of some years now in opposition and sitting on 
government benches, and now this much shorter experience in 
the office of the Premier, it has been my experience with 
colleagues that I have worked with that it has never been a 
circumstance where a resignation has been demanded, because 
in those circumstances where resignations have occurred, they 
have been volunteered. Volunteered by honourable men and 
women who, understanding their own circumstance, will have 
decided it is only appropriate in that circumstance to tender a 
resignation. I think that would be the case with any one of my 
current colleagues. I have no doubt about that. Obviously if 
there is a breach of law, a significant breach of law, that would 
be a breach of ministerial responsibility, but not particularly 
ministerial responsibility but in fact . . . or our responsibility as 
a member of this House and government. 
 
Mr. Chair, what I do not have is a long list of criteria under 
which a minister would be obliged to resign. We are, Mr. Chair, 
mature men and women who are elected to this House who . . . 
this is not a circumstance of a military organization. We will 
each, I believe, seek to fulfill our duties with honour, with 
respect to the institution, and with respect to the people of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. My next 
question for the Premier is, if a minister is leaving his 
department, supports or allows his department to have a 

communication strategy which misleads the people of 
Saskatchewan, would he consider that grounds to question 
ministerial accountability and ask for the resignation of a 
minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I think, Mr. Chair, if the Leader of the 
Opposition has a particular instance or a particular ministry or a 
particular issue he would like to raise in the process here of the 
estimates of the department, please raise it. What I am not going 
to engage in is a great deal of hypothetical what if, what if, what 
if. 
 
If there is an if that the member wants to raise, please raise it 
and we’ll deal with it. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. We would 
certainly like the Premier to be very public with the principles 
upon which he evaluates his ministers, but I will be specific. 
 
His minister responsible for SERM leads a department who’s 
communication strategy, even though they had knowledge that 
many residents had unsafe drinking water in Saskatchewan, 
their communications policy was to say to the public your 
drinking water is safe. 
 
Now that has an impact on the very health, perhaps even the 
very lives of Saskatchewan people. As you as the Premier 
knows, we received the document, it was a cabinet decision 
item, in which a communications strategy was outlined. And it 
indicated that there were serious problems with drinking water 
in Saskatchewan. Many communities had unsafe drinking 
water, unproperly tested drinking water, and yet the 
communication strategy was to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
— some of whom were consuming unsafe drinking water — 
that everything was fine and that their health was not at risk. 
 
Can the Premier condone that kind of misleading 
communication? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — It is helpful, Mr. Chair, when the Leader 
of the Opposition comes to the point. 
 
In this circumstance, as I understand the circumstances — and 
we’ve discussed this, I think, several times in the course of this 
sitting of the legislature — what was brought forward to the 
opposition was a draft document that had some proposals 
around communication strategies within it. This, Mr. Chair, was 
not a decision of the minister or the government. 
 
It will be a long time before the Leader of the Opposition has 
this experience, but if in government he would find that he will 
be advised by many people, many draft documents will be 
provided. Ultimately the Premier, the cabinet, and the caucus 
will decide on the policy. No such policy was ever put in place. 
 
And just while we’re on the subject of water, this government, 
in my view, ever since the issue was raised by the very tragic 
circumstance in Walkerton, has taken very definitive and very 
positive steps forward in dealing with concerns about water in 
our province. And there may be no better example than in the 
very unfortunate circumstance of North Battleford, where once 
we were alerted to the circumstance in North Battleford, this 
Minister of Environment, the Minister of Municipal 



2358 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

Government, the Minister of Health through the Public Health 
field, the Battlefords Health District acted very quickly, very 
definitively. 
 
We’ve established an inquiry to get exactly the truth of what 
happened in North Battleford. We have since worked with that 
community to ensure an infrastructure that is safe and secure for 
the citizens of North Battleford. Mr. Chair, this is a 
circumstance where I have much confidence in the activities of 
the ministers who have been involved. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, 
the document that was released to us did not say draft on it. It 
did have the name of the minister responsible for Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management on it. It was presented 
to caucus. 
 
If this information is not correct, I would ask the Premier to 
categorically deny that that document ever was considered 
around the cabinet table. 
 
It certainly was not a draft. Every indication leads us to believe 
that the minister actually endorsed sending a document to 
cabinet that suggested that the communication strategy 
misleading the people of Saskatchewan. I would have expected 
that at that point the Premier would have called for the 
resignation of his minister for even bringing a document that 
suggested that the people of Saskatchewan be mislead in a 
communication strategy that actually put their health at risk. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, perhaps if the member 
wanted to be helpful to the debate and the discussion here, he 
would provide to me a copy of this document to which he 
refers. Because I would be very, very interested to see if this 
document in fact had bore the signature of the minister. I’d be 
very interested to know if this document bore the signature of 
the minister. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is . . . I can’t be sure about this; I was 
not in the cabinet room at that time. But I’d be very interested 
to see the document and perhaps he will send his member to go 
and fetch a copy. 
 
Again, again, Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is this: all sorts of 
advice will be provided to ministers and to cabinet and to 
caucus and government. Ministers, the cabinet, the caucus, and 
government in total will decide on public policy. And of course 
no such, no such decision was ever taken by this government. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. Then I would 
just remind the Premier that in fact this document indicated that 
there was potential for a Walkerton-style tragedy or health 
concern in the province of Saskatchewan. That was contained in 
the document. The facts, since released, indicate that in fact 
there are many communities in Saskatchewan that had unsafe 
drinking water. 
 
Now I’d also say to the Premier regardless . . . And I believe 
that that was an accurate document. I believe we tabled it here 
in the legislature; it has the minister’s name typed on it. But set 
that all aside. The actual communication strategy that was 
espoused by the former associate minister of Health — right 
here in the House, it’s on the record in Hansard — states water 

quality in Saskatchewan is safe. Residents of Saskatchewan 
have no need to be concerned about their water. Everything is 
under control. It’s being properly monitored. 
 
Now the facts have come out the water wasn’t being properly 
monitored. So whether the Premier argued that the document 
was legitimate or not, the facts are that the contents of the 
document have been the policy of his government. The policy 
being that there is unsafe water; they recognize that there is 
unsafe water in Saskatchewan to the point that it could create a 
replica of the Walkerton tragedy. 
 
And the communication that we’ve heard from the government, 
the actual communiqués from the government were that the 
drinking water in Saskatchewan was entirely safe. 
 
So how does the Premier account for the fact, whether he 
accepts the document or not, that the policies of his government 
were to mislead the people of Saskatchewan about the quality 
of their water? And why doesn’t he ask for the minister’s 
resignation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it was exactly this minister 
and this government who very, very publicly spoke of the 
communities in this province whose drinking water had quality 
issues. In some of those communities — I forget the exact 
number; 100-plus — in some of those communities, the quality 
issues were not health related in particular; they were quality 
issues related to taste, and smell, and odour. In other 
circumstances there were some health issues, some public 
health issues. 
 
It was this minister, it was this government, that made this very 
public knowledge to the people of Saskatchewan. I don’t 
understand how the Leader of the Opposition stands up and 
says that we were somehow endeavouring to hide these 
circumstances. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier is 
making my case for me. This information came to light in 
September. And yet it was only after the media exposed the 
problem, and I believe it was December, and consequently we 
saw further crisis in the year 2001, the current year, that the 
government admitted that there was a problem. 
 
So in other words, to the Premier, there was a cover-up. There 
was a denial of a problem for a number of months that could 
have put the public, and in fact in North Battleford did put the 
public’s lives at risk. 
 
How can the minister condone such action? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the observations of the 
Leader of the Opposition using phraseology like cover-up is 
simply not the case. It was this government — it was this 
government — that after the Walkerton alert . . . and fair 
enough I think the whole country was given an alert by what 
happened in Walkerton, and so we should be. I mean we should 
be. 
 
When this government heard that alert, as did other 
governments, but when this government heard that alert, 
immediate steps were taken to work with communities. It was 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2359 

 

this government — it was this government — that made that list 
operational. 
 
It’s this government that has worked with the community of 
North Battleford. And of course the community of North 
Battleford, everyone in North Battleford, throughout the months 
leading up to North Battleford, was unaware of the 
circumstance. As soon as that circumstance was known, this 
government acted. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, what I find interesting at best, in this whole 
discussion, is that to do this kind of work, to do the kind of 
work that the opposition wants a government to do and a 
minister to do through his department, requires people on the 
ground to do that work. And interestingly enough, in the most 
recent budget, the budget now which debate we’re concluding, 
as we propose to in fact to add resources to the very 
departments that will protect our drinking water in this 
province, what does this opposition do? They stand up and they 
oppose it. 
 
Not only do they oppose this, they criticize us very, very 
specifically for hiring the kind of people that will do this kind 
of work to protect the people of Saskatchewan and our 
communities and our drinking water supply. 
 
So maybe as the Leader of the Opposition retakes his position 
in the House, he may want to explain his party, his opposition, 
to this budget, which provides resources to provide people . . . 
to provide that kind of quality care of our water in our 
communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Let me just ask a 
very short question to the Premier. Can he confirm or deny that 
cabinet was made aware in September of 2000 that there was a 
potential for a Walkerton-type water tragedy in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, I can 
neither confirm nor deny; I was not a member of cabinet at that 
time. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I recognize that the Premier was not the 
Premier when this happened. But does the Premier know . . . I 
mean the Premier was a senior adviser in the government of Mr. 
Romanow. Does the Premier know . . . Does the Premier know 
that cabinet . . . whether cabinet was aware, in September of 
2000, whether there was a potential for a Walkerton-type of 
water tragedy in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I assume that the Leader of 
the Opposition was present in the House when the Minister of 
the Environment was here for his many hours of estimates. I 
assume we had opportunity to ask this question of those who in 
fact were present for these discussions. 
 
What I know is this, Mr. Chair. After the wake-up call from 
Walkerton, after the wake-up call, this department through its 
ministry of the Environment, through its Water Corporation, 
through its public health work in the Department of Health, 

through Municipal Government, have been concerned and have 
been working on these issues, which culminated in providing to 
the people of Saskatchewan a list of concern. Working with 
communities. Communities are always alerted if tests have 
shown to be of an issue or a problem in a community. There’s 
always an alert provided right away. 
 
When we faced the consequence in North Battleford, this 
government acted very quickly in conjunction with the 
community of North Battleford to work with them. We’ve now 
worked with that community to such an extent that we’ve been 
able to provide the infrastructure funding to rebuild an 
appropriate treatment facility for the community of North 
Battleford. 
 
There is no doubt about it, Mr. Chair, that this government has 
taken this issue seriously. Its ministers have taken this issue 
seriously ever since last fall. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chairman, this is our first opportunity 
in estimates dealing with Executive Council to deal with this 
issue. The last opportunity I believe was in June of the year 
2000. 
 
So in the intervening period between June of 2000 and now July 
of 2001, it is our responsibility to ask the Premier — who is 
responsible for Executive Council — whether or not he or any 
of his ministers were aware in September of 2000 that a . . . that 
the drinking water in Saskatchewan may not be safe and could 
lead to a Walkerton-style of tragedy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Chair, I repeat. After the 
circumstance in Walkerton the ministries of this government 
took this issue very, very seriously. It was this department for 
instance, Mr. Chair, that when an issue has been discovered in 
somebody’s water supply in this province, it’s this department 
that immediately — immediately — issues the boil-water 
advisory. It doesn’t wait. It doesn’t take chances. It immediately 
issues the boil-water advisory. 
 
And that advisory, Mr. Chair, is not lifted — is not lifted — 
until there is absolute assurance that the water supply in a 
community is safe. That boil-water issue is not lifted. I mean it 
is in some ways I think difficult for communities when these 
boil-water orders are issued and not lifted until we are 
absolutely assured that the drinking water is safe. 
 
That is the kind of thing that this government is taking this issue 
very seriously over and we will continue to do so. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, a brown 
envelope was received by the official opposition that indicated 
that in September of the year 2000, cabinet was made aware 
that a Walkerton-type tragedy could occur in Saskatchewan. 
 
Was the Premier aware of that document prior to it being made 
public? And if so, will he inform not only this House but all of 
the people of Saskatchewan when he first became aware that 
there was a potential for this type of tragedy in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I want to escape no 



2360 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

responsibility, but please understand — and the Leader of the 
Opposition knows this — that I was not sitting around the 
cabinet table last fall. 
 
I became aware of concerns of the drinking water in this nation, 
as did the citizens of Canada, when the tragedy in Walkerton 
occurred. As I said, I think that woke us all up to that 
circumstance. 
 
But I know for a fact that during the period of time following 
Walkerton, people in the civil service, the public service of the 
people of Saskatchewan, have been working very, very hard 
with communities — the very people that the Leader of the 
Opposition says we shouldn’t hire; the very people the Leader 
of the Opposition says we should fire, in fact. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, I learn of leaked brown envelopes 
coming to the opposition when the opposition leaks them. 
Obviously that’s what I learn about them . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Well the member from Swift Current says we 
released the documents. Fair enough. I mean a letter came to me 
signed by the Leader of the Opposition. A letter came to me, 
which would purport that the Leader of the Opposition had been 
doing something that wasn’t correct. It came to me signed . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — It wasn’t signed by him, and you know 
that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member from Rosthern asks was it 
signed by him. Well I have the copy, it’s signed by him. I mean, 
Mr. Chair, did we rush off to the media? No, we did not. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is that from the time of — and I can 
read the chronology, if the Leader of the Opposition wants it, of 
events that occurred that lead up from the Walkerton 
circumstance, Mr. Speaker — now the fact of the matter is we 
took this seriously, we take it seriously, we worked with 
communities, and we will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, I’ll rephrase my question to the 
Premier, trying to make this as easy as I possibly can for him to 
answer. 
 
Whether the document was a draft or whether it was approved 
by cabinet, was the Premier aware of the potential for a 
Walkerton type of water tragedy in Saskatchewan before the 
opposition made public a document — a government document, 
a cabinet document — that was leaked? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Again, Mr. Chair, would the Leader of 
the Opposition please provide . . . he’s referring to this 
document. It’s the tradition of this House to provide right now a 
copy of the document to which he refers. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, to the Premier, the document 
has been tabled. If he hasn’t looked at the document, that’s not 
my fault. 
 
Because the document now is a public document . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order. The two members involved in the debate is the Premier 
and the Leader of the Opposition, and let’s keep it that way. 

Mr. Hermanson: — I would think the Premier knows that this 
is now a public document because we tabled it. It was a major 
issue of this session of the legislature. 
 
Surely the Premier knows the answer to the question. If the 
Premier insists on refusing to answer the question — I’m not 
going to ask it very many more times, but I talked about 
whether or not the public would have trust in this government 
— if he refuses to answer this, this erodes trust of the 
Saskatchewan people in their government. 
 
So I would urge the Premier — he’s building a new record for 
himself — I would urge the Premier to give a very complete 
and simple answer to my question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member from Rosthern seems to 
want to ask a question, why doesn’t he stand and ask the 
question? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Was the Premier 
aware prior to the tabling of the document in this House that 
indicated there may be a Walkerton type of water tragedy in 
Saskatchewan? Was the Premier aware of this possibility prior 
to that event? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, after the Walkerton alert to 
the nation, I think we were all made aware of potential issues in 
the drinking water system. The Leader of the Opposition asks 
myself was I aware of any particular water quality problem, 
public health issue in this province, in September of last year. 
No I was not, Mr. Chair. No, I was not. 
 
I was aware, as I hope we all were, of the potential problems 
that existed with drinking water in this province, as we were in 
the nation. But those, Mr. Chair, whose responsibility it is were 
hard, hard at work with communities and getting water testing 
done, working with communities. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, as you well know and as everyone well knows, 
when the department was made aware of any issue, 
immediately boiled-water advisories were issued. We made 
public the list of communities where in fact there had been 
concerns. 
 
When we were presented by the circumstance in North 
Battleford, we acted quickly with that community, as we 
continue to work. 
 
But again I ask that Leader of the Opposition, Mr. Chair, how is 
it he can stand in this House talking about the need for safe 
water in the province when he and his colleagues will stand up 
and vote against this budget, when they stand up in question 
period and actually protest the hiring — protest the hiring — of 
individuals to help maintain water quality and safety around 
Saskatchewan? Would he please stand up and explain that 
position? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. The records 
show that the Premier didn’t even vote for his Economic 
Development budget so he better be careful about his comments 
on voting . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . at least not the first 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2361 

 

time you didn’t. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, we have brought to the . . . the Premier 
has refused to tell the people of Saskatchewan when he first 
became aware of the contents of this document. Unless he 
changes his answer, we have to accept that he will refuse to be 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But there is another problem in his government, and this one is 
the opposite. This time we had a minister of his who wanted, 
who desired to make information public and hold the 
government accountable. And in this case it seems like the 
minister had to step out of the position of responsibility because 
your government was unresponsive to her concerns. 
 
As you know there was another document leaked that was a 
memo, and I quote from Janice MacKinnon, minister of 
Economic and Co-operative Development, and it’s two 
distribution lists, requests for information regarding 
Saskatchewan Information Services Corporation, also known as 
ISC. The former minister indicates: 
 

It now appears, however, that ISC is going beyond this 
original mandate into other information technology areas. 

 
In other words, it was going beyond the scope of its mandate. It 
goes on to say: 
 

That this apparent expansion is of concern, as there are no 
concrete opportunities for significant new revenue from 
sources beyond the marketing of Lands and Geomatics 
given that: 
 
(1) SaskTel has the provincial mandate for the development 
of commercial e-commerce; 
 
(2) government information technology projects are 
tendered on a competitive basis, providing no preferential 
treatments to Crown entities; 
 
(3) the economic goal of growing the private information 
technology sector may be put at risk with further expansion 
of government in this area; and 
 
the Information Technology Office is responsible for 
co-ordinating and managing the information technology 
needs and priorities of Executive Council. 

 
I would like the Premier of Saskatchewan to indicate whether 
he agrees with his former minister, the Minister of Economic 
Development, who, who indicated that ISC had gone beyond its 
mandate or whether he agrees with, with the response to that 
memo from Mr. Fraser Nicholson which basically says that the 
ministers and the Premier and Executive Council, for that 
matter, have no business interfering in the affairs of agencies 
like ISC and should not be concerned if they go beyond their 
scope. 
 
Where is the Premier’s position? What is the Premier’s position 
on these kind of issues? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
raises the concerns that were raised by the then minister. Those 

concerns were raised. Those concerns were heard. And those 
concerns, Mr. Chair, have been addressed. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Could the Premier tell us how those 
concerns have been addressed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, they’ve been addressed 
through the work of that corporation, through the work of CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation), through the ongoing work 
that we’re doing with that, with that entity of government. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Can the Premier be more specific and tell 
us exactly what is being done to address that problem? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, I have had a 
little conversation with the minister responsible, and again as he 
has assured this House on many, many occasions, the fact of the 
matter is the mandate was set; it has been set in legislation and 
it has not changed. 
 
Now the Land Corporation of course has expanded. It is part of 
Information Services; it is a broader concept. But the fact of the 
matter is the mandate is now in legislation and that mandate has 
not changed. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Can the Premier express his comments or 
would he express his comments on the concern that ISC is 
going to occur significant shortfalls in revenue simply because 
they were counting on the sale of their technology to potential 
consumers who don’t seem to be interested since the technology 
is not even currently up and running here in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There is a 
business plan to get this up and going, and it is expected over 
year . . . over time that ISC will generate revenues. What this is, 
Mr. Chair, is a very, very good news story, both in the updating 
of our ability to do land titles’ work in this province and our 
ability to grow an information technology sector in this 
province. And I take it as quite a credit to ISC that we do in fact 
have people from around the country, around the globe, who are 
interested in what’s happening in Saskatchewan through ISC. 
 
And I can tell you this, Mr. Chair, the program has now been 
initiated in the community of Moose Jaw. It’s up and running; 
they’re working out the small start-up bugs, but in fact it’s 
working. And this is going to be, I think, an exciting 
development for the future of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And to the 
Premier, in the letter to Mr. Frank Hart from Fraser Nicholson, 
the response to the minister’s memo is: 
 

I have serious concerns about the implication of the latest 
demand on the CIC’s decision-making matrix and the 
authority of Crown corporation boards. It is my 
understanding that the boards of Crown corporations are 
charged with the authority for general superintendence. 

 



2362 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

Does the Premier subscribe to Mr. Nicholson’s view that the, 
that the cabinet should have no input whatsoever into the 
decisions around entities like ISC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Chair, I do not subscribe to that. 
And in fact the former minister raised some important concerns 
and, Mr. Chair, I repeat those concerns were taken seriously and 
those concerns have been addressed. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We are just 
sending another copy of the document over to the Premier and I 
would just ask him to look at the very first page near the bottom 
of the second paragraph. It says: 
 

Although some actions that have been taken remain in 
place on an interim basis, several key problems remain that 
pose an elevated safety risk and threaten the security of 
Saskatchewan’s drinking water supplies to the degree that 
the potential for a Walkerton-type situation exists within 
the province. 

 
That’s in the synopsis of the proposal that was given to cabinet. 
 
If you turn farther into the document to page 6 of the 
communications strategy . . . and I’ll give the Premier just a 
minute to find that. It’s about . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I’ve got a sticky note on it. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Oh there’s a sticky note there so 
apparently he has found it. Under objectives, this is the 
communication objectives, first of all, the second bullet says: 
 

Avoid criticism of former cuts to program and lack of 
provincial action. 

 
So that’s the communication plan — avoid criticism of former 
cuts to the program and lack a provincial action. And then the 
third bullet says: 
 

Reassure the public that improvements and expenditures in 
this area are focused and appropriate. 

 
Then farther down under key communication messages, the 
second bullet says: 
 

The systems currently in place . . . 
 

And this is very important: 
 

The systems currently in place are effective, and further 
improvements are being made to follow the vision, 
objectives, and goals of the water management framework. 

 
Now my question to the Premier, one last time, give him an 
opportunity to restore some credibility, was he aware of this 
situation prior to the first tabling of this document in the 
legislature by the opposition? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order. Why is the member on his 
feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — To ask for leave to introduce 

guests, Mr. Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I want 
to thank the members of the committee for giving me this leave. 
 
Mr. Chair, in the west gallery I should like to point out two 
visitors to Regina and to the Assembly. They are my sister Cea 
and her husband, John Engbers from Edmonton, Alberta. 
 
And I would ask the members to accord them a warm welcome. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I will repeat, I will repeat, I 
had no knowledge of this document in September of last year or 
contents thereof. Nor would I have had reason to have 
knowledge of this, not being a member of cabinet. 
 
But the fact of the matter is the document, sure enough, the 
document that the Leader of the Opposition sends over here, I 
have scanned it, I can find nowhere in this document a signature 
of a minister of the Crown or ministers of the Crown. Nowhere 
can I find that signature. So the fact of the matter is, this 
document — I can say this for a fact — this document did not 
go to the cabinet table. I can tell you that for a fact. No 
document comes to a cabinet table for a cabinet decision that 
does not bear the signature of a minister or ministers. 
 
Now here’s exactly what happened. On November 20, not 
September 22, as this document indicates, on November 20, a 
document was signed by four ministers, each bearing some 
responsibility in this area, a document was signed. It was sent to 
the Treasury Board on December 14 of last year. It was dealt 
with by the Treasury Board. 
 
It was received in cabinet on December 21, and as a result of 
the work that was done through the ministers in November, in 
December, and at cabinet, finally on December 21, it become 
part of the budget process. 
 
It resulted in what this opposition has seen in the budget now 
under debate which are significant new resources around the 
infrastructure file for water; new resources for those individuals 
in the public service who are responsible and do the work of 
making sure that our water quality is safe and assured. And it’s 
this very thing that these people have voted against and stood 
day after day protesting in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2363 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question to the 
Premier. The document that he just outlined that he is aware of 
with the December dates, did it contain the same quotes that I 
just read into the record regarding the synopsis where a 
Walkerton-type situation was identified as potentially occurring 
in this province? Is that same paragraph or a very similar 
paragraph that identifies the potential for a Walkerton-style 
crisis in Saskatchewan part of the document he just referred to? 
 
And the second part of my question — Mr. Chair, members of 
the government side are making so much noise I don’t think the 
Premier can hear me — the second part of my question . . . Do I 
need to repeat the first part? Did you hear . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Okay, just a sec. 
 
The first part of my question was in the document the Premier 
just referred to with the December dates, did that document 
identify that there was potential for a Walkerton type of water 
crisis in Saskatchewan, worded similar to the document that we 
just gave him. 
 
And secondly, in the document he referred to, did it contain a 
communications action plan or a strategy that also suggested 
that the public should be told that the systems currently in place 
are effective and further improvements are being made to 
follow the visions, objectives, and goals of the water 
management framework. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well the fact of the matter, Mr. Chair, is 
that I was neither in cabinet in September nor in November nor 
in December. 
 
I can tell you for a fact that decisions made by this government, 
around this file, did not include a communications strategy that 
was suggested by someone in this document, did not include 
that kind of communication strategy. 
 
What it did, Mr. Chair, was to establish a program that reflects 
in this budget, a program of putting money where money should 
be spent — in the infrastructure to prevent water quality issues 
in our communities, to enhance water quality issues in our 
communities. Money to those public servants who are charged 
with the protection of our drinking water, that’s what’s been the 
result of this work. And I’ll stand behind that result. I’ll stand 
behind this budget. And I just wish they would too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, it is 
obvious to every member of this House, and I’m sure to the 
people of Saskatchewan, that the Premier has tried to sidestep 
and dodge this issue in every way that he possible can. He’s 
doing the NDP shuffle — one step forward, two steps 
backwards, and sidestep all the issues. 
 
Mr. Chair, let’s move on to the issue of health care. I would like 
to ask the Premier how many health care workers there are in 
Saskatchewan today in comparison to how many there were in 
1999. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I do not have at my 
immediate disposal the exact numbers. We’re having those 
brought to us. If the Leader of the Opposition wants to move on 

to a broader question, when we get those specific numbers, 
we’ll have them here shortly. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well we’ll come back to that then. Let’s 
discuss the Fyke report. Mr. Chair, the Fyke report was 
completed a few months ago. The Premier’s response to the 
Fyke report was not to suggest whether he agreed with it, 
disagreed with it, which parts he supported or didn’t support, 
but his response was to set up a Standing Committee on Health 
and ask that committee to basically just garner the response and 
the input of the people of Saskatchewan in regards to what was 
contained in the Fyke report. So it was a bit of a study of study. 
 
And he indicated that it was not to make the . . . the standing 
committee was not to make any suggestions or 
recommendations but simply to be a sounding board. 
 
Then we since found out that he and his government have set up 
a parallel process, parallel committees, to also review health 
care in Saskatchewan. And then of course we know that the 
former premier of Saskatchewan is also charged nationally with 
a health care review. 
 
So I would just like the Premier to state for the record what 
credence he places on the Fyke report, what attention he’ll pay 
to the Standing Committee on Health, what is the role of this 
parallel committee and what weight does it carry, and will he be 
prepared to make any specific comments on our specific 
positions . . . is he prepared to take any specific positions today 
on health care, or is he waiting until this process is completed? 
And if so, will this process, the review of the Fyke study and 
the parallel committee’s work be done before the Romanow 
committee does its work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’m 
appreciative of the questions that the Leader of the Opposition 
raises in this regard. I think we should have a good discussion 
about the role of the Fyke report and the future of Mr. Fyke’s 
findings. 
 
Just to rehearse, Mr. Chair, so we all recall. Mr. Fyke was asked 
to undertake this very, very significant study of the health care 
system in Saskatchewan, to look to the future, to assure the 
longevity of publicly funded health care in our province. We 
know he did a very, very thorough piece of work with health 
care, with health care providers across this province, with 
communities across this province, with district health boards. 
The opposition party took the opportunity to present to the Fyke 
Commission. 
 
He is well known across Canada for his work in the health care 
field. He ultimately provided, to the people of Saskatchewan, to 
government, to this legislature, his report. An extensive report 
with a long, long list of recommendations and observations. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we had several options . . . Mr. Chair, we 
had several options when this was presented. One could take the 
Fyke work and implement it holus-bolus. One could take the 
Fyke work and implement portions and reject portions. One 
could do what in fact I believe is the appropriate thing to do, 
which is to take this piece of work and have it not just available 
to legislators, not just available to the health care system, but 
available broadly to the people of Saskatchewan that they could 



2364 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

in fact share their views of his recommendations. And that’s 
what we’re doing. 
 
(15:15) 
 
And so we established a pioneering process to allow the people 
of our province — as citizens, as health care providers, as 
patients and clients of the system, as legislators, as members of 
political organizations and so on — to have opportunity to 
shape health care in the future by reacting to the Fyke 
Commission. 
 
Now this is where it gets very interesting, Mr. Chair. Because 
once the Fyke Commission was public, his findings, some 
members of the opposition said, well this is horrible, many of 
these recommendations are horrible. Others were saying, but 
implement the report immediately. Don’t give it any further 
study; just implement it. 
 
We proposed therefore, Mr. Chair, that we should allow the 
public to have some feedback on it. When we suggested to try 
and raise this a little above the level of partisan politics by 
establishing an all-party committee, members of the opposition 
said, no, we’ll be no part of it. No, we’ll be no part of it. Well 
they’ve had a change of heart and they, mercifully, are part of 
it. But it took a long time to get them here. 
 
Now we’re going to listen to the people of Saskatchewan in 
number who are presenting to the committee, the legislative 
committee. We’ll hear their views. We’ll assemble those views. 
And working through those views, working with the 
Department of Health, we will develop a plan for 
implementation of a 21st century model for medicare in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now in the meantime of course, Mr. Chair, the need to provide 
quality health care services does not cease, and we continue. 
And the Leader of the Opposition wants to know what we’re 
doing. Well we heard some of that today earlier in this House, 
where in this budget year we have dedicated fully 11.9 per cent 
growth in spending to the Department of Health. 
 
Now, as has been pointed out, if we followed the plan identified 
by the Leader of the Opposition in the last election where he 
said, you freeze the spending to health care at the rate of 
inflation . . . That’s what they said. You can’t deny it. Freeze it 
at the rate of inflation. 
 
Now I think the rate of inflation this year is about 1.9 per cent. 
Is that correct? 1.9 per cent. So health funding increase in this 
budget, had the Leader of the Opposition been in charge of the 
budget, would have been 1.9 per cent. Compare that, Mr. Chair, 
to the 11.9 per cent that has come in this budget with this 
government. 
 
Now we’ve got challenges in health care. There’s no doubt 
about that. We’ve heard some of the recent challenges around 
waiting lists. We’ve got challenges around securing health care 
providers and professionals and those who will assist in solving 
some of these waiting list problems and others. We’ve got 
challenges. No doubt about that. But can you image, Mr. Chair, 
what the challenge would be like if, according to their budget, 
we’d had $292 million less in the Health budget this year. So 

the fact is, Mr. Chair, we are moving ahead in the provision of 
health care services; we’re not standing still. But in terms of 
reshaping for the long-term the health care system in the 
province, I tell you, Mr. Speaker, we are going to listen to the 
people of Saskatchewan, we are going to hear their voices, as 
we build this plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. As the Premier 
knows most of the increased funding for health care comes 
from the federal government, and the Saskatchewan Party 
official opposition indicated that any additional funding from 
the federal government would be earmarked in its entirety to 
health care in Saskatchewan. 
 
But that being said, Mr. Chair, the Fyke report began by saying 
that health care in Saskatchewan was in crisis. Now crisis is a 
very strong word, extremely strong word. And as all members 
of the House know we’ve raised health care issues, which 
reinforced the fact that health care is in crisis in Saskatchewan. 
 
Since Mr. Fyke has identified that health care is in crisis, how 
can the Premier . . . how can the Premier countenance . . . how 
can the Premier countenance the delay of the study that studies 
Fyke but yet makes no recommendations? And what is the role 
of the parallel group that are reviewing health care as well? And 
finally, what can the Premier tell the people of Saskatchewan as 
to any commitments, any new direction they will take in 
providing health care to Saskatchewan based on the work that 
has been done thus far? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I want to just return to 
provide the information that the Leader of the Opposition asked 
for in his initial question about the role of . . . the numbers of 
health care providers in the province. And I believe he asked it 
year over year . . . this year as opposed to last year. 
 
Here are the exact numbers, Mr. Chair. March 2000, the 
numbers of people providing health care in the province of 
Saskatchewan were 23,358. These I believe are full-time 
equivalents . . . 23,358. In March 2001, 23,804. That is an 
increase, Mr. Chair, of 445. 
 
That kind of development, Mr. Chair, would not happen . . . 
would not happen if we had in government today a party who 
believe that you can provide quality health care in this province 
by freezing the health budget at the rate of inflation. It wouldn’t 
happen. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition a moment ago made quite a 
statement. He got up and he said that the commissioner on 
medicare here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Ken Fyke, says in his 
report that health care in this province is in crisis. That’s what 
he said Mr. Fyke says in his report. I have the report here. 
 
I would ask the Leader of the Opposition to quantify that 
statement to show where in this report Mr. Fyke says that health 
care in Saskatchewan is in crisis? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Just in regards then 
to the number of health care workers, I believe this is . . . the 
question I asked the Premier was 1999 versus 2001, so I would 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2365 

 

like to add the numbers for the year 1999 in comparison to the 
year 2001. And then would the Premier indicate, of those health 
care workers and however . . . whatever the adjustment is 
between the two numbers, what portion of that would be nurses, 
both registered nurses, LPNs (licensed practical nurse), any 
type, any kind of nurse. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I do not have here with me the two year 
from 1999. I can indicate from this which groups the health care 
provides according to their affiliation, their professional 
association or trade union, that members of SUN, the 
Saskatchewan Union of Nurses, working in March 2000 in the 
province totalled 5,187; in March 2001, the number is 5,202. 
And so that would be a growth in the total number of 15. That 
would be in those nurses who are represented by SUN. 
 
Again, another roll up from . . . well we have the basic numbers 
from 1999. In 1999 the total number . . . Well again, Mr. 
Speaker, this is a different criteria — these numbers are not 
those numbers that are through the organized trade unions and 
so on. These now provide numbers from all health providers. 
 
I’m presuming the earlier number that I gave did not include 
medical doctors. I don’t see a list from the SMA (Saskatchewan 
Medical Association). So I want to assure the Leader of the 
Opposition we’ll get the complete lists to him. 
 
But this information would tell me that the total number of 
health care providers employed in the health sector, as derived 
from the SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations) benefit eligibility system, in 1999 was 36,074; 
in 2000, 36,981 — in that calendar year the increase was 900. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the Premier. 
We would appreciate it if he could give us a consistent basis of 
the numbers, and probably the final number, which would 
include all health care providers under that broader definition 
would be the preferable, would be the preferable measuring 
stick. 
 
Can the Premier assure the people of Saskatchewan that they 
have created 200 new health care positions? And these are new 
ones — these are not transferring people from one health 
district to another or from one level to another or from one 
facility to another. But in global terms, can the Premier assure 
us that they have met their goal, their commitment to increase 
the number of nurses in Saskatchewan by 200? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there is no question the 
number of health care providers has grown by well over 200 — 
well over 200. I do not have here before me the exact numbers 
from 1999 to date in the nursing profession specifically. 
 
Now I want to get the information correct for the Leader of the 
Opposition. I want to get this correct. There’s no use comparing 
apples and oranges and so on. So I think I would ask the Leader 
of the Opposition —so that we’re very clear and so we can get 
the very accurate information — when he speaks of nursing, 
there are licensed practical nurses, as he knows, there will be 
registered nurses, there will be registered psychiatric nurses. 
 
We will provide for the Leader of the Opposition all of those 
numbers engaged in the practice of nursing, whether it’s LPNs, 

RNs (registered nurse) or psych nurses. We will get the total 
number of all those involved in the nursing profession from 
1999 to 2001. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — All right, I will take the Premier at his 
word that he will provide those numbers for us. Back to the 
Fyke report. I now have a copy of the report and on page 7, Mr. 
Fyke, Mr. Fyke reports, and I quote: 
 

I do not believe the system is in crisis for reasons usually 
cited. Yet there is a crisis. It lies in our failure to identify 
the real problems and to act on their root causes. The usual 
response to problems . . . 
 

And this is exactly the response I got from the Premier. 
 

The usual response to problems is to add money to the 
system — enormous amounts in the past four years. 
Dissatisfaction remains high and the headlines are the same 
year after year, proving yet again that adding money 
without changing the culture of the system provides only 
temporary relief. 

 
Can the Premier tell us whether he agrees or disagrees with Mr. 
Fyke’s analysis of health care in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I agree, Mr. Chair, with what Mr. 
Fyke says in his report on the very same page which the Leader 
of the Opposition wasn’t too anxious to quote. And he says 
right here, Mr. Speaker: “The word “crisis” fuels political 
rhetoric and is (too) prominent.” And . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, he does. He says: “I do not believe the 
system is in crisis for the reasons usually cited.” Fair enough. 
But day after day the Leader of the Opposition and the Health 
critic will get up and talk about the system being in crisis. 
 
Now I do share the view, I do share the view and apparently it’s 
the view of the Leader of the Opposition, apparently it’s the 
view of Mr. Fyke that we’re not going to judge . . . we’re not 
going to solve all of the problems in health care with money. 
That’s for sure. Let us recognize that it is going to take 
substantial dollars to provide health care. We’re not going to do 
it on the kind of plan that they advance. That’s for sure. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, we have to go further. We have to look at the 
provision of home care services, the provision of preventative 
medicine, the provision of how we integrate services — acute to 
long-term. 
 
We have to look at the kind of addictions treatments that are 
necessary and particularly in some areas of our province, some 
neighbourhoods of our communities. There is a whole broad 
range of issues and hence the broad scope of the Fyke 
Commission; hence his description of needing a quality council; 
hence his description of trying to re-establish the importance of 
the regional hospitals — on and on it goes; that’s the work 
we’re doing — the broad stuff. 
 
But in the meantime, Mr. Chair, we believe that public 
resources need to be provided for the provision of health care 
and on this we will disagree with the Leader of the Opposition 
and some of his caucus who believe that there should . . . ought 
to be a prominent role for privatized services in this system. On 



2366 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

this we will not agree. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I have not heard 
anything from the Saskatchewan Party on implementing private 
health care in Saskatchewan, but I have heard the former 
premier of Saskatchewan, Mr. Romanow, indicate that he is 
considering private care . . . health care. He is reviewing the 
Swedish model which has extensively . . . (inaudible) . . . added 
the private health care component to what was entirely a public 
system in the past. 
 
So the Premier better be pretty careful as to who he attributes 
which statements. It’s actually more that that idea comes more 
from his own side or at least a former member of a former 
colleague of the Premier’s than from the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I would also like the Premier to be sure to confirm that in fact I 
had quoted Mr. Fyke correctly when he indicated yet there is a 
crisis in health care in Saskatchewan. It’s very important that 
the Premier maintain his credibility and certainly if that wasn’t 
in the report I would have been prepared to withdraw it. 
 
But I was correct and Mr. Fyke did recognize that there was a 
crisis. It is related to the fundamental delivery of health care in 
Saskatchewan. And I would challenge the Premier to retract the 
statement that it is not the responsibility of the opposition in a 
political forum to raise these issues. Certainly the Premier has 
not changed his mind from the days when he was in opposition 
and raised the issue. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And rightfully so. If an opposition cannot raise health care 
issues and point out to the government the failure and the needs 
in the health care system, something that affects the very life in 
many cases of Saskatchewan people and the well-being of 
families, then the Premier certainly has a different view of 
accountability and the role of members of the Legislative 
Assembly than the public has and certainly that the official 
opposition has. 
 
We still haven’t had an answer from the Premier as to what role 
this parallel committee or parallel process plays. Would the 
Premier indicate to the people of Saskatchewan who is involved 
in this parallel process, what weight he ascribes to this, and at 
what juncture they will report publicly to the people of 
Saskatchewan their recommendations for health care? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
was anxious to learn what some of his MLAs (Member of the 
Legislative Assembly) are saying about health care and the 
potential privatization. Well we heard this earlier today in the 
House. This is a direct quote from his MLA from Weyburn, 
Weyburn-Big Muddy MLA, a quote: 
 

One option Bakken put forward during the course of her 
campaign was the privatization of health services. 

 
Quote. Quote. It’s a quote from the member from Weyburn, and 
the member from Estevan ought to listen. It says here: 
 

I think (she says, the member from Weyburn) I think it 
should be an option. Why should we continue down the 

path we are when people are being driven out of the 
province to look for health care? Why are we not looking at 
having privatized care in Saskatchewan? 

 
That’s what she said. Now fair enough if the Leader of the 
Opposition doesn’t know that his member from Weyburn is out 
there promoting privatized health care. 
 
I have here a quote from the Saskatchewan Party MLA from 
Wood River. What does the Saskatchewan Party MLA from 
Wood River say: 
 

The whole health care system needs a review. I’m in favour 
of private clinics. 

 
Private clinics. 
 
Here’s a quote from the member from Kindersley, the member 
from Kindersley who said, on CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) television: 
 

If people want to and are prepared to pay for the services, 
why won’t you allow it? 

 
Now that, Mr. Chair, speaks of privatized health care. I mean I 
could go on and on, Mr. Chair. 
 
I have a very recent example of participating in the by-election 
in the constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. The general background noise 
seems to have risen above an acceptable level. I’m having 
difficulty hearing the speaker, the member speaking, the 
Premier. So if there’s some private conversations that need to 
take place, please take them behind the bar. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as I was saying, I have a very 
recent experience of participating in the by-election of the 
constituency of Saskatoon Riversdale. Where my very, very 
worthy opponent representing the Saskatchewan Party, during 
that by-election, in my presence, talked about the need for 
private MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) in the province. 
 
That, Mr. Chair, is a clear indication to me — and fair enough, 
it’s a debate — that the Saskatchewan Party, and their 
representatives, and their MLAs share a view for privatized 
health care in the province. 
 
Now we’ll have the debate. We’ve had the debate before. 
They’ve often stood on the side of privatized health care. 
There’s no doubt about that. We’ll have the debate again. We 
welcome the debate. But they should not ought to pretend that 
they’re not on that side of the issue. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition talks about the parallel 
process. Well, Mr. Chair, that sounds ominous when it’s 
described as some kind of a parallel process. In fact, in my 
view, the Department of Health is doing just exactly what the 
Department of Health should be doing. We have the 
recommendations of the Fyke commission. We have the public 
process going on. But to ensure that we will build a plan for 
implementation, we need those folks who are qualified in health 
care, both in the department and outside of the department, to 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2367 

 

be considering options and to looking at plans. 
 
And so here exactly is what’s happening. As part of the 
planning, Saskatchewan Health is reviewing the Fyke 
commission with the assistance of approximately 30 external 
representatives from the health sector. And so the department 
has established a series of working groups with a focus on the 
following areas: primary and subacute care, specialized care, 
district governance, human resources, health system quality, 
sustainability, and the funding methodology. Many of the issues 
that Mr. Fyke talks about in his report. 
 
And in addition then to just those significant folks at the 
Department of Health with their expertise, they’re reaching into 
the community to approximately 30 other representatives from 
the health care sector to work on this important, important 
planning as we move forward. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Can the — and thank you, Mr. Chair — 
and can the Premier tell us when this report will be made 
public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, this is not a process of a 
group of people writing a report. This is a group of 
professionals — professionals in the Department of Health and 
professionals from the health care community — who are 
looking at options and plans and strategies. Because as we 
move forward, it’s not simply enough that a minister of Health 
or a Premier or a Leader of the Opposition says well we should 
just ought to do this and it gets done. 
 
You need to have the professionals who have done a lot of the 
groundwork and a lot of the thinking to provide the kinds of 
options that we know we’re going to want to look at. So Mr. 
Fyke talks about district governments. He talks about primary 
care. He talks about regional hospitals. These all need the kind 
of background work that health professionals can do and will 
give us as we make decisions as legislators. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Is the Premier then 
telling the House that the process undertaken by Sask Health 
with these external experts will not be put into a report and will 
not be made public? Is that what the Premier is saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, we will . . . This 
government, through its ministry of Health, through this caucus 
and through this cabinet and through this government, we will 
present to the people of Saskatchewan a plan for the delivery of 
health care services to take us into the 21st century — a plan I 
note that will be publicly funded; publicly administered health 
care; pioneered in this province — but a plan that will reshape 
and reform and retool a process that will take health care well 
into the 21st century. We will deliver that plan. 
 
As part of delivering that plan we’re engaging our Department 
of Health in preparing options and planning expertise. They’re 
reaching out to the community as we converse with the 
community through the legislative committee, and when this 
work is complete we will prepare a plan. 
 
They’re not in the business of writing a report. We haven’t 
asked them to do yet another Fyke. We’ve asked Ken Fyke to 
do this for us. We’re considering the Fyke. And the fact of the 

matter is, when this work is appropriately done, we will 
announce to the people of Saskatchewan the plan that we set 
out. And members of the opposition will be available at that 
time I’m sure to applaud the plan. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — What is the target date for the release of 
this plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well we haven’t set a target date, Mr. 
Chair. We haven’t set a target date because we’ve committed to 
listen to the people of Saskatchewan through the legislative 
process. And the fact of the matter is we’re going to do that 
thoroughly. We are going to build a plan and it will be released 
and provided to the people of Saskatchewan working with 
health care providers. 
 
Now I’d like to know when the Leader of the Opposition is 
going to announce his plan for the privatization of services? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier 
knows that the standing committee has to table their report by 
the end of August. And Mr. Fyke had a concluding date that he 
had to hit for. You know, the people of Saskatchewan, in light 
of Mr. Fyke’s analysis that health care is in crisis in 
Saskatchewan and the fundamentals needs to be reviewed, 
needs some indication from the Premier and his government as 
to when he’s going to release a plan. 
 
The crisis cannot be allowed to continue any longer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I understand how the Leader 
of the Opposition is very anxious to see what will be a very, 
very progressive plan for health care in Saskatchewan, and it 
will be delivered by this government through its ministry of 
Health, when it is ready and appropriate delivered. 
 
Now that, Mr. Chair, speaks to a long-term plan for the delivery 
of health care services in the province. And I remind the Leader 
of the Opposition that on a daily basis we are working with the 
health care system to provide the best quality care that we can 
provide. 
 
I would remind him again, as I have earlier this week, that in 
fact when we . . . when Canadian communities are scanned by 
independent source and test is done of health care services 
across Canada, I ask the Leader of the Opposition, I ask the 
members present, which community in Canada with a medical 
school as part of its area . . . which community in Canada ranks 
number two in the entire nation for health care services? The 
community of Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is we are working on a daily basis to 
provide quality health care in Saskatchewan. The fact of the 
matter is I think over 30,000 people a day . . . over 30,000 
people a day are served by our health care system. 
 
The fact of the matter is when Saskatchewan people have asked 
to judge the quality of health care of the services they’ve 
received in this province, as reported in January of this year, 
users are happy . . . happy with the care received. 
 
The fact of the matter is when people are asked how would you 
rate the quality of care that was received through 



2368 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan’s health care system . . . this in January of this 
year, fully 86 per cent of those who were asked rated the system 
excellent or good . . . excellent or good. 
 
Now if you were to listen to the members of the opposition, you 
would believe that this is a system that is . . . as the Leader of 
the Opposition is quick to say . . . a system in deep crisis. 
 
The fact of the matter is we have a good quality system in this 
province that’s providing services to over 30,000 people a day. 
Are there reasons for us to be concerned about certain portions 
of the system? The answer is yes. Are we concerned about the 
waiting list circumstance? The answer is yes. Are we working 
with communities, with health care providers to deal with these 
problems? The answer is yes. 
 
What we hear from the opposition, particularly from their 
benches as they sit on their chairs, is a whole lot of protest, but 
very, very few, Mr. Chair, very, very few positive suggestions 
about how we might improve health care in this province. 
 
They’re very, very quick, very, very quick to describe a system 
in crisis but very, very slow to describe some positive solutions, 
except some of those we’ve heard earlier today talking about 
private MRI clinics, talking about privatized services, talking 
about if you got the money and you want to pay, you should be 
able to pay. 
 
Now I want to repeat, as we provide the long-term planning, as 
we work with communities and the people of Saskatchewan to 
build a long-term sustainable plan, we are working on a daily 
basis, through the ministry of Health, through the health care 
providers of our province, through the unionized providers of 
health care in our province, to provide good quality service for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier 
mentioned that Saskatoon has a high standard of health care 
because they have the College of Medicine in Saskatoon. We 
recognize that after you get past the 15,000-person waiting list 
and actually deal with the professional health care providers 
that are there, that we do get service. 
 
And that’s a credit, not to this government — not for one 
second to this government — that’s a credit to the health care 
providers who, in spite of the difficulties and barriers put before 
them by this government, are providing and delivering health 
care professionally to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
But this very group of astute health care providers tell us that 
the College of Medicine — the issue which the Premier raised 
— is at risk. Would the Premier today commit to maintaining 
the College of Medicine even if it means building a new health 
sciences centre on the campus of the University of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well there’s no doubt in my mind, Mr. 
Chair, of the longevity of the College of Medicine as a part of 
the University of Saskatchewan, as part of health care delivery 
in this province. 
 
And we are — the Minister of Health and the district health 
board — they are working very, very closely with that College 

of Medicine. To be sure, there’s been some recent 
announcement from that college of expansion of enrolments. 
We’re working with that college; we’re talking to the 
university; we’re working with the district about the concept of 
a health sciences centre. We understand the important, the 
important role that the College of Medicine plays. 
 
And again I ask then the Leader of the Opposition, if he wants 
to preserve an adequate College of Medicine, a growing 
College of Medicine, an important component of health care in 
the province, how in the world, how in the world would he 
propose to do that if he’d have been government from 1999, 
having frozen the health care funding, how would he propose to 
freeze health care funding and yet do all of this that he says 
should ought to be done? 
 
It is hard for the public to understand this, because on the other 
side he’s saying every day, cut taxes, cut taxes, cut taxes. 
Freeze health care, but expand the College of Medicine, expand 
the number of health care providers, expand services. I don’t 
know, Mr. Chair, maybe the Leader of the Opposition could 
explain that to the people of the province. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier is 
making the people of Saskatchewan very aware of his lack of 
understanding of economic principles, that a strong economy is 
created by a competitive tax structure, and a strong economy is 
the basis on which we can provide better health care and 
stronger social services for our families here in Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I’m having difficulty hearing the 
speaker and unusually it’s from that member’s side. So I would 
ask that all members come to order and listen to the person 
asking the questions and also the person answering the 
questions. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier 
has talked, and my questions have been focused to him, on the 
bigger picture issues with health care. We’ve talked about the 
Fyke report. And he has made some commitments to health care 
publicly. 
 
But if he’s to be believed, he must have kept the promises he’s 
made thus far. If you can’t keep the commitments you’ve made 
up to this point, how can you be trusted on the commitments 
you make into the future? 
 
So I would ask the Premier, given the fact that his government 
promised that all patients arriving in emergency rooms would 
get a preliminary evaluation by a health provider within 15 
minutes of arrival, given the failure to keep that commitment, 
that promise, and not even by a little bit — the fact that many 
times there’s a multiple of 15 minutes; in one case recently a 
4-hour wait for an evaluation — why should we believe 
anything he says? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
apparently has questions on what is transpiring in the 
emergency wards of the province. Now the fact of the matter is, 
our emergency wards, I am told by this information, use the 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2369 

 

Canadian emergency department triage and acuity scale. So that 
everyone who comes through the door, everyone who comes 
through the door, receives this process immediately, which is to 
review the patient prior to registration. 
 
The information I have is that, a patient comes through the door 
of the emergency, the triage process happens immediately. This 
includes I understand both ambulatory patients and those 
transported by emergency vehicles. And I’m sure this could be 
provided to the Leader of the Opposition, if he wants to see it. 
This is in fact the process that is being used in our emergency 
wards across the province. 
 
Now there will be circumstances when treatment is required 
that cannot be provided on an immediate basis — on an 
immediate basis. I mean, this I’m very aware of from my own 
family circumstance several months ago. There are occasions 
with a broken limb or other circumstances where treatment 
cannot be immediately provided and there may be a certain 
wait. But that wait will be judged by the health care 
professionals who are present knowing other demands that are 
coming through those emergency room doors. 
 
And I don’t think the Leader of the Opposition wants a situation 
where he or I, as political figures in this province, are deciding 
who gets treated first or second or third in that emergency ward. 
 
The information that I have is that when someone passes 
through the doors in the emergency ward, there is an immediate 
assessment, the triage is done, and then the decisions — the 
medical decisions, professional decisions — are made about 
treatment. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to 
make it very clear to the Premier that I’m talking about the 
initial evaluation by a health care provider. In other words, the 
promise, the commitment that his government made, his NDP 
government made, that within 15 minutes of arrival there would 
be an evaluation by a health care provider. 
 
Now his paper may say that that is happening. But in fact it is 
not happening and there is many instances when it hasn’t 
happened. It’s because of a shortage of health care workers. 
 
Now he talks about the fact that he thinks that the number of 
health care providers in Saskatchewan are meeting the needs. 
The fact, that’s not true for two reasons. First of all, because the 
waiting lists are getting longer; and secondly, because 15 
minutes after they arrive they are not always dealt with by a 
health care provider. There is no immediate evaluation within 
that 15-minute period. That’s not happening. 
 
I don’t care what his paper says. It’s not happening. And if he 
stands up in the House and tells the people of Saskatchewan 
that it is, he’s not giving them accurate information. 
 
Why should we believe anything that the Premier says if he 
doesn’t even know he’s not keeping this commitment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
stands up and says that people are walking in, being brought in 
or by ambulance or entering the emergency wards of 
Saskatchewan, and not being seen by a health care provider. 

That’s what he is saying. Now would he please then document 
for me these circumstances where this is happening? 
 
My understanding is that when an individual in this province 
enters an emergency ward, a nurse, most likely, performs that 
triage that occurs immediately, makes then the decisions about 
referring to the emergency physician or to other health care 
professionals. Now if in fact there are circumstances where 
individuals are coming into our emergency wards — whether it 
be in our base hospitals, our regional hospitals, or our 
community hospitals — where there is no health professional 
present to meet them and to do that immediate assessment, then 
he should ought to document that, both to the Department of 
Health, to myself, and to the districts involved. 
 
Because I am sure, I am sure that if the districts involved were 
made aware of circumstances where people are coming into 
emergency wards and not being seen at all — now fair enough 
there may be a wait for treatment, fair enough, there may be a 
wait for treatment and we might all desire that sometimes that 
wait could be shortened — but if the Leader of the Opposition, 
and he says it’s happened on many, many, many occasions, he 
said that in the House this afternoon, that I would want him to 
provide to myself, to the ministry of Health, and to the districts 
involved just where it is that these citizens are not being seen 
for long periods of time by any health care professional after 
entering the emergency ward. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. The answer to 
the Premier is it happened in Regina at Regina General 
Hospital. We’ve raised it in the legislature, in this session of the 
legislature so it’s on the . . . it’s on the official record. It was 
confirmed to the official opposition by nurses in Regina 
General emergency that there was not an initial evaluation. I’m 
not talking about treatment. There was not even an initial 
evaluation in some instances for up to four hours for several 
people. And in fact that was confirmed by the Regina Health 
District in the media the following day. 
 
Those are the facts. How does the Premier respond? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And I think in that circumstance the 
Regina District Board expressed its deep concern over that 
circumstance and its willingness to take the appropriate action. 
Now I expect when a system deals with 30,000-plus 
individuals, clients a day, that there will be on occasion 
circumstance when you can’t be sure that every, every, every 
person is served immediately. 
 
But the Leader of the Opposition was standing here moments 
ago saying this is happening all over the province many, many, 
many times. Now he’s cited one example. My recollection of 
the Regina District response to that was to take it very seriously 
and ensure that that kind of thing, to the best of their ability, 
wouldn’t happen again. But if he’s got these many, many 
examples, I invite him to please share them with the House. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank the 
Premier for acknowledging that I was right and he was wrong. I 
appreciate that fact. 
 
The fact then is that his promise to the people of Saskatchewan 
is that not most patients, not when the going is good will this 



2370 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

happen, but the promise is that all patients — I think all is 
everyone — all patients arriving in emergency rooms would get 
a preliminary evaluation by a health care provider within 15 
minutes of arrival. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that’s only . . . Mr. Chair, that’s only one 
failed commitment. There was another commitment from the 
NDP in the last election campaign and that was to introduce a 
single . . . they’re not very happy when they’re exposed for not 
keeping their promises, Mr. Chair. I think we’re hitting a few 
nerves on the other side. They don’t like being shown for their 
incompetence, and their failure to speak truthfully to the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
The NDP promised to introduce a single, reasonable fee for 
ambulance services, and to reduce ambulance charges 
throughout the province starting, Mr. Chair, by eliminating all 
fees for transfers between health institutions. To the best of my 
knowledge, none of this has happened. How can the Premier 
countenance not keeping this promise? 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — With leave to introduce a guest, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I thank the 
Leader of the Opposition, and our Premier, for the opportunity 
to be able to introduce to you and through you to all members 
of the Assembly, a very young, energetic, hardworking summer 
student who’s come to give our office some reprieve during the 
summer months. 
 
I would introduce to you, in the Speaker’s gallery, Rumali 
Werapitiya. And Rumali, besides being hardworking and 
keeping our office smiling and a cheerful receptionist, is also a 
renowned basketball player in her school life and is working 
very hard on her studies. 
 
I would ask all members to join in welcoming Rumali to the 
Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 

Subvote (EX01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Leader of the 
Opposition in his last series of questions was talking about 
commitments made in our election document in 1999 and 
specific commitments around the provision of ambulance 
services throughout the province. 
 
We’re not there yet. We’re not there yet, Mr. Chair, but I intend 

that this government is going to enjoy a four-year mandate. And 
I intend that as that mandate unfolds, we will make continued 
and furthered progress to that goal. 
 
Now what has happened since that time? We undertook a 
significant study of emergency services across this province, a 
study that has now become part of the broad discussion around 
Fyke. 
 
Now I note that on a daily basis these members across the way 
get up in the House and protest about the EMS study, and read 
petitions protesting the EMS study. Fair enough. But we are 
working towards the goals that we set out in that campaign 
because I say . . . or on this issue on the question of, of 
regularizing the charges for ambulance services, whether we be 
rural or urban Saskatchewan, it is the right thing to do. And we 
are moving towards that goal. And I am confident that as we 
approach the end of a four-year mandate we will see much, 
much, much of that work finished and in place. 
 
I would ask therefore that as we want to talk about campaign 
commitments, has the Leader of the Opposition now changed 
his position, or do they still share the view that funding to 
health care should be frozen at the rate of inflation? Now is that 
still the view? Fair enough, I’ll answer to the campaign 
commitments made by this political movement and this party 
and this government — I’ll answer to those. 
 
Will the Leader of the Opposition stand up today in the House 
so the people of Saskatchewan are very clear. Is it his 
commitment today that health care funding should be frozen at 
one point 9 per cent? Is he going to uphold that campaign 
promise if ever elected? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The commitment 
the Saskatchewan Party made was better than the results of this 
government who, if you take away the federal dollars, have not 
kept up with inflation funding. Our commitment was to, as far 
as provincial responsibility is concerned, keep up with inflation. 
And all federal dollars earmarked for health care . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. Order, order. I’m having 
difficulty hearing the speaker and the person asking the 
question, and the person asking the question is having difficulty 
hearing the Chair. So would the committee please come to order 
so we can hear the questions as well as hear the answers. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, thank you. In all fairness the 
Premier should acknowledge that the Saskatchewan Party plan 
for funding health care is far more stable and generous than that 
of his government. 
 
Mr. Chair, I would also tell the Premier that I’ve been informed 
by my colleague, the member for Weyburn-Big Muddy, that 
after we raised the issue in the legislature of an evaluation not 
occurring within 15 minutes on a particular day at the Regina 
General Hospital, and after emergency health care providers in 
Regina General heard the response of the government, they 
contacted us again and assured us that we were correct, and that 
in fact it’s a regular occurrence at Regina General Hospital not 
to do that initial evaluation within 15 minutes. That’s a blatant 
failure by this government to keep its promise. 
 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2371 

 

Mr. Chair, I think the most serious failure of this government to 
keep a commitment, to keep a promise made in its election 
platform was the one to cut waiting time for key surgical 
procedures by at least 30 per cent over the next four years. 
 
(16:00) 
 
As we have heard in Saskatoon, the waiting list has increased 
by 50 per cent; here in Regina by 300 per cent. You’ve lost a lot 
of ground. I don’t know how you can possibly hope within the 
two remaining years to not only reverse the losses but to reduce 
the waiting lists by 30 per cent. 
 
Was this just a foolish promise made to get elected or did the 
Premier think that he would actually be able to reduce waiting 
lists without any concrete changes and improvements to the 
health care system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, there is no one in this House 
that doesn’t share some concern about the increasing numbers 
that are on waiting lists in the province of Saskatchewan. But 
again I think it’s very, very important to recognize that the 
waiting list circumstance is often focused on very specific 
surgeries. And I’m told that many on the Saskatoon waiting list 
— if not, approximately two-thirds — are waiting for day 
surgeries in the city of Saskatoon. 
 
I think we’re all aware that the waiting lists tend to focus 
around cataract surgeries and orthopedics — knees and hips. I 
think we’re very aware . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well you 
see, Mr. Chair, the member from Rosthern chirps from his chair 
continually but he won’t stand up and ask a question. The 
member from Wood River chirps from his chair, won’t get up 
and answer a question. Any time they want to they’re free to 
stand up and ask some questions in this House. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is this. What the Saskatchewan Party 
of course would never recognize, would never want to 
recognize, that in 1999-2000, most recent year, the preliminary 
data indicates that 93,000 surgeries were performed in 
Saskatchewan — 93,000. That’s about 9 per cent of the 
population, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
the member from Rosthern wants me to say it lower. It’s 93,000 
surgeries performed in this province. 
 
Now I ask, Mr. Chair, for members to compare that with the 
number of surgeries that were provided just 10 years ago — just 
10 years ago. What was the number 10 years ago — 80,000. 
Today we are providing 13,000 more surgeries on an annual 
basis than we were 10 years ago. 
 
Now the Sask Party will never tell you about that. They’ll never 
tell you about the growth in services that are being provided to 
Saskatchewan people. Neither will they tell you how we 
compare with other jurisdictions in the surgical procedures that 
we are providing to Saskatchewan people. 
 
And as I said, some of the difficulty in the waiting list is in 
orthopedics; it’s hips and knees and so on. 
 
It says, Mr. Speaker, according to the Canadian Institute of 
Health Information, health care in Canada, our rate of hip 
replacement in the province of Saskatchewan, hip replacement 

surgery, was 70.9 per 100,000 population — 70.9. 
 
An Hon. Member: — So? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well the member from Wood River says 
so. Well so the average national provision is 58.8 per 100,000. 
We are 15 per cent, 15 higher, than the national average. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is we’re doing more, Mr. Chair. 
Have we got a problem? The answer is yes. Are we working at 
the problem? The answer is emphatically yes — working to 
recruit health care providers, working with districts, working 
with the College of Medicine. We’re working to provide 
solutions to these problems. 
 
The fact of the matter is these folks, do they have a solution? 
No, not one. I have not heard one solution from members of 
that opposition to solve or even begin to challenge the waiting 
list problems, not one solution — except, Mr. Chair, that we 
should bring in an auditor to do an audit of the system, that’s 
what they said, and then freeze funding. 
 
Well please would the member from Wood River explain how 
an auditor and 1 per cent funding will help the waiting list 
problem? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, the 
Premier is completely unfounded in his statements. The facts 
are — and this is important — the facts are that the Premier and 
his government have broken their promise on waiting lists; 
they’re getting longer rather than shorter. And it’s unfortunate 
that he would give such a flippant answer when those 15,400 
people in Saskatoon and 11,000 people in Regina, plus others in 
other parts of Saskatchewan, represent people that are hurting 
— people that are in pain, people that are discouraged, 
despondent, parents that are very concerned about their 
grandparents and their children, working people who are 
concerned about getting back on the job. 
 
And the Premier apparently seems to think he’s providing 
enough effort, his government is addressing the problem when 
yet the lines are getting longer and longer, the problem is 
getting worse and worse. And I’m very disappointed with the 
Premier’s answer in that regard. 
 
The Premier also indicated he has no idea when they’re going to 
bring forward a response to the Fyke report and the Standing 
Committee on Health’s study of health care as well as the 
parallel committee sponsored by his department. 
 
The government has failed in regard to promises for access to 
health care. They have failed miserably in regard to the 
15-minute wait for evaluation. They have failed to deliver on 
their promises for ambulance services. So all through the entire 
Health department where we spend the most money — 40 per 
cent of every tax dollar spent on health care — this government 
has been an adamant failure. And the Premier doesn’t even 
recognize it, and that certainly is a concern to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I just want to ask one question on agriculture. Since becoming 
Premier, and I believe it was late January of this year, or at least 
Premier-elect — I’m not sure when the actual transfer, but 



2372 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

whenever the transfer was made from Mr. Romanow to the 
Premier — can he tell the House and the people of 
Saskatchewan how many times he has talked either in person or 
over the telephone about agriculture with the Prime Minister of 
Canada? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition starts this new line of questioning with some 
comment further to health care. 
 
He talks about those in emergency wards who are not being 
seen by health care professionals. What has he been able to 
provide for evidence? One incident. One . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Oh now he says from his seat, many. But he 
won’t say that from his feet. He won’t provide the information 
about the many he says that occur in the province. 
 
He provided the one, and the district involved took immediate 
. . . Mr. Chair, they obviously do not like to hear the truth of the 
matter. They do not like facts over there. For as soon as they’re 
challenged with a bit of fact, what do they do? They all start 
shouting. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, to go back on the emergency question. I 
repeat, if the Leader of the Opposition knows of circumstances 
where he says that there are many, many people who are 
entering emergency departments in this province and not being 
seen, I challenge him today to put that information on the floor 
of this Assembly. Let us know where they are. Let us acquaint 
the ministry of Health. And let us acquaint the districts 
involved. 
 
Now we have . . . Where’s that guy from? The member from 
Sask Rivers. Now he enjoins the debate. The member from 
Sask Rivers enjoins the debate. He too seems to have 
information to offer. I invite him to stand up, ask some 
questions. Offer the information that the member from Sask 
Rivers has. Please, please enter, sir. Enter the debate. Save it 
from your seat. Enter the debate. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition talks about rural emergency 
transportation. Again we have established the EMS report. 
We’ve laid that in the hands of the Fyke discussion. There will 
be, Mr. Chair, progress on provision of emergency services in 
Saskatchewan. There will be progress and commitments will be 
honoured, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is again, I repeat, we’ve got 
challenges in our system, as does every Canadian jurisdiction. 
But when compared to all Canadian jurisdictions, which 
community — which community, Mr. Chair — rates number 
two in Canada? Number two? Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 
Number two in all of Canada. 
 
Mr. Chair, who is it in the decade of the ’90s pioneered the 
home care model for Canada? The province of Saskatchewan. 
Who is it, Mr. Chair, who pioneered in this decade the 
involvement of district, the involvement of communities in the 
development of health care? Who is it in this nation that has 
pioneered the integration of services so that people have come 
from across the world to look at what’s happening in 
Saskatchewan? And who is it, Mr. Chair, who has decentralized 
services, brought services like dialysis, kidney dialysis, close to 

communities; chemotherapy close to communities; mental 
health services close to communities; services like addiction 
services close to communities? 
 
Which administration, which political party, which government 
has pioneered in Canada, in the west, primary care teams in 
rural Saskatchewan? And the Leader of the Opposition should 
know about primary care teams. Which, Mr. Chair, just by the 
way — just by the way — which political movement in this 
province gave birth to the concept of publicly funded health 
care and which political movement and philosophy fights it on 
every occasion? This group. I’ve given evidence today they 
haven’t changed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the leopard has not changed 
its spots. Put them in charge of health care, they’ll privatize 
everything in sight. That’s their answer. 
 
No, no you see this is . . . And I’ll explain it, Mr. Chair. Sure 
they’ll freeze funding to health care. What’s the result? What’s 
the result? They’ll freeze the funding to health care while health 
care will carry on right out of the wallets of the citizens private. 
And so those who have the dollars will get the health care, will 
get the quality health care, and those who don’t won’t. 
 
Because we know that’s the system they believe in. We see it in 
practice just south of us. We know that’s what they believe in. 
We know that’s what they’ll do. And if they want to come clean 
and make that statement we’ll have that debate. 
 
Now I want also, Mr. Chair, to talk about again their 
commitment to health care. What was their commitment, ’99 
election, a year and a half ago? They said to the people of 
Saskatchewan, put us in charge, and you know what we’re 
going to do, we’re going to provide health care at the rate of 
inflation, the funding at the rate of inflation. That’s what we’re 
going to add to the health care budget. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition says well you’ve got federal 
money. Well he ought to check the books — he ought to check 
his facts. The fact of the matter is there’s a whole mot more 
provincial money going into health care than there is federal 
money. It used to be a 50/50 split; we’re down to about 50 on 
the dollar now. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is that . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about agriculture? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’ll get to agriculture, just you wait. 
We’re going to talk a little bit more on health care. 
 
The member from Estevan, she doesn’t want me to talk about 
health care now because her friend from Weyburn’s all in 
favour of the privatization. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Am I on a waiting list too? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well she . . . yes, we’ll put her on my 
waiting list for agriculture, all right. 
 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2373 

 

Now let us, Mr. Chair, take a serious look at their commitment 
in the 1999 election to freeze increases to the Department of 
Health at the rate of inflation, which this year would have 
represented 1.9 per cent as opposed, Mr. Chair, to the 11.9 per 
cent dedicated to that budget from this government. 
 
Now let’s just see, let’s just see, let’s just see what would be the 
result of the member from Wood River — I’ll have to send this 
down to some of his friends because they’ll be interested to 
know what the member from Wood River supports — well he 
would support, he would support a budget that would remove 
$292 million from the . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — I didn’t say that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Oh yes you did. He says he didn’t say it; 
well he said it right in his election material. I saw it in his 
election material — health care funding frozen at the point of 
inflation. All right, $292 million, $292 million out of health 
care. Now you see our totals . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. I’m having a bit of 
difficulty hearing the person answering the questions. And so if 
there’s a lot of background noise, if there’s private 
conversations that need to take place, please move them behind 
the bar. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’ll try not so 
much to agitate the members opposite. But here are the facts of 
the matter. 
 
If we were following their financing policy for the ministry of 
Health in this province, it would have meant a 1.9 per cent 
increase to health care spending this year. That’s what it would 
have meant. Now I just want you to know that would mean a 
reduction in the budget that now exists at 2.2 billion — it would 
mean a reduction of 292 million. 
 
Now our total spending on acute and rehabilitation services in 
this budget is $784 million. So if we took the 282 million they 
want to take out, if we took it out of acute and rehabilitation, 
that would be a 37 per cent decrease in spending. Now that 
would help the waiting list situation wouldn’t it? 
 
Now our long-term care spending 327 million — 327 million 
on long-term care. That provides 9,000 beds to Saskatchewan 
residents. So if you took out the 292 from long-term care 
spending, well I’ll tell you what that would mean. That would 
be a 90 per cent reduction in long-term care spending if we 
followed their budget for prognosis. 
 
(16:15) 
 
In home care we suspend . . . we spend $86 million. We spend 
$115 million for . . . we spend a total of $201 million on home 
care and the drug plan. 
 
Well if you took out the 292 million that they were proposed to 
take out, well, Mr. Speaker, you know what, we wouldn’t have 
a home care plan at all, we wouldn’t have a drug plan at all, and 
we’d still have to cut something else to meet . . . My point is, 
Mr. Chair, the Saskatchewan Party made a very clear 
commitment for the funding of health — and we are, by the 

way, debating the budget — they made a very clear 
commitment on how they would fund health. They said we’re 
going to freeze it at the rate of inflation. 
 
In this budget year that would mean $292 million less for the 
provision of health care services. Now, maybe they’ve changed 
their position. Maybe they now take a different view of that. It 
would be appropriate in my view if the Leader of the 
Opposition would stand up and say that. 
 
Let me conclude this by saying, Mr. Chair, we are engaged in a 
dialogue with Saskatchewan people through the all-party 
legislative committee on the Fyke Commission. We will, in 
conjunction with health care providers, with the communities of 
Saskatchewan, with the people of Saskatchewan, we will build 
and we will deliver, and we will develop and plan and announce 
a model for 21st century health care delivery in this province. 
 
In the meantime, Mr. Chair, we’re going to work on a daily 
basis . . . on a daily basis with our providers, with our health 
care districts, to provide the best possible health care that can be 
provided to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition inquires of conversations that 
I may have had with the Prime Minister. I am not in this 
estimate, or in any circumstance, going to document for the 
Leader of the Opposition conversations that I have with either 
the Prime Minister or other premiers, or other political leaders 
in this province. I am not going to do that, ever. 
 
I can tell the Leader of the Opposition that in a variety of ways, 
through personal contact, through written communication, 
through exercise that we have conducted in this House, we have 
acquainted through, particularly through the work of the 
Minister of Agriculture, we have acquainted the federal 
government with the circumstances facing the farm families in 
this province and the circumstances about the drought that 
we’re suffering in some quarters of our province this year. If his 
concern is that communication is being held with the federal 
government on this, he need not be concerned. Those concerns 
are being addressed to the federal government. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Of course the 
question was not to document the conversations but just to 
inform the people of Saskatchewan how many times he had 
communicated with the Prime Minister, and again the Premier 
failed. He went on a long rant — very little fact in the rant on 
health care — and sidestepped the issue. And that’s very 
disappointing that our Premier would be so disrespectful of the 
concerns of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, in regard to the 15-minute wait, because the Premier 
specifically asked the question, I will respond because I want to 
assure the Premier that we do not come on a purely academic or 
basis of lack of knowledge, but we come with the facts. And 
Regina Health District has backed us up on these facts. 
 
On a Monday, and I believe it was May, at 4 o’clock in the 
afternoon there were 52 patients in emergency, between the 
waiting room and patients already in rooms. The wait was three 
to four hours, plus another hour once in the room, and assessed 
by a nurse to see a doctor. At the same time we were on bypass 
to ambulance traffic for one hour and 45 minutes, so they 



2374 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

weren’t even getting . . . many weren’t even getting to 
emergency in a timely fashion. 
 
On Tuesday morning there were 19 admissions in emergency 
waiting for beds. At 4 o’clock that day there were 22 patients in 
emergency waiting for beds. And then nurses informed us that 
the situation did not improve the next day. So this is a common 
occurrence. We have been informed by health care providers 
that this happens on a regular basis. 
 
I’m disappointed that the Premier is not aware of this and 
hopefully he will be in consultation with his Health minister to 
rectify the problem, because it was a commitment and a very 
important commitment made by his government that is not 
being fulfilled. 
 
Mr. Chair, there are several areas that I want to cover and I 
would just encourage the Premier to . . . I will try to stick to one 
item at a time and if he would stick to one item at a time in his 
answer, the process will not be as long for him. 
 
I want to talk just briefly about post-secondary education. The 
fact is that his government in the last election promised free 
tuition. As we know the opposite has occurred; tuitions have 
increased dramatically. Particularly the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan) has seen a huge increase in tuition. It’s got to be 
quite a shock to students who were promised a first year of free 
tuition to suddenly find a huge increase in tuition. Not only that, 
but there’s a very modest tax credit offered by the province for 
students . . . graduates, but in fact the changes to the student 
loan program taking away the interest-free component more 
than offsets any tax credit component to their post-secondary 
policy. 
 
So in other words the prospects, the prospects for students, 
post-secondary students in Saskatchewan has deteriorated 
substantially and again flies right in the face of promises and 
commitments made by this Premier and his government to the 
very future of our province. How can he countenance such a 
failure to keep a promise? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, yes in fact in the last election 
campaign we spoke to the people of Saskatchewan about the 
possibility, the potential, the promise, that we would work to 
eliminate tuition on the first year. Well you know what the 
people told us? They told us they didn’t like the idea one bit. 
They told us straight up they didn’t like the idea one bit. 
 
Now some of us choose to listen on occasion, Mr. Chair; and 
when we’re told, well some of us don’t choose to listen. I refer 
to members across. When we’re told by a broad base in the 
general public, this is not a good idea, it seems to us then it’s 
not wise to proceed. 
 
What did we do? We had our Minister of Education and our 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education criss-cross the province 
meeting people in community halls all over the province, 
meeting students, meeting their parents, meeting educators. And 
the fact of the matter is they dialogued with people, and the 
people of Saskatchewan said there are several things you need 
to do instead of providing first-year tuition without cost to 
students. 
 

One of them was create a tax mechanism by which, upon 
graduation, you can earn some benefit through the tax system. 
What have we done? Put it in place. 
 
They said, they said, help our students, help our students earn 
their first-year tuition. Help our students do that. So what have 
we done, Mr. Chair? Well we have put in place the Centennial 
Summer Student Program. What have we done in this budget, 
the budget under debate, the budget these people will vote 
against? This budget provides a tripling, a tripling of the 
number of opportunities, Mr. Chair, for students to access 
summer employment in this province. 
 
Now this program, this program is not just a simple . . . not just 
a matter of providing summer jobs, but these are meaningful 
jobs that are giving our young people an opportunity to 
experience summer employment that will be part of their 
long-term training and benefit, Mr. Chair. We’re working with 
students to assist them to earn that first year tuition. 
 
This program, over the next five years, will employ 10,000 of 
our young people — 10,000. And they are working in 
communities small and large, rural and urban. They are working 
in our regional parks. They’re working across the province, 
some of them. Some of them here working with us in the 
legislature, Mr. Speaker. Some of them working in the Wascana 
Park just outside of this legislature. A great program. 
 
Now the member from Wood River again, I think it is the 
member chirping, ask somebody in small business. Well you 
see they would have us put this program in place in duplication 
of other programs that already exist, I guess. 
 
The fact of the matter is there is federal programs that assist 
students, federal programs which assist students to find 
employment in the private sector. Good programs they are. 
We’re not debating that. Good programs they are. But as we 
build programs, we want programs that are complementary and 
not duplicating that which already exists. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we listen to the people of Saskatchewan. We 
listen to them. They did not think the first year of tuition was a 
good idea. We’ve taken steps to provide other mechanisms by 
which to support students. 
 
Now I just want to review also the significant growth in 
post-secondary funding. We’ve increased our third party grants 
by 3.5 per cent — 3.5 per cent to our institutions, 3.5. The 
university funding mechanism gets an extra $3 million — an 
extra $3 million. We are supporting the virtual campus — the 
virtual campus, campus of Saskatchewan through the 
technology of the Internet with $2.5 million. We’re expanding 
computer science expansion at $1.5 million. More than that, the 
minister tells me. 
 
We’re supporting Aboriginal apprenticeship with another 
$400,000. We’ve enhanced student loan interest relief in this 
budget and debt reduction with another $600,000. We’ve 
expanded and made the announcement — and I’m very proud 
of this announcement — the expansion of the nursing program 
in the northern health access program, particularly suited and 
directed to students in northern Saskatchewan, $1.4 million. 
 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2375 

 

Mr. Chair, we are investing significantly — significantly — in 
the education of our young people. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, if 
there’s one element of our society that has got to be 
disappointed with the NDP government, it’s our young people. 
 
The government made a commitment to help post-secondary 
students and they fail to keep that commitment. Not only did 
they fail — and yes, their proposal in the election campaign was 
wrong — but then they never corrected the problem. They’ve 
made it worse. 
 
Tuitions have gone up. Student loans have become more 
expensive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, he talks about student employment. Can you 
imagine the audacity of a government . . . the audacity of a 
government to put forward a student employment program that 
cuts out the private sector, doesn’t include small business? 
Everyone knows that small business is a generator of jobs. 
 
If you want to prepare a workforce to be productive, if you want 
to encourage young people to enter the Saskatchewan 
workforce, surely a government with any sense whatsoever, any 
common sense, any decency in fact . . . any decency, would 
include small business in its student summer employment 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what are students doing? Students are going to 
Alberta to get their jobs because they see a government here 
that thinks that the only real job . . . the only real job in our 
province is a job provided by the government, by a local 
municipality, by a park. Mr. Speaker, if it’s a small business, 
they don’t count. That’s the message that the Premier has sent 
to young people in Saskatchewan. 
 
Not only that, the Premier has told the people of Saskatchewan 
. . . and his Minister of Education, that there are going to be 
30,000 fewer young people enrolled in elementary and 
secondary education in this province. 
 
The Premier has given up on young people. The Premier has 
given up on them at the job level, at the post-secondary level, at 
the secondary, and the elementary level. The Premier is waving 
a white flag and saying he doesn’t see a future for young people 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
And that, Mr. Chairman, is disgusting, it’s disappointing, it’s 
disheartening. It hurts families, it hurts parents, it hurts 
grandparents because they recognize that families are going to 
be divided and the long-distance bills are going to go up 
because the young people of Saskatchewan are going to leave. 
 
Mr. Chairman, we’ve questioned the Premier for a long time 
and we started out on accountability, and the Premier refused to 
be accountable in this legislature. He refused to tell the people 
of Saskatchewan where he measured accountability, what 
measure of ministerial accountability he demanded. He would 
not tell the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
He’s failed on his commitment to be more open and more 
accountable to the people of Saskatchewan. I have indicated 

several areas where the Premier has failed in health care. He has 
blatantly broken promises to Saskatchewan people, and with no 
heart, with no compassion. He’s not apologized to the people of 
Saskatchewan. He’s droned on about numbers that are 
meaningless when waiting lists have got longer, when you can’t 
go to an emergency room and get an evaluation within a 
reasonable amount of time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is wrong for the Premier to paint a picture of 
Saskatchewan that is not accurate, that is not true. The colours 
are wrong, Mr. Chairman. The colours are wrong and the 
people of Saskatchewan know that the colours are wrong. 
 
Mr. Chair, we want to talk a little bit about municipal affairs, 
municipal affairs. Taxes are going up. Taxes are skyrocketing at 
the municipal level because the Premier and his minister does 
not recognize the role of municipalities. They have been 
squeezing property taxpayers, and you know why they’ve been 
squeezing property taxpayers? Because the tax base is shrinking 
in Saskatchewan. There are fewer and fewer taxpayers but that 
property is still there. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And so the Premier, to duck the consequences of an economy 
that’s shrinking, that’s not growing the way it should and a tax 
base that’s getting smaller because people are picking up and 
leaving this province, including young people, because of that 
fact, the Premier is putting the onus on property taxpayers 
because he thinks people are not going to move their land and 
their buildings and their property out of Saskatchewan. You’ve 
at least got them around the ankles on this one. We’re going to 
trip up the people of Saskatchewan on this one. 
 
Well the result is, the result is he’s having more and more 
trouble funding education, providing quality education and an 
optimistic future for education in Saskatchewan. He’s got more 
and more problems delivering health care. 
 
And quite frankly, Mr. Chair, he has not given us any indication 
that he has the foggiest notion about what any constructive 
change to the health care system would be — not one shred of 
hope for the people of Saskatchewan, not one shred. 
 
How can the Premier sit in his chair and shrug things off saying, 
oh well, you know, something about inflation and, you know, 
well if you guys were doing this . . . (inaudible) . . . That is 
disgusting, Mr. Chair. That is irresponsible, Mr. Chair. That is 
shirking responsibility, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — That is unacceptable for a Premier of a 
government that’s been in power in Saskatchewan for 10 years. 
Mr. Speaker, I would have thought that the Premier would have 
recognized from the results of the 1999 election that that kind of 
message doesn’t wash with the people in this province. 
 
But the Premier is playing a fool’s game, Mr. Chairman. The 
Premier is not levelling with the people of Saskatchewan. The 
Premier is not calling a spade a spade. And as a result, Mr. 
Chairman, the people of Saskatchewan are disillusioned, they’re 
disappointed. Many are leaving. They see no hope. Hope has 



2376 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

been deferred, Mr. Chair. And the results are this government is 
losing the confidence of the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, I expect to resume this questioning later on, but I do 
want to ask another question of the Premier before I turn over 
the questioning to my colleague, the member from 
Canora-Pelly, and that is on the whole principle of freedom of 
speech and democracy in the workplace. Now you would think 
that the Premier, the leader of a New Democratic Party, a New 
Democratic Party that proposes to support labour and want to 
create jobs in Saskatchewan, would support democratic 
principles in the workplace. 
 
Mr. Chair, my question to the Premier is threefold, and I hope 
the Premier is listening — I hope the Premier is listening. The 
first concern, why would the Premier allow his government to 
force senior public servants to have to join a union against their 
will? Why would he do that? 
 
Secondly, why would the Premier allow his government to deny 
the proper democratic process of a secret ballot with a 50 per 
cent plus one vote in favour of certification? Why would the 
Premier disallow that democratic process to take place? 
 
And thirdly, Mr. Chairman, why would the Premier of 
Saskatchewan deny the employers the right to freedom of 
speech during a certification process? You would think that a 
premier of honour, committed to the democratic process and 
freedom of speech, would recognize the importance of allowing 
both employers and union organizers the same rights — 
freedom of speech. Would the Premier be accountable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s a challenge to 
address the issues raised by the Leader of the Opposition when 
he started, I think somewhere way back in that tirade, talking 
about employment opportunities and educational opportunities 
for youth in the province of Saskatchewan. So we’ll go back 
there, we’ll go back there. 
 
And I might just want to point out to the Leader of the 
Opposition this article which appeared in The Leader-Post 
April 11 in this year, 2001, with the headline which reads: 
“Sask. youths’ job prospects improve.” Improve. Just note these 
words, Mr. Chair. 
 

Saskatchewan is one of the best places in the country for 
youths to find a job . . . 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: —  
 

In the 2000 (study) Provincial Employment Conditions and 
Ranking for Youth 15-24, Saskatchewan ranked third in the 
country — a jump from its fourth-place standing in 1999. 

 
Saskatchewan is one of the best places in the country for young 
people to find a job. 
 
Now they’d never learn that from the Leader of the Opposition. 
They’d never know that from members of the Saskatchewan 
Party who go around suggesting that this is about the worst 
place in the country in which to live, to be educated, and to 

work, and to raise a family. If you listen to those folks, you 
would think this was one of the worst places in the country in 
which to live. Well, Mr. Chair, it is not. It is not. 
 
And when it comes to opportunities for youth it is documented 
that the prospects for youth to find work in this province have 
in fact improved. 
 
Now in addition, the young people in this province are being 
served through post-secondary education — through a deep 
commitment to post-secondary education. The young people in 
this province are being served through a deep commitment to 
education — K to 12 — in this province. The young people of 
this province are being served by a commitment of this 
government to pre-kindergarten, to community-based schools. 
 
Just note. Just note, Mr. Chair, what has happened as a result of 
this budget. This budget brings through the ministry of 
Education 9.1 per cent increase to expenditures in K to 12 
education in this province — 9.1 per cent. 
 
Now again I ask, I ask the Leader of the Opposition, would he 
please to stand in this House and explain . . . I’m confident that 
he’ll stand in this House as soon as I sit down. As soon as I sit 
down I’m sure the Leader of the Opposition will stand in this 
House and explain his commitment again to freeze the funding 
to education at the rate of inflation. Same commitment; same 
party; same election; 1999: a commitment to freeze education at 
the rate of inflation; 1.9 per cent would be the increase to K to 
12 education in this province on that campaign promise. This 
budget — 9 per cent increase. What does that enable . . . why 
does that happen? 
 
And he started out talking about municipal government. Well 
the fact of the matter is, our municipal leaders came to 
government earlier this year and said if you have resources that 
are extra put them into education. Put them into education. 
Exactly what we’ve done; 9.1 per cent into education, which it 
has in fact in some circumstances allowed the RMs (rural 
municipality) and the urban municipalities to in fact lower the 
mill rate. That’s in fact the case. 
 
Now the situation is that this 9.1 doesn’t just provide for new 
resources to the existing system. It provides the resources that 
we can double in this province the number of community 
schools. Double the community schools. Essentially double — 
not quite — 80 per cent increase in the number of 
pre-kindergartens because, Mr. Chair, it is my view that monies 
that we can provide to the early education of children in this 
province are the wisest monies that we will spend in the 
long-term health of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And here we have in this budget a 
commitment to an 80 per cent increase in pre-kindergartens, a 
doubling of community schools which are working with many 
of our families and children most at risk, Mr. Chair. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, they want to criticize the Education budget, 
they want to criticize the Education budget. Well that’s 
interesting because the Education budget, from those most 
closely involved in Education — the trustees — the trustees say 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2377 

 

. . . Well I’ll just quote again from the Prince Albert school 
officials. This was after the budget. The Prince Albert school 
officials gave the Saskatchewan government good grades on its 
provincial budget, quote, “Overall it’s probably the best budget 
we’ve seen in 15 years.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — So that’s, that’s the view, that’s the view 
not of a negative opposition who seems to thrive on negativity; 
that’s the view of someone who’s actually on the ground 
working to deliver education to our children in our families in 
our communities. That’s the view of the people of 
Saskatchewan as opposed to the negative views that we hear on 
a daily basis from over there. 
 
The last issue that the Leader of the Opposition raised, and I 
know he’ll want to stand and pursue it further, is the question of 
a ruling of the Labour Relations Board, a ruling — note, Mr. 
Chair — of the Labour Relations Board in reference to the 
classification of people employed in the public sector; a ruling 
which indicated that those several hundreds of individuals 
should be part of the public sector union in the SGEU 
(Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ Union). A 
ruling I note, Mr. Chair, of the Labour Relation Board. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition would want the public to 
believe that somehow we just made that decision in the benches 
of government. The fact of the matter is that decision’s made 
with the Labour Relations Board. 
 
Now I am not sure, and I’d ask the Leader of the Opposition to 
clarify this: is he suggesting that government of the day, that 
government of the day should intervene or interfere directly 
with decisions made by the Labour Relations Board? Is that the 
view of the Leader of the Opposition? Because if he wants us to 
do that the fact is we’re not going to do it — the answer’s going 
to be no. We are not going to intervene in rulings of the Labour 
Board, no matter what the Labour critic says, no matter what 
the Leader of the Opposition says. 
 
So I ask the Leader of the Opposition to stand now in the 
House, stand now in the House and make it very clear to the 
people of Saskatchewan — working people, business people — 
is his view the government of the day should interfere, 
intervene in decisions made by the Labour Relations Board in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Premier, before I ask a number of questions regarding one of 
the Acts that you’re responsible for, The Constituency 
Boundaries Act, I do want to clarify a few numbers, Mr. 
Premier — numbers that were raised by the opposition, 
numbers that you’ve indicated. Because there are times when 
people read Hansard and they are a bit confused about the 
numbers that people talk about — 11 per cent increases, 12 per 
cent increases, 2 per cent increases. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want you to clarify, in the Minister of Finance’s 
mid-year financial report, —and we’re talking about estimates 
for this year and estimates for last year, Mr. Premier — in that 

mid-year release back in November of 2000, the Finance 
minister indicated that the Health budget, the Health 
expenditure was going to be 1,987,397,000. In addition to that 
there was going to be an expenditure of 150 million for the 
Transition Fund and there was going to be an additional 
expenditure of $33.3 million, which was federal money that 
came in for the Medical Equipment Fund as it was called. 
 
Those numbers, Mr. Premier, total $2,170,697,000. Those are 
the Minister of Finance’s numbers and those are what are on the 
record. 
 
Mr. Premier, in your budget of this year, you indicate that the 
expenditure for Health is 2,207,228,000. Mr. Premier, that’s a 
difference of $36.5 million, approximately. But you know, Mr. 
Premier, the other thing that is noticeable, in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, Mr. Premier, is that you are taking an 
additional $20.7 million from the federal CHST (Canada Health 
and Social Transfer) supplement that was entirely taken last 
year, the full 80-some million dollars, and you’ve set that side 
in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund to access $20 million each and 
every year — this year, next year, and the year after. 
 
So, Mr. Premier, if I take the $20 million out of the Fiscal 
Stabilization, which is federal money that you are now 
accessing, and I subtract it from the 36.5 million difference 
between this year’s budget and the Minister of Finance’s 
mid-year projections, you know, Mr. Premier, that’s $16 
million. That’s less than 1 per cent increase on what you said 
you were going to spend last year and what you are actually 
estimating to spend this year. 
 
You know, Mr. Premier, that’s way below the cost of living. I 
ask for your response. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 (16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as you well know, this 
government has established the tradition of providing a 
mid-year financial report. At budget time we will indicate the 
estimated budget numbers and the final numbers will occur 
through the process of the Public Accounts. 
 
Now the more accurate numbers, of course, will be those at 
budget time when we’ve been through the year of expenditures 
and the year of operations, when you know much more 
precisely than you did at the mid-year. Mid-year will be a — 
and the critic knows this — the mid-year is the projection at 
mid-year. Fair enough? Fair enough. 
 
So when we get to budget time . . . so the budget figures that we 
have today will be more accurate in their estimations than those 
figures that are available at mid-year. We get the final 
to-the-penny count with the Public Accounts. 
 
So here’s the actual facts of the matter. In Health, in the year 
2001, the estimated expenditures — and these will be more 
accurate even than the mid-year report, and they’re still 
estimated until we get the Public Accounts — but the more 
accurate, estimated figure according to our budget 
documentation here is $1.977697 billion —one billion, nine 



2378 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

hundred and seventy-seven thousand dollars. 
 
The budgeted estimate for this coming year, the budget 
estimated coming this year is $2.2 billion — $2.2 billion. And 
therefore, Mr. Chair, there’s no mistaking the fact that new and 
extra resources are being added to the health care budget. There 
can be no mistaking the fact. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Well we’ll ask 
people of the province to ask for a copy of the mid-year 
financial report, ask for a copy of your budget, and I’m sure that 
the people will be able to see the numbers that I’ve now 
indicated are on the record and I’m sure that they’ll see that 
those numbers are correct, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Premier, 2001 is a census year in Canada, and The 
Constituency Boundaries Act makes specific references to the 
census taken in Canada and then how it must be dealt with. Mr. 
Premier, could you tell us when your government expects to 
receive the report, the census report, from the national census 
just done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m not sure I can entirely, 
with confidence, accurately answer the question. 
 
I think the tradition is that it comes in the April of the year 
following the census. If that follows, then we could expect it 
April of 2002. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. If indeed that’s 
correct, and I understand it will always occur in the year 
following and whether it be March or April. 
 
Mr. Premier, the constitution boundaries Act clearly lays out a 
process for the government to follow in terms of looking at the 
revisions or possible changes. Does the Premier follow the . . . 
will the Premier plan to follow the existing provisions laid out 
in The Constituency Boundaries Act, or do you propose any 
changes to this Act before dealing with that topic? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, at this time, at this time, 
government has no proposal before the legislature or before 
itself to change the Act. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. The Act clearly 
indicates a process to be followed whereby after the Clerk of 
the Executive Council receives that census report, which you 
are indicating is probably April of 2002, that there is a period of 
30 days for the Lieutenant Governor in Council to establish a 
commission. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you plan to follow that clause and establish that 
commission under that directive? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the law . . . this is the law of 
Saskatchewan and unless this legislature at some time debates 
and changes that, we will adhere to the law established in the 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much. Excellent, Mr. 
Premier. We expected that that would be your answer, and I ask 
you to look at section 5 of the Act — and I don’t know whether 
you have a copy of the Act — but if I might, Mr. Premier, that 

section says that the Premier must consult with the Leader of 
the Opposition on the appointment of this committee. 
 
How will this consultation take place, Mr. Premier? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I observe, Mr. Chair, that the Leader of 
the Opposition, or if in the case of some circumstance we end 
up with leaders of the opposition, that the two of us or the three 
of us would meet, discuss this matter, and come to a mutual 
understanding. It is a provision of the Act that I would follow. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Premier, what I would like you to clarify 
is whether or not the actual appointment of those people to the 
commission will . . . in using the word, consultation, in the Act, 
consultation has had different meanings for different people. 
I’m wondering if there is to be approval by the Leader of the 
Opposition for the people that . . . for the names that are put 
forward for the commission. Is that what you’re meaning by 
consultation and establishment of that commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — No, Mr. Chair, to be fair, and I’m 
confident that the member opposite and all members opposite 
want to adhere to the Act and the intention of the Act and the 
law as prescribed in the Act, that intention and prescription is 
that there should ought to be consultation, that consultation will 
occur. This Act does not imply or state that there must be 
agreement or approval from leaders of the opposition. It 
indicates clearly there must be consultation, and there will be 
consultation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Premier, if I understood your comment, 
you are stating then that there will be no need for the Leader of 
the Opposition to approve the names that will eventually make 
up the commission? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, yes. The fact of the matter is 
the legislation doesn’t prescribe to the Leader of the Opposition 
or leaders of the opposition a veto. But let’s, to be fair and let’s 
understand, we all have a desire and a reason to ensure that any 
constituency boundary commission is going to be fair, that it’s 
going to be seen to be fair, that it will do good work because it 
will affect members on all sides of the House. It will affect 
constituencies across the province. 
 
I’ll want to consult with the Leader of the Opposition and I’m 
relatively confident that when we reach this point in time that 
we will find a mutual agreement. 
 
But the Act does not provide veto to a leader or leaders of the 
opposition. That’s very clear. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much for that answer, Mr. 
Premier. Mr. Premier, one of the other conditions in the Act is 
that the commission must consult with the public on new 
boundaries. 
 
How do you see that process unfolding since it might be April 
that that release is, or maybe March, and we may not be back in 
session by then. How do you see that process occurring for 
consultation with the public by the commission members? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’d want first of all to ensure 
that as we put the commission together that we’re putting 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2379 

 

people in place that will have the expertise and the experience 
and knowledge and I would want to trust their judgment on 
appropriate public consultation. 
 
We have had in recent years an experience, and there were 
opportunities for public input and a further follow-up after the 
initial report, where individuals could appear or groups could 
appear before the commission to make either protest or 
recommended change. 
 
The Act as I see it here talks about the potential of the 
commission to have hearings at times and places that it 
considers appropriate. It allows the commission to use paid 
advertisement. It sets out some prescription for people who 
want to present to the commission. It is required to provide an 
interim report, then to have hearings around the interim report, 
to make copies of the report available to the public. 
 
And then finally, after that kind of dialogue and consultation, 
they provide the final and official report here to the legislature. 
And at the end of the day, we would have to approve it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, one of 
the other clauses in this Act states that the constituency 
populations quotient is derived by using various populations. 
That is population of the total amount of the province and the 
north and then dividing that number by 56 after eliminating the 
northern population. 
 
Mr. Premier, we don’t know what the census report is going to 
indicate in terms of where people are located. We know that the 
population of the province of Saskatchewan has dropped a fair 
amount in the last little while. And I note, Mr. Premier, that in 
the Speaker’s report, he indicated that the voters list from 1995 
to the voters lists of 1999 that the numbers changed by about 
12,760 voters in the province. So indeed we have dropped that 
many voters from ’95 to ’99. 
 
You created a Rural Revitalization department to look at rural 
development and rural revitalization and encouragement of 
growth in that sector. And I’m wondering, Mr. Premier, in light 
of the emphasis that you’ve put on rural Saskatchewan, in light 
of the concern that is expressed in rural Saskatchewan, if the 
census report is indicating that there is a significant shift from 
rural to urban, is it your plan to proceed with adjustments even 
if they may be within the guidelines that are there or will you be 
requiring a specific change in the census report to initiate the 
boundary commission and its workings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’m not sure, Mr. Chair, I completely 
understand the member’s question. 
 
The census which is happening or has just happened will, by 
this legislation, trigger the boundaries commission next year. 
Within the body of this piece of legislation is the population 
requirement of constituencies south of the dividing line of a 5 
per cent variance. 
 
Now I think the member is asking is there a plan today to make 
amendment or change to that, and the answer today is no. As I 
indicated in my very first answer, we have not considered — I 
have not considered — we as government have not considered, 
this legislature certainly has not considered any change to this 

Constituency Boundaries Act. And therefore, therefore the Act, 
unless changed, will demand that our constituencies, to 
maintain the concept or the principle of the one person, one 
vote, will retain the 5 per cent variance figures. 
 
And I can again say, Mr. Chair, that I have had no discussion 
with the legislative drafters or others to plan any change to The 
Constituency Boundaries Act. Now maybe in a following 
session of this legislature we may want to. But as I speak today, 
there’s been no consideration of that. So the way it’s written is 
we have a 5 per cent variance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, Acts 
are there for interpretation and lawyers will give different 
interpretations. I thank you for your response to the suggestion 
that you are not proposing any changes to The Constituency 
Boundaries Act. 
 
But the question that I’m asking is, is there a certain number of 
constituencies that you will look at when we talk about the 5 
per cent variance, and when we receive the census report, it will 
enable the report to be then divided up in such a fashion that it 
will place or allocate population per constituency? 
 
Are you looking for half of the constituencies now to be out of 
whack on the 5 per cent, to then proceed with redrawing? Or if 
there’s only one, will you then look at redrawing those? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We will have to wait, I think, for any 
reasonable discussion about this matter to see the results of the 
census. 
 
Now my sense is that the member is asking . . . work that will 
be done by the commission. Again I’m not entirely clear, I 
think, on the member’s question. My understanding is that this 
legislation requires that the boundaries commission be 
established and function as a result of the census. That’s not a 
matter of debate at this point. 
 
I have indicated that we do not have any plans at this time to 
open the Act or change the Act. Again, we’ll have to look 
carefully at the census numbers and make any decisions that 
may accrue from that. But until such time as we have those 
numbers, it can only be speculation. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, in the past 
. . . I want to talk to you just a little bit about gaming in this 
province. And in the past you’ve been quoted as saying that the 
funding of vital public services like health care and education is 
too important to fund on the whims of the gambling public. 
 
Yet here we are a decade later and your government is 
dependent on hundreds of millions of dollars in gambling 
revenue. 
 
Mr. Premier, if essential services like health care and education 
are already funded, how should gambling revenues be spent? 
 
(17:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the gaming revenues of this 
and I think every government in Canada, the gaming revenues 
do flow to the General Revenue Fund. Some of those revenues 



2380 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

will find their way into the fundings of the various activities of 
government from health to education to highways to so on. 
 
I am convinced that some of those funds appropriately must 
find their way into programs that will provide for the prevention 
and for the treatment of the tragic game addictions that do 
unfortunately occur. 
 
But the simple answer to the question is those revenues flow 
into the General Revenue Fund. We have to make the priority 
decisions on how . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I’m having difficulty hearing the 
answer. There’s some sidebar conversations going on and I 
would ask they move that conversation to behind the bar so that 
we can hear the questions and the answers. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, have you 
ever considered giving some meaningful tax relief to 
hard-pressed Saskatchewan people? I mean lately with the 
higher property taxes, higher energy rates, it seems like 
although your government claims to have given tax cuts, it 
seems like you’re perhaps giving with one hand and taking with 
the other hand. 
 
And I was just wondering if you have considered giving some 
meaningful tax relief to these people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I would debate with the 
member to say that I believe that meaningful, meaningful tax 
relief is being provided to the people of Saskatchewan from 
their provincial government. 
 
A year ago, as the member will know, the Minister of Finance 
unveiled a three-year program of significant, significant 
personal tax relief. We have succeeded already in eliminating 
the flat tax — the former flat tax — the high-income surtax, and 
the debt reduction surtax. They are now gone. 
 
We’ve introduced a very progressive three-rate tax on taxable 
income. We’ve provided the 8,000 basic and spousal tax 
credits. We’ve added the $1,500 provincial child tax credit, the 
500 provincial senior supplement. 
 
In this budget, the income tax reductions continue which will 
save Saskatchewan families significant amounts of tax dollars. 
I’m pleased to say in this budget we’re providing new tax relief 
to our small-business community by reducing the 
small-business tax rate by a full 2 per cent — from 8 to 6 — as 
well as raising the ceiling for the definition of a small business. 
 
So my view would be, Mr. Chair, that there in fact is some very 
significant tax relief provisions coming to the people of 
Saskatchewan through this budget, through last year’s budget, 
and through a plan that will carry us into next year. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. In your comments 
though, you did neglect the fact that you have also raised 
property taxes, you’ve extended or expanded the sales tax, and 
we also have higher education tax. You neglected to mention 
that. 
 
Mr. Premier, 1977, a six-month review by your government on 

gambling showed two disturbing trends. The first one being that 
you wouldn’t release the results of that review to the public — 
something we have come to expect from your government — 
and the second one was that this internal review showed an 
increase in addictions. 
 
The minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming at that time 
said the government should and would do a wide-ranging 
review of the social and economic impact of gaming. You 
yourself have said all aspects of gambling should be studied 
before large-scale operations were allowed. 
 
Yet here we are a decade later, Mr. Premier, with a 
multi-million dollar casino sitting in the heart of Regina, with 
expansions on the way, and another casino proposed to be built 
right in your own hometown of Moose Jaw. And eight years 
after you introduced the VLTs (video lottery terminal) into the 
province, you have yet to show us any figures indicating some 
of the problems inherent in gambling. 
 
Why didn’t your government do a comprehensive survey on 
gambling, one that would look at all aspects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is 
— and I do have a little history on this file — the fact of the 
matter is we did carefully study and put in place at the time of 
the introduction of the VLTs into the province, we put in place 
what at that time was the most comprehensive program of 
public education, prevention, and treatment opportunities that 
existed anywhere in Canada, and I would venture to say almost 
in North America, not in North America. 
 
Now over those intervening years there has been growth in 
gaming, no doubt about that. We have now engaged in the 
base-line prevalence study which I’m told by officials will be 
completed and the results will be available this fall. In each of 
the agreements that we have signed around gaming, there has 
been provision of funding and programs to meet the needs of 
those who find themselves addicted and who can find some 
very serious, very serious consequence of abuse of gaming. So 
the work is being done. The work that you speak of, that you 
ask of, is being done. The prevalent study is underway, and I’m 
assured that we will have those results this fall. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. But there was one 
study or a review done in 1997 that your government would not 
release to the public. And I would like to know your reasoning 
for not releasing it. 
 
And I’d also like to know, Mr. Premier, what the current rate of 
problem gamblers is in the province, and what does that 
percentage translate into with regards to the total number of 
people in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I apologize to the member, I 
didn’t catch the question. The total number that she asked for 
was of which? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — I’m sorry, Mr. Premier. What is the current rate 
of problem gamblers in this province, and what does that 
percentage translate into with regards to the total number of 
people in the province, like what percentage of people? 
 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2381 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, this, this . . . to achieve the 
answer to the member’s question is very much a part of the 
prevalent study which is now underway. It is the goal of the 
prevalent study to exactly determine the number of peoples who 
may in fact be very negatively impacted by gaming. 
 
We know, Mr. Chair, that there are many, many, many citizens 
of our province and visitors to our province who game without 
. . . who participate in gambling opportunities without finding 
themselves in an addictive circumstance or having serious 
financial consequence. We also know there are those who are. 
And the prevalent study is to determine just that kind of 
information to give us an understanding of the numbers, to give 
us an understanding of the causes, to give us an understanding 
— a better understanding — of how we may meet their needs 
and prevent the addiction in the first place. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, you did 
still neglect to answer why the 1997 survey was not released to 
the public. So I’ll let you answer that one before I ask the next 
one. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I thank the member for her patience on 
this subject. Now as I’ve consulted with officials here and 
others, we are not aware of a 1997 study. And if the member 
could give us a little more description of the study I might be 
better equipped to answer. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Yes, Mr. Premier, it was a six-month review is 
what it actually was, being done in 1997 on . . . 
 
So the next question, Mr. Premier, is how many calls were 
made to the gambling hotline in the past fiscal year and how 
does that number compare to three years ago, five years ago, 
eight years ago? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the information that I have 
begins in a tally that starts in 1995-96 when I . . . I guess it was 
a little before that the gambling hotline was put into place, but 
that would be early in its history up until 1999-2000. So that 
doesn’t include the current year. 
 
In 1995-96 the total number of calls were 2,035. That grew in 
’96-97 to 3,100 . . . I’ll round them a bit. That grew in ’97-98 to 
3,600; ’98-99 to 3,700; and happily in 1999-2000 fell to 2,900. 
So we’re averaging I would say around 3,000 calls a year. 
 
Some . . . and I just want to caveat this too by the indication 
from this material that the 2,800 number for the ’99-2000 has 
an asterisk beside which says it’s preliminary data, but I assume 
it’s fairly close. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, how 
many counsellors do you have in the province to assist people 
with gambling addictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, we don’t . . . because the 
health districts are involved in the provision of addiction 
services in problem gaming, I’m not sure we have the accurate 
number here, and I’ll ask the Department of Health to be sure to 
get us the exact number. I’m told it’s approximately 40. 
Approximately 40. 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, we’ve 
heard . . . and you have mentioned about the gambling 
prevalence survey that is taking place — this $145,000 problem 
gambling survey that was recently undertaken — and it will not 
go far enough to address the issue of problem gamblers. This is 
what we’ve heard. 
 
And that the best time to do this is the moment gamblers seek 
help. The waiting time between making the call and actually 
getting in to see someone is at least three weeks. Mr. Premier, 
many serious things can happen in that time, if someone 
believes him or herself to be in a desperate situation. 
 
In fact many people are suspicious of a government-sponsored 
survey of gambling. It’s kind of like a bad employee being put 
in charge of his own performance review. How effective will 
this survey be, especially when some of the questions will 
obviously be extremely narrow in focus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, for the information of the 
member, the prevalent study is being conducted by the 
Canadian Centre on Substance Abuse, a very reputable 
organization in the field. It is not a study being conducted by 
government. We’re providing, of course, the funding. But it’s a 
very, very reputable group and I would hope that the member 
would not cast aspersion on the study, because it’s a very, very 
credible group. 
 
They, I understand, will be using an instrument that is called the 
Canadian Problem Gambling Index which has been under 
development since 1997. And the validation of the instrument 
was tested on a sample population of 3,000 adults. And the 
reliability of this instrument, this testing is considered to be a 
very significant improvement over other previous methods. 
 
We were part of a national task force that worked towards the 
— when I say we, I mean the province of Saskatchewan — 
were part of a national task force that developed the new 
instrument. And given the credibility of the Canadian Centre on 
Substance Abuse, I have a great deal of confidence that the 
prevalent study being undertaken will be a very valuable, 
valuable read of what’s happening in our province. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, what 
kind of initiatives are in place to address the waiting times for 
those seeking help with their gambling problems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I can share with the member 
the broad package of activities that are happening in the field, 
both in treatment and prevention. The largest budgetary 
contribution is for the provision of treatment. 
 
For the most part, if not exclusively, the treatments are being 
provided through the health care districts and through their 
mechanisms. 
 
(17:15) 
 
Now I think it is fair to say that we are meeting an increased 
demand for these services. The information I have says that 
over the last four years the client level has grown from 521 to 
815 clients. Now in terms of the numbers here, each one is 
tragic. Each one is tragic, and one hates to see the growth. 



2382 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

The only . . . the silver lining here is that perhaps some of the 
outreach, some of the positive prevention and encouragement 
for people to seek treatment is having an effect and people are 
seeking the treatment that’s there. 
 
Where there will be delays in accessing treatment, I think I 
share the member’s view that we need to be working as 
diligently as we can to find mechanisms by which people can 
access early treatment. 
 
We’ve committed a fair significant financial dollar to it. This 
information also indicates that there are about 40 people doing 
the work. I think following the prevalent study we’re going to 
have to have a hard, hard look at the whole range of services to 
as best we can treat, and even perhaps more importantly, 
prevent. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. When you gave me 
the figures before about how many people had called the 
gambling addiction hotline, you stated what the figures were in 
’95-96. And then in ’98-99 it was up to 3,700, and then in ’99 
and 2000 it went back down to 2,829 people. And now you’ve 
just stated that the figures were 521 — the problem gamblers — 
and they had risen to 815 in treatment, I believe you said. 
 
And I was just wondering if those dates corresponded. Because, 
you know, we’ve seen a decline in the number that have phoned 
the centre, and yet at the same time the number for receiving 
treatment have went from 521 to 815. So I was just wondering 
if the dates on those correspond or if you could explain that to 
me. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — You see, I think there’s quite a 
difference in the numbers of calls to the gambling help line — 
remember that’s calls to the line. The other numbers are people 
who are actually in treatment — actually in treatment. These are 
not inquiries; these are people who are actually in treatment. 
 
Some of those who will call the help line will be referred to 
treatment and they may be reflected in these numbers. Others 
may be referred to other programs, not the one-on-one kind of 
intensive treatment but other educational programs, and won’t 
be reflected here. 
 
In some ways both sets of numbers — a decline in the number 
of calls and an increase in those receiving treatment, while it’s 
tragic in every case, may in fact be good signs that people are 
accessing the help. They are accessing information. Fewer 
perhaps are feeling the need, but we’re getting help to more 
people. And that I think is good news. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier, for clarifying that for 
me. 
 
Mr. Premier, four years ago a Canada West Foundation report 
indicated that Saskatchewan adults spend more than $400 per 
capita on gambling. That’s the highest number in Canada, Mr. 
Premier. And no doubt that number has risen in the past four 
years. 
 
We also know that the Health department — a department in 
which you were once the associate minister of — spends at least 
one and a half million dollars a year on programs for gambling 

addicts. 
 
What programs and services are encompassed in this $1.5 
million? And why are gambling addicts still having problems 
receiving or getting access to these programs and services? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Provided from the 1.5 million budgeted 
in the Department of Health for prevention and treatment 
services — and it’s both prevention and treatment — as I said, 
the largest chunk of the budget is for the treatment program; 
that’s $630,000. To maintain and staff the problem gambling 
help line is $195,000. We do professional training, and budget 
for that $30,000. And a wide variety of prevention initiatives, 
spending $70,000 on these. 
 
We also partner, as you know, with the Canadian Mental Health 
Association who provide community programming through 
their associations. And so to CMHA (Canadian Mental Health 
Association) we provide $250,000. 
 
We’re also working of course with First Nations in the 
programming that they’re doing. Not funding that comes 
directly from the Department of Health budget, but through the 
other agreements. 
 
So that will describe, I think, the $1.5 million that’s been 
expended. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, six years 
ago an internal NDP caucus memo strongly urged the 
government to get out of the casino business. The memo went 
on to say that the increasingly politically volatile nature of the 
gaming issue was an excellent opportunity for the government 
to extricate itself from any further involvement in the expansion 
of casinos in Saskatchewan. In short, the government should cut 
its political losses. 
 
One of the signatures on that memo, Mr. Premier, belongs to 
the person who is now the minister responsible for Liquor and 
Gaming. And, Mr. Premier, now as you are and as we are all 
aware, the minister has been in the media spotlight this past 
year as there have been many question surrounding alleged 
activities within the province’s liquor and gaming industry. 
 
And the opposition has repeatedly said that it’s obvious the 
minister currently responsible for Liquor and Gaming does not 
have a clear idea of what is going on within her own department 
and that she should resign. 
 
Would you give the . . . or will you give the people of 
Saskatchewan a commitment today that you will ask the 
minister responsible for Liquor and Gaming to step down, and 
that you will conduct a full internal audit of the standards and 
practices of the Liquor and Gaming department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I will not today or tomorrow 
or the day after be asking the minister, current minister of 
Liquor and Gaming to resign from cabinet because in my view, 
Mr. Chair, this minister has done exemplary work, Mr. Chair, in 
a very, very difficult circumstance — exemplary work. 
 
Now do we need to have a careful look at the structures of 
Liquor and Gaming? I think that’s fair to say yes, we do. I don’t 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2383 

 

think I would use the same kind of language that the member 
from Estevan has been using, but I think we do need to 
continually be reviewing our structures, our processes, whether 
it’s in Liquor and Gaming, in all aspects of government. And 
yes, I think we will be taking a look at Liquor and Gaming as 
well as other aspects of government. 
 
But on the first point, will I be asking the minister to resign? 
The answer is absolutely not. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. But, Mr. Premier, you 
must also remember that a lot of the problems within the Liquor 
and Gaming ministry could have been prevented if the minister 
would have acted upon the recommendations set out by the 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
We all know your opposition to gambling, Mr. Premier. In fact, 
you’ve gone so far as to call gambling a desperate money grab 
by any government that brings it in and that will be only seen as 
a quick fix to solve financial problems. 
 
Hasn’t gambling solved a lot of your financial problems, Mr. 
Premier? In fact, hasn’t your government’s extensive, extensive 
involvement in gambling proven to be an unprecedented 
windfall of revenue over the years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, on the subject of gaming, on 
an individual, personal basis, I am not one who supports 
gambling. Am I therefore to oblige my personal views, or how 
those views are based, on the general public? The answer is no, 
the answer is no. 
 
From my point of view, a responsible government dealing with 
gaming must ensure several things. It must ensure that the 
regulatory regime is secure and strong. It must ensure that 
benefits, financial benefits from gaming flow to the public 
good, flow to community good. It is my conviction that some of 
those financial gains should be provided to the prevention and 
treatment of those who find themselves in difficulty with 
gaming. 
 
On each of these, Mr. Chair, this province has shown 
leadership. On each of these we’ve shown leadership. And 
when challenges have arisen, as they have — and there is no 
doubt about that — this province has responded. 
 
This government has worked with communities, this 
government has worked with First Nations peoples, this 
government has worked with the city of Regina, this 
government has worked with other communities in the 
province, is working with the city of Moose Jaw to ensure that 
gaming in this province is well regulated, well controlled, that 
the benefits flow to the community, to the public, the public 
good. 
 
And as I’ve indicated earlier, we are serious in our commitment 
of undertaking prevalent studies, serious in our commitment to 
provide prevention and treatment where that’s required. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. I believe that your 
government is the true addict. It is addicted to gambling and it 
is addicted to the revenues derived from it. 
 

Mr. Premier, you’ve also been quoted as saying that liberal 
gambling laws will mean more prostitution, drug trafficking, 
and other crimes common to cities with wholly relaxed . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Would the 
committee please come to order? I’m having difficulty hearing 
the question put forward by the member for Estevan. Thank 
you. I would like to hear what the member for Estevan has to 
say but I’m having difficulty hearing it. So the committee 
please come to order. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, I’ll repeat 
the preamble to my question. 
 
You’ve also been quoted as saying that liberal gambling laws 
will mean more prostitution, drug trafficking, and other crimes 
common to cities with wholly relaxed regulations. 
 
The sad fact of the matter is, Mr. Premier, that we do have 
increased prostitution. And drug trafficking is certainly a 
problem. And we all know about the high crime rates in 
Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
Mr. Premier, do you attribute those statistics to your 
government’s gambling policies, or do you attribute our 
province’s social ills to other things, for example, the decrease 
in the number of police officers on our city streets and in our 
towns and the lack of employment opportunities for our young 
people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, when we look at issues like 
drug and alcohol abuse in our communities, when we look at 
crime, the causes are many and varied and I think the member 
will know that. There will be many roots of those causes in 
family breakdown; we’ll find roots, causes of these issues in 
poverty, in lack of education, in a wide variety of causes. Each 
of which, Mr. Chair, if I may say, this government has been 
tackling. 
 
We’ve been showing to the nation for instance, the only 
province in Canada to show consistently now a reduction in the 
number of families and children living in poverty. That kind of 
a result will show, I believe, significant change in some of the 
other issues that the member talks about. 
 
I repeat again, it is my view that in a community and a society 
that there will be gaming opportunities, and it is the role of 
government to ensure that those gaming opportunities are 
regulated, well regulated, well policed. It is the responsibility of 
a community through its government to ensure that benefits 
accrue back to the community, accrue back to people —not to 
private interest. 
 
And it is my view that government must be responsible in 
providing the kind of programming that will reach out to 
prevent and reach out to treat those who find themselves in 
difficulty. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Premier, I quoted what, you know, you 
have been . . . you have thought of the gambling laws, and how 
they’ll mean more prostitution and crime. But we must 
remember that this gambling, as it is today in Saskatchewan, is 
a creation of the NDP government and therefore your 



2384 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

government must take responsibility for it. 
 
Mr. Premier, some people believe that a lot of the penalties 
regarding gambling associated crimes are too lenient and that it 
doesn’t address the more serious issue of fraud or theft. These 
people firmly believe that more needs to be done in this area. 
 
Mr. Premier, has your government considered imposing stiffer 
sentences for those caught in gambling-related offences? 
 
(17:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think it needs to be clearly 
stated that when the member from Estevan was in the 
employment of the former premier, there was growth in 
gambling in this province, a significant growth in that time, in 
the bingos. We saw growth in horse racing industry at that time. 
 
There has been in the last decade in Saskatchewan, in Canada, 
across North America, Mr. Chair, a growth in gaming 
opportunities. There’s no denying that. We’ve seen casinos 
opened in Winnipeg, we’ve seen casinos opened in the United 
States of America, we have seen a casino open in Regina. We 
through partnership with First Nations have seen Indian owned 
and operated casinos in our own province. There has been an 
expansion of gaming. I’m not denying that. 
 
But for the member to suggest, the member for Estevan to 
suggest, that when she was working for the former government 
and its leader that there wasn’t gambling going on in the 
province of Saskatchewan is really to stretch the truth. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, she asked a question about the penalty. As she 
knows, the courts will award penalty for a guilty verdict as they 
see fit. We have not introduced in this session, as she knows, 
nor do I contemplate in the near future introduction of 
legislation that would change the penalties for fraud or for theft. 
These are matters that will fall under the purview of the federal 
government in any event. 
 
But I think now it is fair to say, the member from Estevan 
should maybe now, maybe this is the appropriate time, for the 
member from Estevan to stand in her place and acquaint this 
legislature with the position and the policy of the Saskatchewan 
Party on gaming. Is she saying through this line of questioning 
that the casinos of this province should be closed? Is she saying 
that? 
 
Is she saying that the VLTs in the hotels across Saskatchewan 
should be removed? Is she saying that the charitable bingos that 
are happening in this province should not be happening? Is she 
saying — and let’s be clear; we’d like her to please be clear 
about this so she can speak on behalf of her party — is she 
taking the view that there should not be funds accruing to the 
treasury from gambling in Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Premier. Mr. Premier, if you 
want us to answer the questions, call an election. We’ll gladly 
replace you on that side and we’ll answer them all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ms. Eagles: — It was your government that brought in casinos. 
You blame the former administrations constantly. You had the 
option regarding what discussions were held before the 1991 
election. 
 
We had GRIP. What happened? Your government tore it up. 
You could have done the same thing with this. So that just 
doesn’t wash any more. There you go, Bill. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, now here is an 
interesting theory, here is an interesting theory. Here is an 
opposition party who doesn’t want to disclose its policies until 
they’re in government. That’s what the member just pointed 
out. You just let us get in. Well we had an election; we had an 
election. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. I would really like to hear 
the question, which we were able to do, and I would really like 
to hear the answer. So would the committee please keep the 
sound level below so that I can actually hear the questions and 
hear the answers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, thank you, Mr. Chair. Somehow or 
other I’ve agitated them. Now they’re busy demanding an 
election call. That’s what they’re doing now — they’re busy 
demanding a call of an election. So I call an election — I guess 
then they’ll tell us what they think about issues. Well isn’t that 
an interesting position for an opposition party to take. 
 
They don’t have a position. They want to keep this all under 
wraps until an election call. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Would the committee please come 
to order. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Chair, I’ll see if I . . . I’ll just 
. . . Well, the member from Rosthern, see he doesn’t stand and 
ask questions. He just asks or hollers from the benches. Now 
again, Mr. Chair, I think we’ve had an interesting experience 
here where the opposition refuses to enunciate a policy outside 
of an election call. That’s what they’re saying to us here this 
afternoon. Let me ask again. Just let us ask again. I’ll ask the 
member from Estevan again. 
 
Okay. Please, would you enunciate today for the House, for the 
people of Saskatchewan, the policy of the Saskatchewan Party 
opposition regarding the future of gaming in the province. 
 
Is it your policy that VLTs should, ought to be removed from 
the hoteliers of Saskatchewan? Is it your policy that the casinos 
which are established in partnership with the First Nations here 
in Regina should be shut down? Is it your policy that we should 
eliminate the charitable bingos? Is it your policy that revenues 
should not flow to the public purse from gaming? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, I’ll give the member from 
Estevan another opportunity to answer that question. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier. I find it very 
interesting that the Premier’s interested in the policies of the 
opposition. This is a government obviously that’s been in 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2385 

 

government for some 10 years now and their response to 
everything, every question, every kind of . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Would the committee please come 
to order. I’m very interested in hearing what the member for 
Kindersley has to say and the question that he has to ask. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — The Premier likes to chastise from that side of 
the House members when they raise their voice on this side of 
the House. But every single one of them opposite there was . . . 
or was beaking off from their seats a few moments ago and 
simply not allowing the opportunity for questions. I want to talk 
to the Premier for a moment. 
 
The Premier likes to and the NDP have always liked to in this 
legislature absolve themselves of any kind of responsibility 
whatsoever for anything that takes place in this province in any 
way, shape, or form, and their entire attitude and their entire 
attack has always been, tell us what you would do. 
 
Well we will be happy to tell you what to do when we choose to 
tell you what we will do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — We will enunciate the policies, we will enunciate 
the policies of this opposition when we choose to, just as he did 
in the 1999 election campaign. We were out front in the 1999 
election campaign a full year and a half with our platform. Our 
platform was there a full year and a half. 
 
Where was your platform at that time? Didn’t announce it until 
election day and throughout that. 
 
And incidentally if we choose to do it that way we will do it 
that way, Mr. Premier. We will, we will allow the people of 
Saskatchewan the opportunity, the opportunity here in 
Saskatchewan to hear the policies of the official opposition on 
our timetable, and it won’t be generated or it won’t generated 
by you folks in terms of what that timetable should be, Mr. 
Premier. 
 
And if you think that your rising in the House and somehow or 
another wanting to chastise members on this side of the House, 
and elicit some sort of off-the-cuff remark from them, it won’t 
work. We will do it when we choose to do it, Mr. House 
Leader, and it won’t take any kind of promise from you or any 
kind of prompting from you in any respect. 
 
Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, one of the areas of responsibility that 
you have to the administration and to the province of 
Saskatchewan is the whole area of agriculture. And I would 
choose to say that as the official opposition critic, and as a 
farmer, I believe it is one of the most — if not the most — I 
believe it is the most important area of our economy in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And there are always . . . and we know that there will always be 
ups and downs within that agriculture economy, and we are 
certainly witnessing some of them right now. 
 
Mr. Premier, any kind of agriculture policy that we’ve ever had 
in this nation has always been a large part formulated by the 

governments of Saskatchewan — the administration of the NDP 
over the years, the administration of other governments over the 
years. And we have set benchmarks all along in terms of policy 
discussions, and how the policy framework in terms of 
agriculture policy should be set forward. All of the years of the 
past, Saskatchewan has been a leader in putting forward ideas 
and plans with regard to that. 
 
Yes, they certainly have, and we can clap for that; absolutely 
we can clap for that. Up until about 10 years ago. We can 
support that view. 
 
That has changed . . . that has changed. There’s always been 
three pillars to any kind of farm policy in Canada over the last 
number of years. Those three policies . . . those three pillars 
have always been crop insurance, NISA (Net Income 
Stabilization Account), and a third line of defence, as we’ve 
always had that and has always been expected of governments. 
And your government has promised that time and time again 
that those three pillars would always be in place. 
 
You ran through the 1991 election campaign saying that you 
would commit to that, and you would always agree to keeping 
in place those three pillars of it. And for better or for worse, you 
made policy decisions around that timeframe. 1992-93, you 
were opposed to the farm safety net program, the gross revenue 
insurance program, and you decided that you were going to 
abandon that program. You made that policy decision. It’s 
perfectly within your right to do so at that time. 
 
And every single occasion after that, the Minister of 
Agriculture, and ones previous to him, have stood in this 
Assembly or through the Throne Speech or through the budget 
and have said that you would put in place . . . at the removal of 
the GRIP program, you would put in place a long-term safety 
net program to address that kind of shortfall in terms of ag 
policy. We’ve waited since 1992, through to 3, 1994, and 
subsequent all the way to today for those discussions to 
conclude. 
 
We see the minister has put in place the ACRE (Action 
Committee on the Rural Economy) committee. He’s put in 
place farm support review committees. He’s put in place all 
kinds of opportunities for the NDP to finally come forward with 
a plan to deliver to the farm people of this province. 
 
And most recently there’s been two occasions when we 
thought, in official opposition — and I suspect the farm people 
of Saskatchewan would agree with me that they thought — that 
the Minister of Agriculture would be finally laying out a plan 
for that long-term safety net. 
 
The most recent one was obviously at Whitehorse recently 
when the ag ministers got together. And I think the farm people 
of this province were prepared to give you the benefit of the 
doubt, if you indeed put forward a concrete plan, and then it 
could be discussed and looked at at that time. We didn’t see 
one. 
 
The opportunity previous to that was in Ottawa when you stood 
before the . . . when your Minister of Agriculture stood before 
the agriculture committee, the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, and put forward a plan. We expected — and I 



2386 Saskatchewan Hansard July 5, 2001 

 

believe the farm people of Saskatchewan would support me in 
this view — we fully expected that would be a great 
opportunity for the Minister of Agriculture to lay out a plan. 
 
What did we see? There was none. He gave a pretty good 
speech in terms of the problem addressing that. Yes, gave a 
pretty good presentation in terms of addressing the problem. 
We expected we would see something. 
 
What did we see from other provinces? The province of 
Alberta, Mr. Premier, went there with three specific proposals 
to address what they felt were some of the things that we could 
do to help the farm sector right now in Saskatchewan. They said 
we could do something with the federal fuel taxes that would 
help. And obviously that’s true. If we can reduce input costs on 
the fuel side, that indeed would help our producers in Western 
Canada and certainly here in Saskatchewan. 
 
If, they said — the Alberta Minister of Agriculture — if we did 
something in terms of transportation, implementing the 
Kroeger/Estey reports, that may help in terms of our 
transportation concerns. 
 
And while we don’t agree that all of the Kroeger/Estey reports 
are completely what we believe in, at least they said this would 
be a step in the right direction. And they had a plan. 
 
In addition to that they said that they believe that the Canadian 
Wheat Board should be opened up. Now the Minister of 
Agriculture, in response to that — and I recall very clearly, and 
I’m sure he does as well — said those are three, I think, good 
proposals. Those are three things that we could look at here in 
Saskatchewan. Those are three things that make some sense in 
terms of opening up opportunity for our farm families here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, I want you to be on the record for the farm 
families of Saskatchewan to say clearly, on behalf of your 
government, do you agree with those three proposals that were 
laid on the table before the Standing Committee on Agriculture, 
that were presented by the province of Alberta and steps in the 
right direction in terms of agriculture policy here in this 
province? 
 
(17:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, some weeks ago, I joined 
with Western premiers and territorial leaders and made a 
unanimous call — led from Saskatchewan and Manitoba — to 
reduce the federal fuel tax on fuel used in agriculture 
production. It is appropriate that we note in this House that this 
government took that step. We took that step on behalf of farm 
families. 
 
And I share the view of the member from Kindersley, that has 
been voiced by the Minister of Agriculture from Saskatchewan, 
that that would be an immediate and appropriate response from 
the federal government to lower input cost to our farm families. 
Just take the tax off farm fuel like we’ve done, like we’ve done. 
So we share that view. 
 
In terms of marketing, we believe that there ought to be concern 
. . . we ought to review all marketing options. 

And in dealing with transportation, this is key to the future of 
this province, key to the future of farm families in this province 
— the whole issue of transportation. 
 
We are an exporting province, Mr. Chair, particularly in the 
agricultural sector. We want to further diversify value add in the 
province. But even if it’s raw commodity or if it’s value-added 
production, transportation is absolutely key to the future of this 
province — to the future of Canada for that matter. 
 
And so, on this point as well, we share a common front in this 
legislature for the need to be building and reviewing and 
looking at all forms of transportation in the West, and 
particularly in Saskatchewan. On this front, we are agreed. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is and I want to just put this on the 
record — the member wants me to put some stuff on the record; 
well I want to put this on the record and I want him to 
acknowledge it — that in the provinces of Canada, in the 
provincial budgets of Canada, if you compare those budgets, 
you will find that this province, by a margin of 2:1 on a per 
capita basis, invests more in our farm family than any other 
province in Canada. 
 
So that Saskatchewan today invests from this provincial budget 
$436 per capita into farm programming. That compares with 
Alberta, which is next at 206; Manitoba, which is next at 194; 
Prince Edward Island, which is next at 162. 
 
Mr. Chair, this government, through the reality of the budget — 
not through rhetoric, but through the reality of the budget — 
stands behind Saskatchewan farm families. Not through, not 
through speeches, not through rhetoric, but through real 
tangible programs, real tangible dollars, we’re standing behind 
our farm families. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, then would 
you support Alberta’s call that they made at the Standing 
Committee on Agriculture to implement a pilot project for the 
removal of the monopoly on the . . . from the Canadian Wheat 
Board in Alberta? 
 
They offered up their province as a pilot project. Would you 
support that call? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The answer is . . . On that very specific 
question about the Alberta proposal to open the Canadian 
Wheat Board, the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So while the Premier 
stands in his place and says we accept and we are certainly 
supportive of any kind of call to allow farmers marketing 
options and marketing choices and to help them in terms of 
marketing, the very first and only opportunity that this 
government will have in terms of supporting a pilot project — 
not in this province; it’s not going to affect the farmers of this 
province, but in Alberta where they clearly want it and their 
government is in agreement for it — this Premier stands in his 
place and says no, not only are we not going to allow marketing 
options here, we aren’t even going to allow them in another 
jurisdiction. 
 
Well the fact of the matter is, is Alberta is prepared to take that 



July 5, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 2387 

 

on. They want to have marketing choices in that province. And 
they have a duly elected government that wants that as well. 
 
And in Saskatchewan, in Saskatchewan, rather than listening to 
any of the rhetoric from the Premier about wanting marketing 
choices, when it comes right down to the question of do you 
support it or don’t you support it, the answer is always clear 
from this government in terms of agriculture policy. And the 
farmers of this province know it very well; they can always 
expect a resounding no from this NDP administration. Just as 
they can expect from this NDP administration and this Minister 
of Agriculture — as they’ve gotten used to over 10 years — 
nothing, not a thing. 
 
A long-term safety net program that’s been promised for eight 
years now, nine years, and nothing from your administration. 
 
Any kind of a program, any kind of a detail about what you 
would like to see in a program in terms of whether you’d like to 
see a revenue insurance program, whether you want to see 
enhancements to crop insurance, whether you want to see 
top-ups to NISA or anything like that, nothing from this 
Minister of Agriculture time and time again. 
 
And on top of that, whenever we are discussing agriculture 
policy in this country, the fact of the matter is when the AIDA 
program was put in place, the minister of Agriculture, Upshall, 
of the day, sat in Mexico rather than taking the time to be . . . 
rather than taking the opportunity to stand before the agriculture 
people in Ottawa and debate them and put a plan on the table on 
behalf of the province of Saskatchewan. They did nothing. 
 
When CFIP was on the table, where was the minister? Not even 
close, once again, to putting any kind of a plan forward. 
 
The NDP’s proposal, the NDP’s plan in terms of agriculture 
policy has always been and always will be — and that’s why 
the farmers in this province don’t support you now and never 
will in the future — the program has always been, from your 
administration, blame Ottawa, and there’s considerable blame 
for them, no question about it. Ask them to put a plan on the 
table, ask the rest of the provinces to put a plan on the table, as 
Alberta did, and then sit back as you always do and the Minister 
of Agriculture always does and complain and complain and 
complain and say: we don’t like the design of it, we don’t want 
to take part in it, we don’t want anything to do with it. 
 
But where is the Minister of Agriculture when it comes time to 
putting the plan on the table? The farmers of this province know 
it very, very well. It isn’t there. Never has been there and never 
will be from an NDP administration. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’m not sure I heard a 
question there, but here’s exactly what we’re about as a 
Government of Saskatchewan, sometimes enjoying the support 
of the opposition and sometimes finding them offering no 
support at all — in fact, creating difficulties. 
 
But here he wants to talk about long-term plans, long-term 
plans. This government working with our provincial 
counterparts, working with a national plan, we’re talking about 

developing the issues around food safety. It’s going to be 
crucial, crucial to the future of agriculture. The member knows 
that. 
 
We’re talking about environmental issues that are going to face 
agriculture over the future. 
 
We are talking about the safety nets, whether it be NISA, 
whether it be CFIP, CSAP, crop insurance. We are talking 
about the safety nets. We are talking about the kind of 
improvements that are necessary. But while we’re talking, Mr. 
Chair, we are putting our financial resources into these 
programs. 
 
Now we were brought into the AIDA program. You remember, 
Mr. Chair, how they railed on us, pushed us into the AIDA 
program. Well you know how that worked for Saskatchewan 
producers. You know how that worked. We all remember, Mr. 
Chair, we all remember how they were front and centre, front 
and centre, especially their leader and the member from 
Kindersley in support of getting out of the Crow rate. 
 
Well that little plan, that little promotion of theirs to get us out 
of the Crow rate cost Saskatchewan farm families $300 million 
— about $300 million — which is about the difference, Mr. 
Chair, which is about the shortfall many times on our family 
farms. I talk to young farmers in my own family who say to me 
if they had that Crow benefit it’s the difference between making 
it and breaking it on the farm. They supported the end to the 
Crow Benefit — $300 million out of Saskatchewan farm 
families. 
 
Mr. Chair, in this budget year, I repeat, we are dedicating 
significant budget resources from the provincial treasuries to 
our farm families. Why? Because we believe in the strength of 
the farm family, we believe in the role of agriculture as an 
ongoing and growing role in the future of our economy in our 
province, Mr. Chair. 
 
I want to again repeat, this budget, this budget shows a 35 per 
cent increase, a 35 per cent increase in funding for agricultural 
programs in this province. I believe that that’s a significant 
percentage increase. But it is equally a commitment, a 
commitment to the future of agriculture in this province, a 
commitment to support those who occupy and who farm and 
who work that one-quarter of all the arable land in Canada 
located in Saskatchewan. That’s our treasure and we’re going to 
work with our farm families to ensure that future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:59. 
 
 


