















































Hansard: June 19, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1907 
 June 19, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30 p.m. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I rise again today with a petition 
for people who are concerned about the Fyke Commission. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Kelvington health 
centre be maintained at its current level, offering 24-hour 
acute care, emergency and physician services and that 
laboratory, physiotherapy, public health, home care, and 
long-term care services be readily accessible to users from 
Kelvington and district. 

 
The people that have signed these petitions are from Kelvington 
and Lintlaw and Buchanan Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Briercrest, Claybank, Regina, Moose Jaw, and Hearne. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
concerned citizens in southwest Saskatchewan regarding the 
state of Swift Current’s hospital. And they presented me with 
the petition to present to the Assembly. The prayer of the 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition today is signed by residents of the city 
of Swift Current, residents of Wymark, Gull Lake, and 
Tompkins. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the Weyburn Council on Alcohol and Drug Abuse 
who are proposing to build an in-patient treatment centre in the 
city of Weyburn. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

support the in-patient treatment centre in the city of 
Weyburn and provide funding for the same. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn and Osage. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition of citizens concerned about the cellular 
telephone coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable telephone service in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present to do with the lack of funding to non-profit 
personal care homes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide subsidies to non-profit personal care homes in the 
province so all seniors can be treated equally 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Melville, Bangor, and Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here opposed to 
possible reduction of services to Davidson and Craik health 
centres. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctor services available, as well as lab, public health, 
home care, and long-term care services available to the 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the centralization 
of ambulance services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 



1908 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Mozart, Wynyard, Kandahar, Raymore, and 
Dafoe. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding 
cellular telephone coverage in the Shellbrook-Spiritwood 
constituency. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Meadow Lake, Spiritwood, and Mildred. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by folks that are concerned about the funding for the 
Territorial House in Battlefords. And the prayer reads: 
 

Therefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to designate the restoration of 
Territorial House in the Battlefords as a centenary project, 
and provide the necessary funds to complete the project 
prior to 2005 centennial celebrations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Battleford and 
North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise again with a petition from citizens in southern 
Saskatchewan concerned about long-term care facilities and the 
cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge facility, and the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
provide a petition that was presented to me from community 
health services in the Moose Jaw-Thunder Creek Health 
District. It’s in support of comprehensive tobacco control 

legislation, Mr. Speaker, and reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth assess 
to tobacco products. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by citizens from Moose 
Jaw, Chaplin, Craik, from Mortlach, as well as Marquis, 
Regina, and Bushell Park, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’m happy to so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition today dealing with health care. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities of 
Redvers, Antler, Wauchope, Fertile, Gainsborough, Storthoaks, 
and the southeast Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
There are nine petitions that are hereby tabled as addendums to 
previously tabled petitions. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 
AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Communication 

 
Clerk Assistant (Committees): — Mr. Speaker, as Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Communication presents the second 
report of the said committee which reads as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the recommendations of 
the Public Documents Committee, under The Archives Act, 
contained in the retention and disposal schedules 
comprising sessional paper no. 140, including schedule no. 
344 — Department of Justice, law enforcement branch, 
private investigators and security guards, and schedule no. 
345 — Farm Tenure Arbitration Board, the second session 
of the twenty-fourth legislature and referred to the 
committee by the Assembly on May 10, 2001. 
 
Your committee recommends to the Assembly that the 
recommendations of the Public Documents Committee on 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1909 

 

schedule nos. 344 and 345 be accepted. 
 
Your committee reviewed the report of the Legislative 
Library for the period ended March 31, 2000. 
 
Your committee also considered issues related to the 
broadcast of the legislative proceedings. 

 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Communications be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 65 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Labour: does the Workers’ 
Compensation Board pay to fly P.C. Councel, 
vice-president of human resources of technology and 
corporate support, back and forth from Calgary every 
weekend; if so, how much has this cost so far and when did 
it begin? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the rest of the Assembly, I would like to 
introduce 16 grade 4 students in the east gallery. I had a chance 
to meet with the students earlier on and they have had a tour of 
the building so now they are just going to watch the 
proceedings of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the students are accompanied by their teachers, 
Arnelda Lawrence and Paula Fondrick. 
 
I hope you enjoyed the tour and I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings of the House this afternoon. It’ll get a little livelier 
once we get into question period. 
 
So would you please join me in welcoming this group to the 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
through you and to you, I’d like to introduce a number of guests 
who are in your gallery and seated on the Assembly floor. They 
are here to mark United Empire Loyalist Day in Saskatchewan. 
 
The United Empire Loyalists, Mr. Speaker, were given the 
mark of honour, U.E. (The Unity of the Empire), by Governor 
General Dorchester in 1789. They were allowed to pass it on to 
their descendents as recognition for their loyalty to and service 
in defending the Crown during the American revolutionary war. 
 
We have a number of guests whose ancestors played a pivotal 
role in ensuring that the northern and better half of North 
America is part of Canada we know and are so proud of today. 

Among our guests today, Mr. Speaker, is Mr. Logan Bjarnason 
— please stand, sir — who is the president of the Saskatchewan 
branch of the United Empire Loyalists of Canada. Mr. 
Bjarnason is wearing a replica, a Butler’s Ranger’s uniform 
worn by one of his ancestors. 
 
Butler’s Rangers, Mr. Speaker, fought alongside our Aboriginal 
peoples in New York and Pennsylvania and settled the Niagara 
region after the war, ensuring that the land north of the Great 
Lakes would wind up in Canadian hands. 
 
Among the other loyalists joining Mr. Bjarnason today are his 
wife Shirley, Mrs. Margaret Carter, president of the Manitoba 
branch; Ms. Lorna MacKenzie, archivist and librarian of the 
Saskatchewan branch; and Mrs. Linda Smith, the local branch 
secretary. And I also recognize a colleague, Mr. Speaker, with 
whom I also served in Her Majesty’s Service. 
 
Our guests will be attending Government House this afternoon 
where the pre-1801 Empire Union flag will be raised and they 
will have tea. I also understand the member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld, a scholar and author on the Loyalists, will be meeting 
with them as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask you and all members of this Assembly 
to welcome these wonderful people to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
on behalf of the official opposition, I also would like to 
welcome the Loyalists here to the legislature this afternoon. 
 
I know they played a very significant part in the formation of 
Canada and it’s definitely nice to see the costumes of the past 
era displayed here again today. So on behalf of the official 
opposition, I would like to welcome you. 
 
And if I may, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, when I 
introduced the group from Assiniboia, I forgot to mention that 
they were in fact from Assiniboia. 
 
So please join me in welcoming the Loyalists. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Seated 
in the west gallery is Mr. Howard McMaster of the FSIN 
(Federation of Saskatchewan Indian Nations). And I would like 
all members of the Assembly to welcome him. 
 
And I hope that no one will misinterpret this when I say that 
Howard and I used to run around together when we were both 
members of the YMCA (Young Men’s Christian Association) 
in Saskatoon and both a little lighter on our feet and we could 
run a fast and mean mile. 
 
Please welcome Howard McMaster. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1910 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a great pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to my colleagues in the 
Assembly, a group of 20 students from the Ruskin Hutterite 
School at the Swift Current Hutterite Colony just north of Swift 
Current. 
 
They’re seated in your gallery, Mr. Speaker. And they’re 
accompanied today by their teacher, Colleen Eliason, and the 
teacher aide, Sylvia Martens. 
 
It’s great to have them here and I’d invite all members of the 
Assembly to join with me in welcoming them to the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Legislative Assembly, seated in the west gallery, a group of 26 
post-secondary education students. And they are from the U of 
R (University of Regina), the U of S (University of 
Saskatchewan), SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied 
Science and Technology), some from the U of A (University of 
Alberta), and also the U of Western Ontario. 
 
And they all have one thing in common, Mr. Speaker, and that 
is, they’re all working for the Department of Finance this 
summer. And I’d like to say that they’re working in various 
branches. They’re working for the Saskatchewan Savings 
Bonds program which is . . . they’re being sold right now, the 
budget analysis division, the revenue division, the comptroller’s 
division, the information technology branch, and one of them is 
working in my office for the summer, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’m very, very happy, Mr. Speaker, to have these students 
working in government for the summer. They’re working in 
Finance; there are other students working in other departments, 
some of them through the centenary student employment 
program. 
 
And I want to say, I think it’s a win-win situation, Mr. Speaker, 
because the government benefits from the work of the students 
— the creative ideas, their intellect — and also because it gives 
us an opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to find new people that can 
come into the public service in the future. 
 
It’s a very valuable experience from our point of view and the 
people’s point of view and I think it’s a good experience for 
them, Mr. Speaker, because they get to learn something 
hopefully — I’m sure they do — and they get . . . and I hope I 
do learn something from them and I’m sure I will, Mr. Speaker, 
as well. And also I think it helps them pay the bills, Mr. 
Speaker. So it’s a win for them as well. 
 
So I want all members to join with me in welcoming and 
acknowledging the students working in the public service over 
the summer. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the official 
opposition, I too would like to extend a welcome to the 
post-secondary education students that are working with the 

Minister of Finance. We certainly are looking forward to the 
positive results that we can expect from these students of higher 
learning having their influence on the Minister of Finance, and I 
think it will be certainly a positive for this province. 
 
So I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and to all 
members in the House, I’m delighted to introduce 50 students 
from Watrous Elementary School, grade 7 students. They’re in 
the east gallery. I’m sure that . . . They’re here today with their 
teachers, Larry Orth, Ryan Galagher; teacher assistant, Ryan 
Mart; chaperones, Leslie Frey and Leah Ullyott. And I’m sure 
that this will be a high point to your visit here in Regina. I’m 
sure you’ll enjoy the Assembly as much as we do, at least those 
on this side of the House. 
 
So welcome and I look forward to meeting you later. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
afternoon I want to introduce two individuals in the west 
gallery, friends of ours, Mr. Duane Theaker and his partner, 
Lorelei. Mr. Theaker is a very successful businessman in 
Yorkton and his partner is just recently retired as an employee 
of one of the RMs (rural municipality), being an RM 
administrator in this province. 
 
Also a very special moment I know for Duane this afternoon. 
They’re here for two reasons: one is to observe the work of the 
House; but secondly, rarely do we ever get an opportunity to 
observe our children at work. And of course this afternoon Mr. 
Theaker will get an opportunity to observe his daughter Sarah at 
work. 
 
So I want to welcome you to the House and hope that you enjoy 
the proceedings here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to introduce Ken Chevaldayoff to the Assembly. 
Ken is in the east gallery. Ken was the chairman of a very 
successful leader’s dinner for the Saskatchewan Party in 
Saskatoon last month. It was sold out — over 700 people. Ken 
had to use all of his diplomatic skills to explain to people why it 
was sold out and they couldn’t attend. 
 
And I know that all members of the House will join with me in 
welcoming Ken Chevaldayoff to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I was feeling like a 
yo-yo and now I realize I yo-yoed too late. I wanted to 
introduce one of my constituents, Betty Caldwell, who is here 
with the United Empire Loyalists. 
 
Betty’s ancestors settled in the same area as my ancestors 
around Napanee, Ontario, and her grandfather sold my 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1911 

 

great-grandfather a piece of land in that area. And we share a 
common heritage as well — she sits in front of me in church. 
And so even though she is no longer in the House, I would like 
to bring attention to her. She’s in the building, and I would like 
all to welcome her to this building at this time. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Drug Abuse Resistance Education 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, an 
impressive number of students in Humboldt and area have made 
a commitment to remain drug free. 
 
The first group of grade 6 students from St. Dominic School 
recently graduated from the Drug Abuse Resistance Education 
class. D.A.R.E. (Drug Abuse Resistance Education) is a 
17-week course that teaches students about drugs and their 
effects, as well as strategies on how to deal with pressure to 
avoid the use of drugs. 
 
The course started back in January at the school and was taught 
by RCMP Cst. Dave Hamilton. According to St. Dominic 
School principal, Malcolm Eaton, the program involves more 
than education about drugs and violence; it focuses on 
self-esteem, setting goals, solving problems, how to be 
assertive, recognizing stress, and how to deal with anger. 
 
Cst. Hamilton’s enthusiasm about D.A.R.E. helped to create a 
super learning environment. Kathy, the grade 6 teacher, said 
this of Cst. Hamilton: 
 

That he always left the students with something, another 
piece of knowledge to help them cope in a sometimes 
pretty tough world. 

 
According to Constable Hamilton, he says: 
 

If I have taught one kid to be drug and alcohol free, I’ve 
done my job. 

 
Mr. Speaker, to finish the year, the students each wrote personal 
commitments to remain drug free. According to one student, 
being healthy is a gift and she doesn’t want to take advantage of 
that gift. Drugs basically destroy your health, smarts, and 
creativity. 
 
In the words of another student, the D.A.R.E. (Drug Abuse 
Resistance Education) program has given her the knowledge 
about drugs and their effects that she would not have had 
otherwise, and perhaps would have taken drugs to be cool and 
popular. 
 
Thank you to the community of Humboldt that supported the 
D.A.R.E. program as the program is dependent on donations 
from local businesses, service groups, and private citizens. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Transition House 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Regina 
Transition House run by the Regina Transition Women’s 
Society is located in my constituency. And the current news 
bulletin of the society reminds us of two somewhat 
contradictory facts about Transition House. 
 
I’ll quote the opening paragraph of their bulletin to illustrate. It 
says, quote: 
 

No one wants to celebrate the necessity of operating a 
shelter in our community. However, the board of directors 
and staff of Regina Transition House are proud of the 
services the agency has provided to women and children 
for the past 25 years. 

 
And unfortunately in those 25 years we have not reached the 
perfection we strive for as a society, and for that reason 
Transition House continues as a caring, compassionate 
community aware of our human shortcomings. 
 
But we are full of admiration for those staff who serve at 
Transition House and proud that it has been able to provide 
shelter and refuge to over 11,000 women and children in its first 
25 years and will continue until we’re able to eliminate the 
causes of spousal and child abuse. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the bulletin also says, the staff of Transition 
House is a wonderful group of women with diverse talents who 
make our shelter a special and caring home. 
 
And I know all members will join me in congratulating the 
staff, board, and all the volunteers who serve women and 
children in need at Transition House. And I am proud that as a 
government we make a contribution through Social Services 
and Sask Housing. I wish them well in their future endeavours. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Student Outdoor 
Education Club Plants Trees 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I’d like to take 
some time to congratulate some ambitious students from the 
Swift Current Comprehensive High School. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Outdoor Education Club at the school provides 
students with the opportunity to experience a number of outdoor 
recreational activities in order to learn about the environment. 
Each year they also conduct an environmental enhancement 
project in the southwest. 
 
This year a group of 30 students spent the afternoon of June 7 
planting trees around a trout pond near Highway 32 in the Swift 
Current area. The Outdoor Education Cub felt the trees would 
help beautify the trout pond for the people who enjoy fishing 
there and would also bring more wildlife to the region. 
 
The club contacted the non-profit group known as 
TREEmendous Saskatchewan and requested 300 trees for their 



1912 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

project. Mr. Speaker, TREEmendous Saskatchewan thought it 
was such an excellent idea that they supplied the club with 720 
trees. 
 
I’d like to take this opportunity to congratulate the students of 
the Outdoor Education club for their worthwhile efforts to 
enhance the environment, as well as their teacher advisers, 
Myles Radchenko, and Stew Tasche, who I believe were also 
involved in the club when I went to that high school a few years 
ago. 
 
And I’d also like to thank TREEmendous Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, for providing the trees to the Outdoor Education Club. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Recognition of United Empire Loyalist Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a great honour to rise on 
United Empire Loyalist Day to recognize the roughly 4 million 
Canadians who can trace their ancestry back to the United 
Empire Loyalists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we Canadians pride ourselves on our values. We 
boast that our country is founded on more than the narrow 
nationalism of language, region, or religion. Canada is built on 
a mutual respect of diversity, belief in peaceful change, and a 
balance of individual rights with responsibility to care for one 
another. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Canadians owe these values and our country itself 
to the thousands of United Empire Loyalists who remained 
loyal to the Crown and fled to Canada following the American 
Revolutionary War. Loyalists were multicultural with African, 
German, British, and Aboriginal peoples among their ranks. 
 
They settled many parts of Canada and brought with them 
parliamentary democracy. During the War of 1812, they helped 
successfully defend Canada from the attacking Americans, 
despite overwhelming odds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our country and our province would not exist 
without these contributions. We must remain thankful and work 
to build on our unique values with the same sense of hope and 
determination as our Loyalist friends, and our founders. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Radville Students Win National 
Platinum Recognition Award 

 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to congratulate the students at St. Olivier School in Radville for 
winning the National Platinum Recognition Award for quality 
daily physical education. 
 
This award is presented by the Canadian Association for 
Health, Physical Education, Recreation and Dance. The award 
is given annually to Canadian schools achieving more than 150 

minutes of physical education per student, per week. 
 
St. Olivier is one of only 511 schools in Canada to receive this 
prestigious award. 
 
Research shows that those who develop knowledge, skills, and 
positive attitudes towards physical activity in their youth, go on 
to live healthier, more active lives as adults. 
 
St. Olivier attributes their success in achieving this award to a 
team effort by physical education teachers, classroom teachers, 
school administrators, the board of education, parents, and of 
course the students. 
 
Once again, congratulations to St. Olivier School for all your 
hard work, and a job well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

St. Paul’s Hospital Emergency Department 
Wins Millennium Award 

 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased, but not 
surprised, that the emergency staff of St. Paul’s Hospital in 
Saskatoon have received high praise and recognition for their 
exceptional service. Since I’m an alumnus of the St. Paul’s 
School of Nursing, I take something of a personal interest in 
this award. 
 
The emergency staff were presented with the Granger Campbell 
award for Clinical Excellence, one of the millennium awards 
presented by the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association 
and given to registered nurses and/or members of the public 
who have made an outstanding impact in nursing practice on 
the health environment. 
 
The testimony in support of this award says all that needs to be 
said about these superb health care professionals. It states that 
professionally the members of St. Paul’s emergency department 
are unmatched in their technical skills which cover a wide 
range. Despite a heavy workload, they are diligent in their work 
while exhibiting patience, kindness, and tenderness to patients 
who come to emergency filled with fear and uncertainty. 
 
The award also notes the collegiality between the nurses and the 
skilled emergency doctors and other supportive technical and 
administrative staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t say it often enough — we are aware of 
the professional excellence of all members of the Saskatoon 
Health District staff and we are proud to see these St. Paul’s 
professionals recognized by their peers. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

10th Annual Frenchman River Valley 
Gospel Music Jamboree 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if my 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1913 

 

face has looked a little bit redder the past few days, it comes as 
a result of sitting in the sun all day this past Sunday. The 
occasion was the 10th Anniversary of the Frenchman River 
Valley Gospel Music Jamboree held in June in the valley south 
of Shaunavon. 
 
The site sits almost directly on the line that divides the 
constituencies of Cypress Hills and Wood River. But that 
division is inconsequential to the hundreds of people that attend 
this annual event from locations all around this province and the 
state of Montana and from other jurisdictions in the nearby 
areas. 
 
Gospel music of all different kinds presented by groups of 
various configurations, both local and some from as far away as 
Nashville and Missouri, blend together to create a weekend of 
joyful noise. It’s an uplifting time in the valley, a time of 
sharing good music and friendship. And it’s one for which I 
have a deep appreciation, having been on the organizing 
committee for several of the past 10 years. 
 
The event requires the support of about 100 volunteers and the 
financial backing of businesses and interested individuals 
throughout the southwest. To be fully successful, however, the 
help of an obliging weatherman is also required. And I’m glad 
to say that that was so for most of this weekend anyway, and 
hence my sunburn. 
 
So today I would like to acknowledge the success story of this 
local gospel music event. It brings people together in 
fellowship, helps to reaffirm one’s faith, and even provides a 
small economic benefit to the area. 
 
I would like to offer my ongoing thanks and appreciation to 
each individual involved in making the 10th annual Frenchman 
River Valley Gospel Music Jamboree a wonderful event. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to welcome all of the guests to 
the legislature in addition to the welcome you’ve received 
earlier. And I would remind the guests and ask them to respect 
the tradition of the House, and that is not to participate in the 
proceedings in any way. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority 
 

Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the Premier made the following statement regarding 
Justice Wakeling’s report. The Premier said, and I quote: 
 

. . . when (the) report is available, it will be available to the 
legislature and to the public . . . 
 

At a news conference later the minister of Liquor and Gaming 
confirmed that Justice Wakeling’s report is complete. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Justice Wakeling’s report is 
complete. The Premier promised to release the report as soon as 

it was ready. Will the minister release Judge Wakeling’s report 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yes, I 
believe that Justice Wakeling’s report is being completed and 
printed. Part of the terms of reference that were delivered on 
two occasions to the members opposite require that Justice 
department look at that report to see if there are any further 
actions that are needed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
On one hand they would say that we shouldn’t interfere with 
those kinds of investigations, and on this hand they say release 
the report without completing the terms of reference that they 
requested, Mr. Speaker, for Justice to have that review. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have stated and it’s the desire of the Premier that 
we would be able to release that report. If there is anything in 
the report that Justice requires and would be needed for further 
investigation, that would not be released, Mr. Speaker. But it’s 
our desire to release as much as we can of Wakeling’s findings. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister is sitting on Justice Wakeling’s report and refusing to 
release it. The minister is sitting on the Liquor and Gaming 
annual report and refusing to release it. What are they hiding? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister release Justice Wakeling’s report 
and the SLGA’s (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) 
annual report before this House adjourns for the summer? 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I have not seen the report 
and I’m not sitting on any report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What I can say is that Justice Wakeling asked if his findings 
completed the terms of reference. And except for the last terms 
of reference, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition themselves were 
calling for, is that make certain it is reviewed to see if there are 
any further actions needed or investigations needed, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s the final piece here. That is being done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it would please this side of the House to be able to 
release all of the information from Justice Wakeling’s report as 
soon as possible. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the minister of Liquor and 
Gaming has steadfastly maintained that she never knew 
anything about financial problems at SIGA (Saskatchewan 
Indian Gaming Authority) before June of 2000. However, much 
of the testimony at the Dosenberger trial focused on an SLGA 
audit of the Gold Eagle Casino in North Battleford conducted 
back in 1998. 
 
This audit revealed numerous problems and it was apparently 
changed a number of times to cover up those problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the minister continue to say she didn’t 
know of the problems at SLGA . . . or pardon me, at SIGA until 



1914 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

last year when serious problems at the Gold Eagle Casino were 
identified back in 1998? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
preliminary audit that the member opposite is referring to was 
an internal auditing process on the operations of the Gold Eagle 
Casino. 
 
We were very new in the industry, Mr. Speaker, and the 
auditors, the internal auditors, outlined a number of questions 
they would have, Mr. Speaker. That auditing report, as she 
mentions, as the information become available, changed a 
number of times when the auditors had the information 
available to them, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that had nothing 
to do with the misspending and the allocations of monies at 
SIGA. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, we were working to have the 
internal audit processes in place and operating so that the 
integrity of casino gaming was in place for this province. When 
we discovered the misappropriation of monies at SIGA we 
immediately shared that information and took action, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, the NDP’s (New Democratic 
Party) Liquor and Gaming Authority has a pattern of regulatory 
negligence and cover-up. They knew about problems at the 
Gold Eagle Casino as early as 1998, but instead of dealing with 
those problems, they covered them up. 
 
The minister says she knew nothing about this matter. Now 
either she’s not telling the truth or, if she is telling the truth, 
then her own officials were deliberately withholding 
information from her. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. I would 
ask the members in their questions to be very diligent and very 
careful about the use of parliamentary language in the questions 
and in their responses. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, which one is it? Did the minister 
know about problems at SIGA prior to June 1998, or were her 
officials covering up and keeping information from their own 
minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — I would say that there is a record. The 
record is on that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, for use of 
misinformation, use of partial pieces of information to distort 
the issues and blow them out of proportion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as the member would have been told in the 
previous answer, the information she’s talking about was a very 
preliminary auditing process within one facility. Many of the 
questions asked in that reporting, as she mentions, were 
answered or addressed; financial information was presented, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 

That is a separate issue, Mr. Speaker, from the operations of 
SIGA. Mr. Speaker, much of that information would never even 
make it into a final audit report because they were addressed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, very early on in the preliminary working 
papers, we discovered the misappropriation of money at SIGA. 
We immediately informed this House and took action, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s the same old 
story from this minister. Say one thing and then do the opposite. 
 
First the NDP held a news conference to say they fired Joe 
Dosenberger for leaking a cabinet document to the media. And 
for 11 months the NDP intentionally left the public with the 
impression that Mr. Dosenberger was fired for leaking 
documents, even though the minister didn’t have a shred of 
evidence to prove it. 
 
Finally last week, after Mr. Dosenberger took the NDP to court, 
a judge confirmed what Mr. Dosenberger already knew — the 
NDP fired Joe Dosenberger for no reason except to hide the 
NDP government incompetence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister spent 11 months attempting to trash 
Joe Dosenberger’s professional reputation. And it finally took a 
judge to stop the NDP’s attempt to assassinate the character of a 
28-year RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) veteran. Will 
the minister do the right thing today? Will she accept 
responsibility for her government’s disgusting conduct and 
tender her resignation immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Members of the Assembly, while I find the subject at hand an 
important subject and it must be dealt with, I would ask 
members in their questioning and in their responses to be 
respectful of each other as members and not to impugn bad 
motives of any member in trying to use . . . in any of their 
relationships with the persons in their department. And in that 
respect I’d ask the member to be very mindful in her question. 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in good faith, the authority acted on what Justice Kyle himself 
said was a security leak within the authority. They acted with 
that information at that time, Mr. Speaker. As I say, it’s 
unfortunate how the circumstances around this have unfolded. 
Through it, as I stated yesterday, I said that at no time did the 
authority or myself question the integrity of Mr. Dosenberger or 
question that his motives were other than to co-operate with the 
police investigation. It was the issue of a security leak and 
measure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So on . . . With that in mind, I said I regretted the result of this 
but we are learning from this, Mr. Speaker. I have asked the 
authority and they have ensured me they will put processes in 
place so that employees know exactly how to handle this kind 
of information in the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1915 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, what 
part of Justice Kyle’s ruling doesn’t the minister understand? 
The judge says the NDP fired Joe Dosenberger to take the fall 
for embarrassment sustained by the government. The judge says 
the NDP fired Joe Dosenberger for doing his job. The judge 
says the NDP’s decision to fire Joe Dosenberger was political 
and that it could put a chill on regulatory diligence. 
 
The minister herself accused Mr. Dosenberger of having 
something to do with the leak of cabinet documents even 
though she didn’t have a shred of evidence to prove it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the minister is looking to blame someone for 
government incompetence perhaps she should look in the 
mirror. Isn’t it time to call off this charade. Mr. Speaker, will 
the minister stop making excuses, take responsibility for the 
mess at SLGA, and resign immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I am the minister 
responsible and I am taking responsibility for the decision that 
Justice Kyle has rendered, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do not believe, as the member opposite with her 
half bits of information would say, that I had said other than 
Mr. Dosenberger himself had stated he handed over that 
document, Mr. Speaker. And that’s all I have ever stated and 
alluded to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would remind the member opposite that SLGA has two 
functions that it performs. And one, as the minister responsible 
for the Authority, I identify the direction of this government in 
cabinet to the Authority with policies and the procedures to be 
carried out, Mr. Speaker. I have many examples of that. For 
example, VLT (video lottery terminal) distribution, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
On the other hand there is regulatory function under the 
Criminal Code of Canada and I will not, should not, and could 
not interfere in that process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Really, Mr. Speaker, 
the minister sounds like a broken record. 
 
The bottom line is that the NDP fired Joe Dosenberger without 
cause. The minister used Joe Dosenberger as a scapegoat for her 
own incompetent management. And then she forced Mr. 
Dosenberger to go to court to clear his reputation. It’s the worst 
kind of government arrogance and incompetence. It’s the kind 
that destroys the reputations of innocent people. And it’s the 
kind of incompetence that cannot be condoned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister really only has one choice, Mr. Speaker. Will she 
do the right thing — accept responsibility for all the devastation 
she has caused in Joe Dosenberger’s life and resign 
immediately. 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I have stated and I will 
state again that it is unfortunate the way the circumstances 
around this issue have unfolded. Mr. Speaker, it does not help 
to inflame those issues within this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have stated to the Assembly that I regret the 
result that this has had on Mr. Dosenberger and his career. 
 
There is now a decision in hand. There is a settlement due to 
Mr. Dosenberger, and I’m hopeful that will help us all to move 
on from this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Support for Crown Corporation Investments 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Liberal leader has now made it clear. He’s sticking with the 
shotgun marriage to the NDP no matter what. It doesn’t matter 
how many Liberal policies the NDP ignore. It doesn’t matter 
how low the Liberals drop in the poll. He’s sticking with the 
NDP and they’re stuck with him. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the main reasons the Liberal member from 
North Battleford left the government was over the NDP’s policy 
of using Crown corporations to buy private business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Education is now sitting on the 
board of CIC, Crown Investment Corporation. Does the 
Minister of Education support the NDP’s policy of Crown 
corporations buying businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. As 
the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation, I think I’ve 
been fairly clear in our policy with respect to CIC. 
 
We will, of course, look to investments in Saskatchewan, 
partner with the private sector. We will look to invest outside of 
Saskatchewan, partner with the private sector outside of 
Saskatchewan in an attempt to diversify risk, as an example, in 
our insurance company, and also of course, to bring revenues to 
the province and to the people of Saskatchewan so they too can 
benefit from the investments of the Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, that 
was a very interesting answer to the question. Probably the 
answer that we would have loved to have heard. He doesn’t 
mind investing outside the province. 
 
Let me read a quote from the Liberal leader in the last 
provincial election. It states: 
 

There is a role for government and there is a role for the 
private sector and we should know the difference between 
the two. 
 



1916 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

The private sector can invest in power plants in Guyana or 
cable companies in United States if the investment makes 
sense to them. 
 
Government should not (should not) risk government 
taxpayers’ money on these risky ventures. 

 
Mr. Speaker, you know who said that? They said it was the 
Liberal leader of the 1999 election platform. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Liberal leader sit on that side of the 
House making up policies like that and then support investing 
taxpayers’ money outside of the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to begin my 
comments by saying that it’s very clear that members opposite 
are very concerned about the success of this coalition 
government. It was, Mr. Speaker, a problem for them when we 
put it together; it’s a problem, that fact that it’s been successful; 
and it will be the problem that it’s going to deliver a full term of 
good, solid, sound economic planning and government for this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the reason I’m 
responding to this question is day after day those members refer 
to NDP actions and they refer to Liberal actions. 
 
Well I want to say that the role of this government is to respond 
to policy and programming that’s pertinent to the operations of 
the government, not of a political party. 
 
But what I want to say, Mr. Speaker, is — while I’m on my feet 
— the performance of their federal leader, the leader of the 
Alliance . . . the Canadian Alliance Party, his performance is 
one that’s falling in the polls like a stone, supported by those 
members opposite. My question to them is every bit as pertinent 
as the question that that member asked and that is: how can you 
support a political movement whose political fortunes are 
falling faster than your own? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I may agree with the fact that 
they may finish their term as government, but there’s nothing 
sound or competent about that government there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, again to the Liberal leader if he’ll answer. He was 
totally against Crown . . . buying Crown . . . against Crowns 
buying businesses in the last provincial election. Now he’s 
completely . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — . . . now he’s completely in favour of 
Crowns buying business. It just goes to show you that the 
coalition is not about implementing Liberal policy; it’s about 
Liberal leaders propping up a tired and completely worn out 
provincial government. All of that in turn for two cabinet 
positions, Mr. Speaker. 

Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader was dead against Crown 
corporations using taxpayers’ dollars to compete against 
Saskatchewan businesses. It makes perfect sense. Why would 
they? Mr. Speaker, will that Minister of Education stand on his 
feet today and back up his policies in the last provincial election 
and go against the provincial government competing against 
Saskatchewan businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, again, I’m willing to 
stand and answer questions with respect to policy and 
programs. What I would ask those members to do is recognize 
where some successes have taken place. 
 
SaskTel last year as an example, generated $30 million of 
revenue from outside of this province, that came into this 
province to deliver programs and to deliver policy implemented 
by our government, Mr. Speaker — 30 million of the $90 
million. 
 
But what I want to say is that members opposite should be 
questioning their own judgment politically, since we’re 
speaking of political parties. Those members supported 
Stockwell Day, with the exception of the Leader of the 
Opposition, of course — a leader whose political popularity has 
fallen like a rock. 
 
So you’ve got to question their judgment on one hand, Mr. 
Speaker, but I think here in Saskatchewan you’ve got to 
question their judgment as well because their leader’s political 
popularity is so far behind the Premier’s, you can hardly see 
him and I think he might lap himself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Liberal Election Promises 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the 1999 election platform, the 
Liberal leader promised to cut the size of the Premier’s office 
by 75 per cent. The Liberal leader also promised to eliminate 61 
staff positions in the Premier’s office. And he was going to 
slash Executive Council’s budget by $5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader is now part of a co-management 
team running the government. Could he please advise us, how 
is he doing with his campaign promises? How many positions 
have you actually cut from the Premier’s office? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious 
to everybody in this House, and I’m sure everybody who 
happens to watch this legislature, that the loyal opposition over 
there have figured it out. They’re falling in the polls, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re falling in the polls, so what’s the answer. 
What’s the answer? 
 
Well, try and attack the Liberal leader; try and attack the 
coalition. 
 
Now I understand why they’re falling in the polls — because 
they’re so closely aligned, Mr. Speaker, so closely aligned with 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1917 

 

their federal cousins, the Alliance Party. So closely aligned. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s come to my attention today that there is 
an old hymn in the United Church hymn book, number 562, in 
the 1930 edition of the United Church hymn book that I think 
that group over there is going to start singing pretty soon. It’s 
called Day is Dying in the West. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the fact is the 
Liberal leader isn’t cutting the size of the Premier’s office — 
he’s making it bigger. He already has his chief of staff working 
in the Premier’s office. He has defeated Harvey McLane, an 
ex-MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly), working in the 
Premier’s office. He has now defeated Liberal candidate Ken 
Magnus, who has a job . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. It’s getting very 
difficult to hear the comments and the question. 
 
Ms. Draude: — . . . MLA, Harvey McLane working in the 
Premier’s office and now he has a defeated Liberal candidate, 
Ken Magnus, given a job in the Premier’s office. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Liberal leader isn’t cutting the size of the 
Premier’s office, he’s just filling it with Liberals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what happened to the Liberal leader’s campaign 
promise? Why is the government expanding the size of the 
Liberal’s office . . . the Premier’s office, and just filling it up 
with Liberals? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to make reference to 
just some — just some of the accomplishments of this coalition 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this budget alone, we’ve introduced and continued significant 
tax reform. We’ve introduced a Saskatchewan sales tax credit 
up to $264 a year for low-income families. We’ve lowered 
income taxes. We’ve introduced a new Innovation and Science 
Fund, Mr. Speaker; $213 million new dollars in health care; 
increased funding for schools, universities, SIAST, regional 
colleges. 
 
The list goes on and on, Mr. Speaker. The largest ever 
highways budget in the province of Saskatchewan; the 
announcement of wind cogeneration, Mr. Speaker; a centennial 
summer student’s program, Mr. Speaker, bringing students 
from across Canada to work in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the weeklies . . . in the weekly newspaper this 
week, headlines like this: “Alberta ranchers moving to the 
Moosomin area to take up residence in this province.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ll put the record of this coalition government 
up against the record or the plans of that party any day of the 
week, any month of the year, any year of the decade. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(14:30) 
MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 

 
Canada-Saskatchewan Integrated 

Student Loans Program Agreement 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, this morning I had the privilege of signing a landmark 
agreement. The Minister of Human Resources Development 
Canada, the Hon. Jane Stewart, and I signed an agreement to 
create the Canada-Saskatchewan Integrated Student Loans 
Program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my time as Chair of the CMEC, the Council of 
Ministers of Education Canada, has underlined for me the 
importance of co-operation and partnerships with the federal 
government in the post-secondary sector. The need for such 
partnerships has never been greater than it is today. 
 
I am particularly pleased then that Canada’s first integrated 
student loans program is already a model for negotiations on 
such agreements between other provinces and Ottawa. 
 
Effective August 1, on new loans, Saskatchewan students will 
have one loan, one repayment, and one service centre. This is 
good news for students and taxpayers, Mr. Speaker. In addition 
to the simplicity of a single loan, this agreement provides for 
better service as well as improved relief on interest . . . interest 
relief, and debt reduction for students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re making the best student loan program in the 
country, the Saskatchewan student loan program, even better. 
 
In last year’s public consultations held all across Saskatchewan 
on improving financial access to higher education, students and 
their families made it very clear that improvements to the 
student loan program were important and that we should reward 
success. One response to that was the unique Saskatchewan 
post-secondary graduate tax credit still unique in all of Canada. 
Another important response is this integrated student loan 
program. 
 
The integrated service will free up funding for program 
improvements and get more benefits into the hands of students. 
 
I am proud to hold this up as a model for other provinces to 
follow. It demonstrates how the federal and provincial 
governments can work together successfully to provide a better 
program at lower cost to the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, before concluding I would request leave of the 
Assembly to introduce a guest in the gallery. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I appreciate 
the agreement as well as the co-operation of other members. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud to introduce today a woman who is 
sitting in your gallery, in the front row, Mr. Speaker, Ms. 
Carmela Hoffart who is the first Saskatchewan student, and 



1918 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

therefore the first Canadian to receive an integrated student 
loan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Ms. Hoffart is a single mother from here in 
Regina who would not be able to return to school without a 
student loan. She will be entering Avant-Garde College here in 
Regina in August to begin cosmetology study. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I extend congratulations to Ms. Hoffart, the first 
recipient of the Canada-Saskatchewan integrated student loan, 
and wish her much success with her studies and her career to 
follow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, she welcomes the opportunity to continue her 
education. She welcomes the simplicity of one student, one 
loan. And I am very, very pleased to have Ms. Hoffart here with 
us today. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to join 
with the Minister of Post-Secondary Education in welcoming 
Ms. Carmela Hoffart here this afternoon and congratulate her on 
being the first student to receive the integrated student loan. 
And I would also like to ask members of the Assembly to join 
with me in welcoming her. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Canada-Saskatchewan Integrated 
Student Loans Program Agreement 

(continued) 
 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to be able to attend 
the signing ceremonies this morning, witnessing the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education along with the Minister of Human 
Resources Canada sign the new integrated student loan, the one 
student/one loan. I was certainly happy to hear the minister 
make the comment that the new program and the new . . . the 
administration part of the student loan program will free up 
benefits that will get into the student’s hands. I take that to 
mean that the savings will be passed on . . . in administration 
will be passed on to the students. 
 
This is certainly a departure from the past when we seen things 
like the millennium scholarship fund whereby the province, his 
department, kept all the benefits and passed none of those 
benefits along to the students, although the minister argues that 
there is . . . either those benefits and those increased funds or 
those savings in student bursaries were passed on to the 
universities. However, if you talk to the universities and the 
technical institutes, they will give you a different story. 
 
We certainly have some problems in student loans today . . . or 
in post-secondary education today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. I would 

ask the members to come to order. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As I was saying, there 
certainly are problems in post-secondary education today in our 
nation. One only has to look at today’s headlines in the 
National Post, which state that education boom is sidestepping 
Canada. Canada is the only industrialized country where 
enrolment in post-secondary education is declining at a time 
when international demand for graduates of post-secondary 
education is increasing. 
 
The enrolment in the period 1995 to ’99 has declined by some 
10 per cent. And there’s a reason for that, Mr. Speaker, and I 
think this government has to take a share in some of the blame 
for that decline in enrolment. 
 
The article states, and I agree with it, that one of the main 
reasons for declining enrolment is the high tuition fees that are 
being faced by students today which are a direct result of the 
underfunding by both the provincial and federal governments to 
post-secondary education. 
 
We see evidence of that, Mr. Speaker, in our own province 
where our two universities recently announced massive 
increases in tuition fees. I understand that tuition fees at SIAST 
will be going up, which is creating hardships for our students. 
 
It’s not good enough, Mr. Speaker, to simply say that we’ve 
improved our student loan, which this agreement, Mr. Speaker, 
does. It certainly will make things much more convenient for 
our students. It’ll take out some of their . . . take away some of 
those frustrations with having to deal with two different levels 
of government. And it’ll streamline things a lot. 
 
But it’s not good enough to say that we’ve got a better student 
loan program when on the same hand or in the same breath we 
see higher tuition fees, which will result in higher student debt 
upon graduation, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Governments, all governments of this country, and particularly 
this government, must work to improve . . . not only work to 
improve student loans, Mr. Speaker, but they must adequately 
fund post-secondary education. And it’s not good enough just to 
improve the administration part of the student loan program, 
Mr. Speaker. We have to look at the eligibility requirements, 
the accessibility, the adequate . . . the parental contributions, 
and those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And secondly we must fund, adequately fund post-secondary 
education, Mr. Speaker. We must invest in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Thank you. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand and respond on behalf of the government to 
written question no. 233. I think it’s important to point out, Mr. 
Speaker, this is considerably more than last year so we must be 
doing a very good job as a government. 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1919 

 

The Speaker: — The response to 233 is tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Expansion of Effort to Combat 
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and Fetal Alcohol Effect 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to thank my colleagues in the House for allowing this debate on 
fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect to take place. 
I’m convinced that the word debate is at least unfortunate in 
describing the discussion that will take place over the next 75 
minutes. 
 
Our parliamentary system describes the verbiage on private 
members’ day as debate because in the normal course of events 
we disagree with the members opposite’s stand on any given 
issue. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I believe with all my heart that that’s not 
true. I say this because today we are speaking about children. It 
is my belief that all members of this Assembly are united in 
their desire to ensure that every child in this province has a right 
to be the very best person they can be. Every child has the right 
to use their talents, their abilities, to make not only their 
personal dreams come true, but to make this province and this 
world a better place for themselves, their family, and the society 
they live in. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, it is our responsibility as legislators on both 
sides of the House to ensure that every child has the opportunity 
to use all their God-given talents and abilities to make the world 
— our world — a better place to live in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion we have before us today asks that the 
provincial government expand its efforts to prevent fetal 
alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect and make 
Saskatchewan a leader in the fight against these conditions. 
 
This is a motherhood and apple pie issue. Regardless of your 
political affiliations, you have to believe that ridding the world 
of a condition that ruins the lives of children before they are 
even born, a condition that can be prevented has to be a 
laudable goal. 
 
Fetal alcohol syndrome, known as FAS, and fetal alcohol effect, 
known as FAE, is 100 per cent preventable. I wonder how many 
people — not just women, how many men as well — know 
that, Mr. Speaker. How many people know that this is a 
neurological disorder that is caused solely by the consumption 
of alcohol during pregnancy? 
 
This alcohol consumption causes brain damage resulting in 
specific areas of strength and weaknesses similar to the damage 
caused to the brain during an auto accident. This damage to the 
brain can and does lead to behavioural problems because 
information isn’t processed by the brain in a typical manner. 
And consequently, affected people don’t behave the way they 
are expected to behave. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has been a leader in research and 
program development in the area of FAS since the mid-1970s. 
The first diagnosed case of FAS in Canada was made in the 

university hospital in Saskatoon in 1975. However, we cannot 
rest on our laurels as the number of FAS and FAE cases is 
growing in Saskatchewan. The disorders have devastating 
consequences not only on the people diagnosed but the families 
and friends as well. 
 
There is very little information on actual cases of FAS and 
FAE. We rely on figures published by Havik in 1996 which 
states they are .85 FAS cases per live births. Many health 
professionals argue that there’s three in a thousand. 
 
In discussing full spectrum alcohol-related conditions, FAS and 
FAE, it is more likely that the number is three to five times 
higher. That’s one in a hundred live births. 
 
It’s also suspected that Aboriginal people suffer ten times more 
than do non-Aboriginal people. We all know that the Aboriginal 
population in Saskatchewan is the fastest growing segment of 
our society. 
 
Alcohol consumption and patterns of drinking during pregnancy 
determine the degree of disability. However, there are a number 
of factors, such as socio-economic status, multiple drug use, 
and poor health which are related to FAS and FAE. 
 
In our province we know that many of our Aboriginal 
population live in poverty and suffer from poor health. This 
adds pressure to the need to actively and quickly eradicate the 
disorder. 
 
This disorder is extremely difficult to diagnose. Professionals 
are not certain what amount of alcohol consumption produces 
the damage or at what stage of fetal development is most 
susceptible to damage by alcohol. What has been determined is 
that prenatal alcohol exposure for one single day can be 
damaging, producing brain growth defects and neuron loss. 
 
FAS is extremely difficult to diagnose because there are no 
single features which are uniquely characteristic to the 
condition. There are no standardized tools to test for the 
syndrome. 
 
Diagnosis becomes even more complex when a mother’s 
alcohol intake is not documented as sufficient to produce the 
physical characteristics commonly seen in a child with FAS. 
There can be central nervous system damage and brain 
dysfunction without facial disformology. The absence of the 
physical features can result in a wrong or under-diagnosis. 
 
In many cases it is difficult to identify whether the neural 
behavioural abnormalities are due to prenatal exposure to 
alcohol or to the postnatal environment. 
 
Physical diagnosis criteria cannot be applied across cultures, as 
some facial features of FAS are common in other cultures, such 
as the Afro-American and Native American communities. 
 
Currently most hospitals in Saskatchewan don’t keep statistics 
for FAS and FAE at birth. There is no province-wide 
surveillance system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is so very little known about FAS and FAE 
and there is also currently very few programs available to deal 



1920 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

with individuals afflicted with the condition. 
 
Currently many are either not diagnosed at all or diagnosed 
with something that will fit into the parameters of a program 
which already receives funding. Depending on the severity of 
the case, many doctors or educational psychologists will 
diagnose a child with FAS or FAE as having pervasive 
development disorder or PDD. 
 
Teachers and school boards, frustrated with the lack of financial 
help to deal with FAS and FAE students, find it easier to have 
the child bumped into a targeted behavioural program so they 
can receive funding to give the child the extra help they need. 
 
Other labels such as ADHD (attention deficit hyperactivity 
disorder) and ADD (attention deficit disorder) are given to 
students so they can get funding for extra programming in the 
classroom. But the programs that are then available are not 
necessarily those that will meet the needs of the child. Every 
disorder needs specific programming and education to give the 
best possible help to the child. And this is not happening for our 
children with FAS and FAE within the educational system. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, FAS and FAE lasts a lifetime, but the problems 
and manifestations change with age. Infants with FAS and FAE 
are usually small in height and weight, and they’re excitable 
and fitful sleepers. 
 
In preschool, your children with FAS and FAE are often alert 
and talkative, but they can have severe temper tantrums and be 
hyperactive. 
 
In middle years, children with FAS and FAE are marked by 
hyperactivity, have memory difficulties, and they are very 
easily distracted. 
 
Teenagers with FAS and FAE are very impulsive and they have 
an inability to use judgment so it’s nearly impossible for them 
to hold down a job or have a stable life. The majority of 
afflicted teenagers become dissatisfied with school and drop 
out. Adolescents with FAS and FAE can be described as 
innocent, immature, and easily victimized. 
 
In 1997 a four-year study on 253 adults from ages 12 to 51 with 
FAS and FAE found that 95 per cent of those had mental health 
problems; 60 per cent eventually dropped out of school; 49 per 
cent had inappropriate sexual behaviour; 60 per cent had been 
in trouble with the law; and 50 per cent had been incarcerated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, their criminal behaviour is considered impulsive 
rather than premeditated. This suggests that cognitive deficit, 
difficulties sorting out causes and effects, and trouble 
understanding consequences leads them into trouble in the first 
place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the CTV (Canadian Television Network 
Limited) late news had a segment of their . . . a program on 
prisoners that are affected by FAS. They stated that one in four 
of the people incarcerated are victims of FAS. When they add 
FAE to the mix, it is estimated that two out of three prisoners 
are victims of disabilities caused by alcohol consumption 

during the pregnancy of their mother. These statistics are 
staggering. Remember that this condition is preventable. 
 
The cost of warehousing people in our justice system ranges 
from $82,000 a year for adult offenders to $120,000 a year for 
young offenders. The sad fact is that the prison is not helping 
the problem. Incarcerating victims of FAS and FAE does not 
solve the problem; it just keeps them out of society until the 
sentence is complete or parole is granted and then the problems 
start all over again. 
 
Judge Mary Ellen Turpel-Lafond tried to deal with the issue 
recently when she ordered a young offender to be assigned a 
youth worker with special training and understanding in organic 
brain impairment. She also ordered that his care consist of 
in-patient treatment centre with an Aboriginal focus. 
Unfortunately the appeal by the Crown was upheld and her 
order was struck down. 
 
Judge Turpel-Lafond knows that our justice, education, health, 
and social systems are not working to address the problems of 
individuals with FAS and FAE. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we not only need to develop programs which 
address the needs of these individuals, we must be at the 
forefront of diagnostic testing; we must be at the forefront of 
prevention, providing intervention programming for parents to 
help them raise these children with special needs, and we must 
be at the forefront of educating all people about the danger of 
drinking while pregnant. 
 
Advertising in establishments where alcohol is sold is a positive 
first step but we must take this education into the school at a 
very early age. We must make society realize that unprotected 
sexual activity and alcohol consumption can result in 
pregnancies that are harmful to the fetus, to the fact that 
drinking while pregnant can and does result in brain damage to 
a fetus. And we have to educate people to the fact that there is 
no safe level of alcohol consumption while pregnant. 
 
We have to get into people’s faces with the fact that drinking 
while pregnant causes varying degrees of brain damage to the 
fetus. Many people don’t even understand what the terms FAS 
and FAE mean. They don’t understand that FAS and FAE 
people suffer from brain damage which was caused during 
pregnancy because the mother drank. 
 
They don’t understand that no amount of alcohol consumption 
is safe during pregnancy. They don’t understand the devastating 
effect of brain damage and how difficult it is for individuals to 
cope with this disability, the heartache it has caused by the 
disability, and monetary cost of the disability. We have to 
accelerate the education of these facts. 
 
Most of all, Mr. Speaker, we must accelerate the fight to 
eliminate poverty, which is the purveyor of hopelessness, of 
dysfunctional families, increased health risks, and increased 
abuse of substances. 
 
For infants born with FAS or FAE, the most important thing we 
can do is provide high-risk infant monitoring. We need 
therapeutic child care with low staff/child ratio. We need 
screening within early childhood agencies to identify but not 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1921 

 

stigmatize children with FAS and FAE. 
 
We need to be able to identify mothers who are substance abuse 
using. We need to educate professionals about alcohol effects. 
 
We have to develop intervention programs that think long term. 
We need programs to affect children, re-frame their behaviours, 
and programs to help the families. 
 
These strategies cannot be undertaken by one department alone. 
We must collaborate with professionals in Health, Social 
Services, Education, Justice, as well as biological and adoptive 
parents of children with FAS and FAE to put Saskatchewan at 
the forefront of treating and combating the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, both FAS and FAE are totally preventable. My 
colleagues and I would be so very proud if Saskatchewan could 
be the first province to seriously deal with this problem. Mr. 
Speaker, if the day would ever come that we could be known as 
the province who led the way in putting an end to this condition 
that devastates so many lives, I believe that all of us as elected 
people would feel we had truly made a difference in this world. 
 
We have all been given the responsibility by the virtue of our 
positions here in this Assembly to prevent and protect innocent 
babies from harm. We owe it to society. We owe it to parents. 
And mostly, we owe it to the children. 
 
Before I read the motion I would like to quote a stanza from a 
poem that I feel is very applicable. It says: 
 

This is no paradisal dream; in its hardships is its 
possibilities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move a motion, seconded by the 
member from Estevan: 
 

That this Assembly urge the provincial government to 
commit to expanding its efforts to prevent and eliminate 
fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol effect, which are 
both completely preventable, and to make Saskatchewan a 
leader in the fight against fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal 
alcohol effect. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
appreciate the opportunity to second this motion this afternoon. 
 
Fetal alcohol syndrome is combined mental and physical 
disabilities which are present at birth. Fetal alcohol syndrome is 
a lifelong condition, which not only affects the individual but, 
has very devastating effects on families. The saddest part of all 
this, Mr. Speaker, is that FAS is preventable — incurable, but 
preventable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, FAS affects people of many different cultures. We 
do need to educate people. People must be educated so they are 
aware of the effects alcohol has on unborn children. Mr. 
Speaker, when you think about it you would never even 
consider giving a newborn baby or a young child a drink of 
alcohol. Yet some give no consideration to an unborn child 
when they drink. 

Fetal alcohol syndrome has been recognized in Canada as one 
of the leading causes of preventable birth defects and 
developmental delays in children. No single group, 
organization, or community can effectively deal with this 
problem on its own, Mr. Speaker. Broad-based efforts are 
required, given that everyone has a stake in addressing this 
complex issue. 
 
Fetal alcohol effects or FAE indicates that alcohol is being 
considered as one of the possible causes of a child’s birth 
defect. This term is used to describe children with prenatal 
exposure to alcohol but only some FAS characteristics. These 
may included reduced or delayed growth of the baby, single 
birth defects, or developmental learning and behavioural 
disorders that may not be noticed until months, or perhaps even 
years after a child’s birth. 
 
While FAS is more likely to occur following continuous or the 
heavy intake of alcohol during pregnancy, effects have been 
observed after intermittent or binge drinking. There is no 
definite information that can be conveyed to women regarding 
the safe quantity . . . or quantity of alcohol use during 
pregnancy. Consequently the prudent choice for some women 
who are, or may become pregnant, is to abstain from alcohol. 
 
Besides the devastating emotional effects on the people 
involved, there is also the financial side, Mr. Speaker. Children 
with FAS require extensive supports including health, special 
education, child and family services, and frequently justice 
services. It is estimated that a child with FAS may require as 
much as $1.5 million in special care, supervision, and support 
during their lifetime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Kids First program is very encouraging. 
Unfortunately this is all federal money, $73 million over five 
years, 10 million of it being spent this year. It is encouraging, 
but I again question what the province would have done if this 
money wasn’t forthcoming from the federal government. 
 
We have this provincial government sitting on a half billion 
dollars in oil and gas windfall revenue, but only when money is 
coming from the feds will they deal with the issue of FAS and 
FAE. 
 
Here are some very important statements that have been made 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Here are some very important statements that 
have been made regarding FAS and FAE. New methods are 
needed to fight fetal alcohol syndrome says leading Canadian 
researcher, Joe Nanson, especially as only the tip of the iceberg 
has been seen so far. 
 
What is needed is a system less punitive to parents of 
alcohol-affected youth, and one which will provide more 
stability for children. 
 

Current social services, in-patient programs require 
mothers to leave families for their admission into treatment 
or remove affected children from their parents. 

 



1922 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

“I can’t emphasize enough the need for long-term treatment 
for these individuals,” said Nanson 
 
“And we need more family-centered foster care where we 
don’t have to put women in these terrible binds of choosing 
between their children and their treatment, and that we 
don’t have this adversarial model of either ‘do it all by 
yourself, or we’ll take your kids away.’” 

 
“We’re not diagnosing . . . kids early enough. We’re 
missing the critical times for intervening in children’s lives 
and intervening in women’s lives,” 
 

Nanson said. 
 
Another segment I’d like to read is from Gary Merasty. He’s 
the Grand Chief of the Prince Albert Grand Council. 
 

Thus far we have a lot of political talk and little tangible 
planning. It is time to take the interagency partnership 
approach that everyone identifies as necessary and make it 
a reality. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is time for Saskatchewan to lead the way in an 
area other than tax hikes and utility-rate increases. Let’s take on 
a leadership role and be number one in the fight against FAS 
and fetal alcohol effect. 
 
I second the motion put forth by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased 
today to talk about fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal alcohol 
effect. And there’s many things that my colleagues opposite, 
both of them have said, that we all agree with. It is a devastating 
disorder that affects children, and as both of them have said, it’s 
entirely preventable. 
 
What I really want to make sure I do, and hopefully will be 
aware of this through with my remarks, is that I want to be 
sensitive to the fact that we will not be stigmatizing children 
when we talk about this disorder, we will not be laying blame 
and guilt on women, and we will be keen to work in partnership 
with our Aboriginal community to try and address these issues. 
 
Our government, through Saskatchewan Health, is committed to 
developing more comprehensive services in the area of FAS 
prevention and support. I have had two and some years to be 
devoted to this file, and have spent a lot of time with my 
colleagues in other provinces talking about what we share and 
what’s common — of course, across the country; this is not 
unique to Saskatchewan — and dealing with . . . and sharing 
our responses and our initiatives so that we can build on what 
each of us have done and not reinvent the wheel or spend 
money that we don’t have to. 
 
I will also talk about some of the . . . there are many things that 
we have done through Saskatchewan Health. There is of course 
all kinds of things we can do more of, but when we talk about 
the things that can be done we really have to remember what we 
have done and what we do have in place. 

I’m going to try not to repeat too much of what’s been said 
already by redefining fetal alcohol syndrome, but the medical 
diagnosis is also been . . . the more fine-tuned diagnosis has 
been talked about now as a full continuum of alcohol-related 
neural developmental disorder, which is the acronym of ARND 
(alcohol-related neural disorder). 
 
And within that range of ARND are the alcohol-related birth 
defects and fetal alcohol syndrome. It is the most severe form of 
ARND — fetal alcohol syndrome. And we do have in 
Saskatchewan a rate of approximately 10 FAS births per year, 
and that’s remained constant since 1973, based on studies that 
we have done here. 
 
(15:00) 
 
The rates of FAS are highest for children from the most 
disadvantaged backgrounds. So when we talk about our 
approach to prevention of fetal alcohol syndrome, we do have 
to look into our issues of poverty and how people are living in 
their communities. 
 
And 86 per cent of children diagnosed with FAS in 
Saskatchewan are of Aboriginal origin. So when I talked about 
partnership with Aboriginal agencies and groups, that is of key 
importance to dealing with this issue. 
 
And the incidence of ARBD (alcohol-related birth defects) is 
estimated to be three to four times as high in the Aboriginal 
community . . . in the community, as that of FAS. And as my 
colleague mentioned, FAS does cost over a lifetime, one and a 
half to two million dollars per child. 
 
Our focus in Saskatchewan Health is on prevention since we 
have the ability to actually do that. If people do not drink, 
women do not drink at the beginning of pregnancy, then we do 
not have this. So we’re involved in a number of initiatives to 
assist in the development of a more comprehensive array of 
services in the area of FAS support and prevention. 
 
The early childhood development unit is formed right now and 
currently working on a strategy to address the needs of 
high-risk children and their families. One of my colleagues will 
speak later on, on the Kids First program and some of the 
wonderful initiatives that we have announced there. 
 
The prenatal component of the strategy has been . . . a prenatal 
component of the strategy has been included in order to address 
the FAS/FAE prevention, and that is by intervening as soon as 
possible with the high-risk addicted pregnant women. 
 
Other examples of our support and prevention, we have got . . . 
through the Saskatchewan Institute on Prevention of Handicaps, 
which is the acronym of SIPH, a preventative approach using 
culturally sensitive activities to support women, children, and 
families at risk. 
 
And we have the Prairie Northern Partnership on FAS, which is 
a prevention strategy, as I said before, with our neighbouring 
provinces, Alberta and Manitoba. We’ve also included now 
Nunavet, Northwest Territories, and the Yukon, and I believe 
BC (British Columbia) is poised to join the group also. 
 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1923 

 

We have collaboration on strategies for coordinated approaches 
and integration of our services, and we’ve talked about . . . 
we’ve shared posters, we’ve shared programs, and we’ve been 
quite successful in developing culturally sensitive and mutually 
acceptable programming. 
 
One of the things we had in Saskatchewan was the kangaroo 
poster which people were very excited about, and we thought it 
was just a wonderful poster and very cute. The Northwest 
Territories and Nunavet in the Yukon said people in the North 
don’t know what a kangaroo is, so to share this poster with 
them really meant nothing to them. So we had to relook at what 
do have as a universal symbol or a universal poster dealing with 
FAS. 
 
We do have a number of programs in place. We have been a 
leader in the FAS war for many years. The Alvin Buckwold 
Child Development Program or ABCDP in Saskatoon has 
focused on research in FAS since the early ’70s. 
 
The first diagnosed case of FAS in Canada was made in 
Saskatoon in 1975, and the Alvin Buckwold program and the 
Kinsmen Children’s Centre in Saskatoon is the major referral 
centre for children with mental and physical handicaps in 
central and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And SIPH, the Institute on Prevention of Handicaps, is housed 
in the Kinsmen Children’s Centre and it has focused on FAS 
prevention since the early ’80s. We have tapped on SIPH’s 
expertise when initiating prevention strategies about FAS for 
many years. 
 
We have many services already in place that I really do want to 
expand on. Our mental health services, we provide a broad 
range of community-based mental health services to children 
and youth under the age of 18. And those services include 
intake and referral, screening and assessment, emergency 
after-hours service, clinical treatment, consultation, and 
in-patient services. 
 
In-patient mental health services are available in all service 
areas for stabilization, assessment, and treatment. Saskatoon 
provides a specialized adolescent in-patient unit. Clients 
requiring residential services are referred to Social Service 
group homes. Forensic services provides psychological and 
psychiatric assessment, sex offender treatment, and consultation 
services to other agencies. A diagnosis of FAS/FAE is always 
considered when doing individual case planning. 
 
We also have alcohol and drugs services. Out-patient alcohol 
and drug services are available for youth and their families in 
every Saskatchewan health district. In-patient treatment is 
offered at the Calder Centre adolescent program in Saskatoon, 
which provides 24-hour chemical dependency recovery services 
staffed by a multidisciplinary clinical team. 
 
In addition, depending on individual need, youth can receive 
residential treatment services at Pine Lodge centre in Indian 
Head; Métis Health and Addiction Council of Saskatchewan in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert; and at the Walter A. 
“Slim” Thorpe Recovery Centre in Lloydminster. 
 
The high risk and violent young offender initiative addresses 

the issue of service provision to high risk and violent young 
offenders. The aim of the project is to enhance assessment, 
treatment, and case management capacity for this population. 
 
Since 1999, Saskatchewan Health has contributed funding to 
support the clinical teratology program within the Department 
of Pediatrics at the University of Saskatchewan. The program, 
headed by Dr. Patricia Blakley, focuses on ways to prevent and 
treat FAS. Through this program, Dr. Blakley is conducting 
research and providing medical education pertaining to the 
genetic and environmental causes of FAS and FAE and other 
preventable birth defects. 
 
The program also seeks ways to reduce exposure to these 
causes and will treat high-risk mothers and affected children. 
 
Dr. Blakley supports and provides education and training to 
other health professionals in assessing for FAS/FAE. And we 
contribute to that every year to support that initiative — and Dr. 
Blakley is one of the teratologists — because FAS is very 
difficult to diagnose and very little time has been spent on 
educating health providers to do that. 
 
The government funded an initiative — FAS/FAE in 
Saskatchewan, programming for education and prevention — 
through our Institute on Prevention of Handicaps, and Social 
Services partnered with Sask Health, and Justice, Education, 
and SLGA in providing support. 
 
Some of the institute’s activities over the years have included 
an FAS coordinating committee and many of . . . our work is 
done to intersectoral committees in Regina, North Battleford, 
Prince Albert, and La Ronge. 
 
Like I said, I want to talk one more time about the partnership 
that we have with Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba and the 
northern partners. 
 
We have seen jointly many initiatives that we have been able to 
share, and in particular the kangaroo poster, as I mentioned, and 
the community development initiatives grant program which we 
developed in Saskatchewan so we can take programs out to 
support women in their communities to change their lifestyle. 
 
It can’t only be done by putting labels on bottles or labels on 
bags in liquor board stores. Women need to have community 
support where they live so they can make better choices in their 
lives. 
 
And we took a lead in the Prairie Northern FAS Partnership, 
having the symposium here this year and the conference, and 
we are pleased to be part of that and continue ongoing excellent 
work in this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 



1924 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, a group of 22 grade 4 students that 
are seated in the east gallery. They are students at the Raymore 
School, and they’re here today to sit in the gallery and observe 
the proceedings. 
 
They are accompanied, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by their teacher, 
Ms. Linda Seidler; chaperones, Sheena Keep, Roland 
Huberdeau, Sandra Fazakas, Shelly Sentes, and Lori Bentz. 
 
I’ll be meeting with them shortly after they leave the gallery, 
Mr. Speaker, and I would ask all members to welcome them 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Expansion of Effort to Combat 
Fetal Alcohol Syndrome and Fetal Alcohol Effect 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
I want to say that I welcome the motion from the official 
opposition and from the members for Kelvington-Wadena and 
Estevan on this issue. I’m pleased to see the official opposition 
raising this issue. And while I didn’t agree with all their 
comments, I agree with the general thrust of the motion in terms 
of the need for us to do more to address fetal alcohol syndrome 
and fetal alcohol effect. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I think in fairness, what the official 
opposition didn’t acknowledge and what my colleague from 
Saskatoon Eastview has already pointed out in large part, the 
province has taken significant steps to begin to deal with this 
issue. But what we’re doing is not enough. More does need to 
be done. 
 
I want to say a word about some of the initiatives around 
prevention which have not been referenced yet, and particularly 
the investment that is being made this year in the Kids First 
program. Because, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we see as one of the 
major vehicles for addressing concerns around fetal alcohol 
syndrome and fetal alcohol effect, an early intervention 
program that includes home visitation support and prenatal 
support in high-risk neighbourhoods and with high-risk families 
across this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And specifically, we will be investing in an initiative in this 
fiscal year that should touch at least 900 children and their 
families. We will be identifying children who are at high risk as 
early as possible in the pregnancy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
we will be providing support to those families. 
 
We will also be ensuring that home visitation supports are in 
place for high-risk families after the child has been born. And I 
think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, looking at the result of initiatives 
like this in states like Hawaii in the United States, we can 
expect significant gains to be made around putting home 
visitation supports in place. 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, in addition to the home visitation support 
by a paraprofessional, and where necessary, by a health staff in 
the mental health field and the alcohol and drug addiction field, 
we will also be expanding daycare support programs to children 
at risk, including children with fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal 
alcohol effect, and we will be expanding early learning 
programs for high-risk children. 
 
We’re hoping to place at least 195 new daycare spaces in place 
this year, and much of that work has already begun. And we’re 
also going to be significantly expanding early learning 
programs. 
 
Now all of this I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is going to make a 
real difference in terms of providing what I call first of all on 
the prevention side, of preventing FAS and FAE in the first 
place, and also working with children in the earlier years where 
children are deemed to be, or identified at being at high risk of a 
variety of problems, including FAS and FAE. 
 
Where I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we need to do more is in 
the area of support for families, as children who’ve been 
diagnosed with FAS and FAE move into their middle years and 
their teen years. 
 
Here we don’t have a lot of services in place right now, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and I think we need to look at initiatives such 
as support for children who have FAS and FAE, during noon 
hour at school. Noon-hour supervision, good noon-hour 
supervision can make a real difference in terms of these 
children functioning well during the school day, because they 
often need structure to function effectively, and they need 
additional supports during the noon hour in some cases. And all 
of this has to be assessed on a case-by-case basis. 
 
They also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think in some cases, need 
more support after school. And I believe that we need to look at 
family home supports outside the . . . that are similar right now 
to child care for children who are 11, 12, 13. We need to extend 
that concept, I believe, for some children who have more 
serious FAS or FAE, so that we actually have teen support 
homes for teenagers with this diagnosis, in our communities, as 
required. And not all children who are diagnosed as FAS or 
FAE will need these supports, but some of them will. 
 
(15:15) 
 
I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also need to do a better job of 
helping to identify cases of fetal alcohol syndrome and fetal 
alcohol effect when children are on the street. Because I believe 
there are many children who are on the street, including 
children who are involved in the sex trade, who are suffering 
from FAS and FAE and have not been diagnosed and aren’t 
getting the help that they need. As the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena said, we do need a better system 
province-wide for properly diagnosing and identifying all these 
children and not just some of them. 
 
So in those areas, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do agree with the 
sentiments of the official opposition, and I think all members of 
the House, both on the government and the opposition side, 
want to see more done in this arena. 
 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1925 

 

So I think we’re off to a very good start on the prevention side 
of things and the early intervention side of things in terms of 
helping families and children in the early years. And where we 
need to put some more . . . look at placing some more strategic 
energy is in supporting these families as children progress into 
their teen years. 
 
Because the alternative, as other members have outlined, really 
is either spending money on these children in the justice system 
or spending money on these children to help them before they 
come into contact with the justice system and before they drop 
out of school. We want to support them staying in school and 
we want to support them going on and having a productive life 
without needing to have contact with the justice system. And 
that in my mind implies more support during the time that 
they’re aged 10 to aged 18. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I do want to touch on a couple of 
other issues that I feel that members of the opposition haven’t 
adequately acknowledged. One is that as the member for 
Kelvington-Wadena said, and she’s correct, there is a 
relationship between poverty and higher incidence of things like 
FAS and FAE. 
 
I think what she might also acknowledge is that Saskatchewan 
is making significant gains in terms of reducing child poverty. 
We are the only province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is year by 
year reducing our child poverty rate. Have we done enough? 
No, we’ve not. We need to do a great deal more. And I’ve often 
commented in the Assembly on some of the other initiatives 
that I want to see taken. Given the time, I won’t get into that 
today. 
 
But Saskatchewan stands alone in Canada and has been 
recognized nationally and internationally for the steps that 
we’ve taken to reduce child poverty. But our child poverty rate 
is still much too high and we have a lot more we need to do to 
bring it down. But things like the “building independence” 
program are making a real difference in our communities. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it should be acknowledged 
that, on this side of the House, we’ve significantly extended the 
support to children at risk through expanding our social worker 
placements in the Department of Social Services and putting 
more . . . investing in more social workers, an initiative 
unfortunately that members of the opposition oppose. 
 
But Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think we can reach agreement on 
this initiative. It think this is a good motion. I commend the 
member for Kelvington-Wadena for putting it forward and I 
hope we’ll be able to reach all-party approval on it. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to stand in this Assembly this afternoon and say a few words 
regarding the motion that has been brought forward by the 
member from Kelvington-Wadena in regards to fetal alcohol 
syndrome and fetal alcohol effects and the problems that it 
creates for members of our society and the fact that it’s an issue, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that certainly needs to be addressed and 
needs to receive some public involvement and public discussion 
and debate. 

And, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that the debate has gone far 
enough and it’s important that members of this Legislative 
Assembly take the time to recognize the serious effects of FAS 
and FAE on our society. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in my remarks I’d like to quote from a 
couple of documents and articles that have been written in the 
last few months. First of all I’d like to quote a few paragraphs 
from the Tuesday, April 17 issue of The Leader-Post, an article 
written by Gary Merasty of the Prince Albert Grand Council. 
And I quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He says: 
 

Fetal alcohol syndrome (FAS) and its related disabilities 
(such as alcohol-related neurological disorder or ARND) is 
more than just a justice problem in Saskatchewan. It is a 
health crisis, an education issue, and a vital issue for social 
services. 
 

And then he goes on to talk about the Prince Albert Tribal 
Council holding a conference on FAS in northern Saskatchewan 
where they saw some 500 people come together to discuss the 
issue and to try to arrive at a consensus as to how we begin to 
deal with the problems associated with FAS and FAE. What he 
says is: 
 

What we learned was both informative and shocking. 
Drinking alcohol from day 18 to day 25 of a pregnancy 
(when most women do not even know they are pregnant) is 
when the most visible damage happens. 
 
However, drinking during any time of the pregnancy can 
harm what cannot be seen — the brain. The impact of 
alcohol consumption during pregnancy on the brain, and 
thus on all aspects of behaviour, is a shocking part of FAS. 
 
(Mr. Deputy Speaker), while it can be seen on special brain 
scans in those who have FAS, it cannot be seen and is 
noticed only through behaviour and learning disabilities. 
Mr. Merasty goes on to say: 

 
We do not know exactly how pervasive the FAS problem is 
in Saskatchewan. However, we do know that it is the 
leading cause of mental retardation, and when diagnosed, 
that Aboriginal people suffer 10 times more often than do 
non-Aboriginal people. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d also like to read a couple of comments 
made by Judge Mary-Ellen Turpel-Lafond in a speech that she 
had given at a conference, a youth conference in this province 
early in May in regards to FAS as well. 
 
And a couple of things I’d like to quote from her speech to the 
conference are these comments here, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
she says: 
 

With the lack of family support due to high rates of 
abandonment and adoption, the FAS/FAE person will be 
unlikely to stay in a school setting. 

 
She says: 
 

It has been suggested that 60 per cent of FAS youth in the 
US are suspended from, expelled from, or drop out of 



1926 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

school. 
 

And she goes on to say: 
 

From my experience in youth court in Saskatchewan, the 
rate is closer to 90 per cent with many expulsions due to 
impulsive and inappropriate behaviours, which disrupt 
classes, overwhelm teachers and teaching assistants. 
 

Ms. Lafond also says: 
 

Into adulthood, an FAS/FAE sufferer, depending on the 
severity of the secondary problems, may not gain 
employment, or if employed, be at a high risk to lose jobs 
because of unacceptable job performance, inattention to 
detail, and/or absenteeism. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, what these two individuals are pointing 
out is the serious problems of FAS and FAE and the fact that 
our young people are being affected very dramatically. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the unfortunate reality of this 
problem is the fact that the individuals who are being affected 
have no say whatsoever, have no control whatsoever, over the 
problems that will affect them from the beginning of their life, 
well into adulthood and beyond, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it’s very important that the province of Saskatchewan, and as 
we’ve seen, the federal government, begin to realize that this is 
a major problem that we’re facing. It’s a major health problem. 
It’s a health factor that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when we talk 
about the costs of providing health services, not only to the 
people of Saskatchewan but to the people of Canada, and we 
look at the effects of FAS and FAE in this province and in our 
country, and we realize that this is a health issue that can be 
dealt with at a very minimal cost, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The biggest factor in FAS and FAE is drinking while pregnant, 
and I believe some of the members have already pointed out 
that fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And I’m not exactly sure how we really get the message out to 
young women that this is a serious issue. And if for no other 
reason, the fact of that little new life growing within you that it 
would be imperative that you even just abstain from drinking 
for that period, that nine-month period, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
you could give that child growing within you a real opportunity 
at a wholesome and valuable life and be a valuable contributor 
to society, rather than take the chance that that child may 
become another statistic in this whole problem of FAS and 
FAE, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So it’s certainly important that this Assembly . . . and that we 
move beyond the Assembly and that we include the very 
individuals that may be affected, that we include the groups and 
the peoples where this is a major problem, and that we begin to 
work with the leaders of those groups to begin the educational 
process to point out the fact, the detrimental fact, the fact of 
drinking while pregnant and the problems that FAS brings upon 
a young child. 
 
I’d also like to quote another . . . from Ms. Lafond as well, and 
she says in her speech, she says: 

At the provincial level, at least in Saskatchewan, no 
supports in place for individuals with FAS or ARND in the 
criminal justice system. We hear of existing programs 
which could help those with FAS and ARND as an 
afterthought. 

 
(And she says) That is a problem. Plans and programs are 
announced or are on the drawing board. But in the real 
world of affected individuals, no presence to any of this as 
yet. 

 
And then she goes on to say: 
 

What is most discouraging is that there is no dialogue on 
what a comprehensive intervention and preventive 
treatment program would entail at the local, regional, or 
provincial level involving an interagency approach and 
with the participation from Aboriginal leaders. This has not 
happened. 
 
Even an interdepartmental discussion which involves those 
in the justice system, who engage with FAS and ARND 
disabled individuals has not happened. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think that’s a point. We have a major 
problem. We have a health problem that can be addressed, and 
yet we have not taken the time to sit down with the agencies 
involved, with the leadership involved to begin to address this 
very real problem which the Saskatchewan School Trustees, 
back in 1992, recognized would be a major problem It would be 
a fairly expensive problem to address and we need to address it 
immediately. Otherwise, Mr. Deputy Speaker, what do we have 
if we don’t address it and begin to address it right now? 
 
We are going to have situations where children . . . FAS parents 
are going to be bringing children into the world, and what we 
will end up with is compounding the problem, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my colleague from 
Kelvington-Wadena has pointed out, it’s imperative that this 
Assembly and this province and both governments at the 
provincial and federal level recognize the problems of FAS and 
FAE, recognize that this problem can be addressed very 
effectively. 
 
And the effects of FAS and FAE can be dealt with very quickly 
if indeed we’re prepared to sit down and work with individuals 
to design a mentor program that will point out the problems and 
show the benefits of not drinking while pregnant. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, I have a few comments that I would like to 
make on this motion. First of all I would like to thank the 
member from Kelvington for bringing the motion forward. It is 
an issue that needs to be dealt with clearly. 
 
And I think it’s very important also to acknowledge, 
particularly in the light of comments from the last speaker, that 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1927 

 

in the language of the motion itself it acknowledges that there is 
work that has been done already where it says, we commit to 
expanding the programs. 
 
And I think that’s what it’s about. Because to this point there 
has already been some very, very good, diligent work made . . . 
progress made by interdepartmental and interagency groups 
who have been working to try and get a very clear sense of how 
we can make these programs most effective for children and 
young people and adults who are affected by FAS and ARND. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think of the family in my constituency 
who I have spoken with recently who talked about their 
children who were adopted and who were raised with much 
love and care. But those children, even beyond their mid-teen 
and late-teen years, continue to struggle with the effects of FAS 
and ARND. 
 
It is very difficult for them to learn; it is difficult for them to fit 
into job situations; it is difficult for them to fit into an 
educational situation. But the parents continue to struggle and 
to work with our Social Services department, our Department of 
Health, and with the available resources to try and make sure 
that their much-loved children have opportunity to have as full 
a life as possible. They are looking for support systems within 
the community. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And when I think about the way that we are dealing with fetal 
alcohol syndrome and ARND, I believe that the key is within 
the community itself; that there are many, many groups and 
bodies which can mutually support the raising of these young 
people. 
 
I think of the work that has been done already. There is need for 
much more partnering between our provincial government and 
its departments and the federal government. And very clearly 
we need to extend that partnering beyond these two 
governments to work with tribal councils, with the FSIN, to 
make sure that together we are providing the best care that is 
possible. 
 
The Minister of Aboriginal Affairs has been in consultation 
with Chief Gary Merasty, has corresponded with him about this 
issue. And I need to say that she has conveyed to me the utmost 
respect that she has for the work that they have currently done 
in trying to prepare for and to care for the children in their 
community who are dealing with FAS and ARND. 
 
With regard to that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think it’s very, very 
important that at this point in what we are doing, we need to 
acknowledge that the partnership discussions that have 
happened between the provincial government and the federal 
government will be extended. 
 
And I know that the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs has said 
clearly that there is much opportunity for her to work with the 
Prince Albert Grand Council, with FSIN, and with other tribal 
councils and to share some of the burden of dealing with this 
issue. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to quote from a document 

that we have. It’s the report of the Prince Albert Grand Council, 
First Nation Community Healing Plan (A Fetal Alcohol 
Syndrome/Alcohol Related Neurodevelopmental Disorder 
Initiative). 
 
With greatest respect, I have not read the whole document but 
what I have read is quite impressive and I think there is much 
for us to learn in terms of the way a community can pull 
together to help people who are dealing with this particular 
problem. 
 
And so I would like to read into the record the executive 
summary of this report. And I quote: 
 

The First Nations Community Healing Plan (A Fetal 
Alcohol Syndrome/Alcohol Related Neurodevelopmental 
Disorder Initiative) will focus on intervention, prevention, 
and treatment for individuals and families by building upon 
traditional values and beliefs that emphasize caring and 
support of communities. 
 
The Prince Albert Grand Council Women’s Commission 
wishes to establish a network of trained, committed, caring, 
and supportive individuals to help various First Nations 
promote, enhance, and maintain well communities. 
 
This model proposes to engage a community-based 
interagency approach in helping communities deal with a 
variety of social issues, many of which revolve around 
alcohol abuse and the presence of FAS/ARND. 
 
FAS/ARND has become an ominous fact of life in our 
communities. It has only been recently that FAS/ARND 
has been linked to many social issues, not only in First 
Nation communities but also in Canadian society as well. 
Unfortunately the prevalence of FAS/ARND is much 
greater in First Nation communities, with estimates 
suggesting 11 times the national average. 
 
Research in FAS/ARND suggests that individuals and 
families must be enabled to function in the community with 
respect, free from exploitation, so that they can achieve 
their fullest potential. For this to occur the community must 
be involved in creating this supportive environment. If that 
environment is not available, those affected with 
alcohol-related birth defects tend to become frustrated from 
a lack of understanding, a lack of acceptance, which 
eventually results in individuals lashing out in negative 
ways. 
 
These negative, secondary characteristics can generate 
extreme behaviours detrimental to FAS/ARND individuals 
and the community. The appearance of secondary 
characteristics can be prevented through an interagency, 
community-based approach that facilitates a supportive and 
caring environment. This is the intent of the two-streamed, 
multiphased community healing plan. 
 
The community healing plan consists of a large variety of 
community personnel properly trained to deal with those 
individuals and community issues common to those 
affected with FAS/ARND. Furthermore, they are 
networked to an extensive list of support services and 



1928 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

agencies who can provide and/or access expertise to assist 
the community in its healing journey. 
 
The personnel consist of a developmental facilitator, 2 
FAS/ARND coordinators, 4 special education interveners, 
20 community coordinators, and 20 community advocates. 
The development of a family treatment centre is proposed 
to further support and complete the holistic treatment, 
prevention, and intervention in the crisis issue of 
FAS/ARND. 
 
Currently all treatment centres in Saskatchewan segregate 
family members from each other, the entire family unit is 
ignored in the rehabilitation plans, and individuals return to 
this unchanged family environment. A focus on family 
healing and a return to traditional beliefs and values 
towards parenting and living would be an essential aspect 
of the family treatment centre. 

 
I end quote there. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, having read that and having come out of 
the particular background that I come out of, I believe that this 
community-based approach is absolutely essential. We are 
finding this in our community schools approach. We are finding 
this now in the inter-agency work that is already being 
developed. That it is when people in community pull together, 
work together to try and treat not just the individual . . . Not to 
incarcerate, but to care for that individual with respect, to care 
for the family with respect. It is when all of these components 
come together that there is hope for those who are dealing with 
FAS/ARND. 
 
And I think, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is hope for our 
larger community when we pull together. And so I appreciate 
the work that our Social Services, our Health department, our 
other departments are doing as they are working to deal with 
these alcohol-related problems. And I appreciate the fact that 
we need to, as the motion before us says, expand our 
commitment. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I say that I support this motion 
and I believe that we are as a government committed to further 
expanding this work to caring for these folks. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very 
pleased to enter into this debate today. FAS and FAE children 
and youth who are inflicted with this very sad condition are in 
fact in great jeopardy in their lives in as far as being able to 
function in the main stream of society and function in a healthy 
manner. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a very complex situation, this syndrome. 
It’s very seldom considered very objectively because of the 
immediate nature of the conflicts in many families and 
communities. 
 
One should be aware of the characteristics of children and youth 
that are afflicted with FAS. One should be very aware of the 
kind of problems that causes them. One should be aware of 

their background. Some of the characteristics, Mr. Speaker, are 
that there is poverty in these families and there is limited 
economic opportunities for them due to FAS. 
 
There is family breakdown intolerance, tolerance of violence in 
families. There is poor attachment, limited experiences with 
trusted adult figures. 
 
There is isolation, racism, alcohol, drug, and solvent abuse, 
poor self-image, as individuals and as people. There is cultural 
and linguistic alienation and absence of accepted individuals in 
the society in roles of perceived importance by all members of 
the public. 
 
There is early sexualization, sexual inappropriate behaviour, 
education gap with non-Aboriginal population, teenage 
pregnancy, and a great involvement in the criminal justice 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to speak a little bit about the involvement 
of many FAS youth in the criminal justice system. We have a 
wonderful judge in this province in the person Mary Ellen 
Turpel-Lafond, and she brought forward a number of times the 
need for in-patient treatment services — comprehensive 
services to assist children that are already suffering from FAS. 
 
Ms. Lafond points out, and pointed out at a conference in 
Saskatoon, some obstacles that she saw, obstacles in therapeutic 
approach. And my colleague from Moosomin has just pointed 
out some of these things, but I would like to elaborate a little bit 
more. 
 
At the provincial level, at least in Saskatchewan, there is 
certainly was a sense at that conference that there were no 
supports in place for individuals with FAS, ARND in the 
criminal justice system. We hear of existing programs, which 
could help those with FAS, as an afterthought. And that’s a 
problem. Plans and programs are often announced, or it is said 
they are on the drawing board, but in reality, in the real world of 
the affected individuals, no presence to any of this yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is being asked for, I believe, is to ensure that 
we have in place and co-operation with all of the people that 
want to help in this area. Prevention is one side of the concern. 
Prevention presents a necessary ingredient, I guess, in 
addressing FAS. However, we are at the present time looking at 
90 per cent of Aboriginal youth in our province that are in the 
justice system that have problems with FAS. 
 
And so it takes a collaborative and co-operative effort by 
governments on all levels, of all levels, including Aboriginal 
government, to come up with what it is they think would be 
helpful to children with FAS, to keep them out of the court 
system, to keep them from being recycled through the courts 
again and again. 
 
Now there are some ideas and thoughts put forward not only by 
Judge Lafond but by many people from the conference that was 
in Saskatoon. And we need to focus on what those ideas were. 
We need to ensure that something is happening and we need to 
take a lesson from what we’ve heard at that conference. 
 
Because in the past there has been a number of times this issue 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1929 

 

has been brought forward to the health care system, or to the 
health care department rather, to Social Services, and to the 
education system, and nothing in fact has been done. Therefore 
I guess the justice system will have to be the focus on 
addressing this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that my many colleagues in the legislature 
are concerned about this issue on both sides of the House. My 
concern certainly is as great as any. I have, along with other 
members of this House, been a part of the committee to address 
the sex trade of youth and children in Saskatchewan. And I 
recognize from that, that many of the children on the streets are 
inflicted with FAS and FAE. 
 
They need specialized services. They need assistance. And 
there’s a great concern that if these things are not provided, 
many of these children will in fact meet an early death. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — The time of debate has expired. We 
now have a 10-minute debate for question and comment if 
required. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Question. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — I hear the call for the question. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — To ask for leave to move to 
government orders. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I move that 
the Assembly move to government orders. 
 
Seconded by the member from Cannington. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 44 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Belanger that Bill No. 44 — The 
Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2001 be now read 
a second time. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure 
to enter into debate on Bill No. 44, The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act. 
 
This Bill puts into place the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. It’s 

somewhat curious that this fund was established last year in the 
amount of $50 million, but without the benefit of this 
supporting legislation. And I think certainly there are some 
questions around how that was managed and the legality of 
having a fund that was actually drawn on last year without this 
kind of legislation being in place. 
 
Now certainly we agree, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there is some 
wisdom in setting aside a fund to deal with forest fires in a 
particularly bad year. And given the unpredictable nature of 
forest fires, it can be very, very damaging to not only the 
natural resource that we have, but it can also be very costly and 
very, very difficult for the department to budget accordingly. So 
to allow some cushion in terms of managing, particularly the 
large escape fires which are the costliest and the most 
dangerous is perhaps a good idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An added benefit of this as well could be that we will see a 
greater degree of accountability on the part of government with 
respect to the way funds expended on forest fires are expended. 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that while we in this province have 
not as of yet taken a very, very serious look at the entire forest 
firefighting operation with a view to finding efficiencies — if 
there are some to be found, and in completely reviewing the 
operation to determining if there are improvements that could 
be made — I do know however, Mr. Speaker, that in the 
province of Alberta, they have undertaken such a review. And 
they found a number of very, very interesting things when they 
reviewed their forest firefighting budget. 
 
And at the end of the day, Mr. Speaker, I am told that that 
review saved the province of Alberta and the taxpayers of 
Alberta literally, literally millions of dollars and, at the same 
time, provided a safer and more appropriate environment for the 
people actually fighting the fires. 
 
I would just address a couple of the issues that were identified 
in Alberta and, given the fact that we haven’t undertaken a 
similar review in this province, Mr. Speaker, I would venture to 
guess that these are areas that we could perhaps look at here as 
well. 
 
They found that, in a lot of cases, meals were inadequate for 
forest firefighters. They found that forestry personnel were 
actually doing contractors’ work. The contractors were not 
living up entirely to their obligations. They found that, in some 
cases, supplies and services were not up to contract 
specifications. 
 
They found in terms of the ability of workers to look after 
themselves and to have appropriate access to things like toilets 
and showers and cooking facilities, that in some cases those 
were lacking as well. They found that food was not being 
handled in accordance with the acceptable standards. 
 
And they found that, in cases, contractors were substituting 
personnel differently than what had been specified in the 
contract. So in some instances perhaps, Mr. Speaker, the 
government was not getting the expertise that they thought they 
were upon the signing of these contracts. 
 
They found that there was a lot of inadequate record keeping on 
a daily basis for rental of equipment, for service records — 



1930 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

those kinds of things. They found, in some instances, that 
damage to equipment caused by contractors, for example, was 
being charged back to fire costs. 
 
So they undertook a massive review, Mr. Speaker, and it 
showed, amongst other things, over billing, double billing, 
improper billing, overcharging resulting, in some instances, in 
exorbitant rates, not signed for in the field, or written into the 
contracts. 
 
And I think this is something that in terms of the forest 
fire-fighting operation in this province, Mr. Speaker, we’re 
going to have to look at. If the Forest Fire Contingency Fund is 
going to be spent wisely and efficiently, then we also have to 
look at the way in which those funds are going to be spent. 
 
We do have some questions around the particulars with respect 
to this fund. If this is only a fund on paper, as some would 
suggest, is this any different at all from the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, Mr. Speaker. And if this fund exists as well, would it be 
off limits to the government in a year, for example, when they 
may have difficulty balancing their budgets. 
 
There are a number of avenues, Mr. Speaker, that we would like 
to pursue — these, amongst others — and I think we can 
certainly do that in Committee of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 26 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 26 — The 
Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
with pleasure that I rise to comment briefly on Bill No. 26, The 
Hearing Aid Sales and Services Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you know, I probably have to make sure that 
we’ve commented on these issues appropriately. 
 
We’ve had an opportunity to talk to people that work in this 
field, especially the Saskatchewan Association of 
Speech-Language Pathologists and Audiologists, who believe 
that this legislation is not only needed, but very important to 
make sure that there are standards of excellence set for the 
hearing aid industry in this province. 
 
And as well, the Saskatchewan Hearing Instrument 
Practitioners Society is also concerned that there is appropriate 
regulation and control of the industry so that clients that require 
hearing aid support are able to make sure that they can deal with 
practitioners with confidence. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we very much appreciate the time we’ve 
had in order to get this information back from these agencies, 
and any detailed questions that we may have, we will be very 
pleased to deal with in committee. 
 
Thank you. 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 4 — The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to speak on Bill No. 4 — The Registered Nurses 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill recognizes advanced practical nurses or 
advanced clinical nurses, registered nurses who have received 
additional training and expanded their skill set that allows them 
to diagnose basic medical conditions, prescribe drugs, and order 
diagnostic tests. 
 
It will also allow the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association) to issue temporary licences to RNs (registered 
nurses) coming from other jurisdictions and who do not yet 
meet the full requirements for a full licence. 
 
Bill No. 4 will also increase the number of public 
representatives on the SRNA council from two to three, 
ensuring that the public perspective is provided on nursing 
issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, virtually all pertinent associations were consulted 
on this Bill. This Bill is very . . . It is very encouraging to see 
this Bill has expanded the scope of practice because as nursing 
shortages become more evident across the country, this Bill will 
certainly move to address the issue of recruitment and retention 
here in Saskatchewan. 
 
While we are encouraged to see this legislation, we also can’t 
help but wonder why it wasn’t introduced before. Had measures 
like this been implemented a few years ago, this would have 
had a positive impact on the number of nurses leaving the 
province. 
 
The physician shortage has also been felt very sharply in rural 
Saskatchewan and we don’t want to see any more physicians 
replaced by advanced clinical nurses, so the role of advanced 
clinical nurse must be clearly defined. 
 
For years nurses, doctors, and other health care providers have 
been telling us that unless something was done and soon, the 
ongoing and irreversible out-migration of health workers would 
continue and have a negative impact on health delivery not only 
in rural Saskatchewan but also the impact that that has on urban 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once these nurses, doctors, and other health care 
workers leave, they do not return. And the workplace in 
Saskatchewan has a lot to do with their decision to leave in the 
first place. Nurses were promised in the union agreement in the 
spring of 1999 that the workplace issues would be addressed. 
They have not been addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just for the record I would like to quote from 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1931 

 

Rosalee Longmoore the president of SUN (Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses). And I quote: 
 

The president of the Saskatchewan Union of Nurses says 
her membership is still waiting for working conditions to 
improve. It’s a pledge that was made by the NDP 
government two years ago in the wake of the 
province-wide job action by nurses. Longmoore says even 
though two years have been passed since the strike, some 
workplace relationships are still troubled. The thought is 
pay me more to work me like a dog, said Longmoore. Until 
we do things to make people feel better about going to 
work, money will be the biggest single issue for a lot of 
people. 
 

And that article was printed by . . . or was from CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) Saskatchewan when Miss 
Longmoore was interviewed in April of this year. 
 
Another reason, Mr. Speaker, that we are losing nurses is 
because of the part-time work that nurses have to put up with 
instead of being guaranteed full-time hours. Nurses need to 
know they will be guaranteed a certain number of hours in order 
to remain in Saskatchewan, and this is especially a concern of 
our new graduates. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan now has the dubious honour of 
boasting the longest waiting lists in the country. While this Bill 
will not reverse that negative trend entirely, it is important for a 
step towards that. SRNA statistics show that in 1991 there were 
10,000 practicing nurses in the province and today we have 
only 9,000. This shows a clear problem with our manpower in 
the nursing . . . for nursing in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of this government’s 1999 election promises 
was to hire 500 more health care providers, and we all know 
that the front-line staff are critical to access and delivery of 
basic health care programs and services, and yet this promise 
has not been fulfilled. 
 
While we’re encouraged by the overall positive direction that 
this Bill takes, so much more remains to be done to address 
recruitment and retention issues in the province, not only for 
nursing but for all health care providers. By not moving to 
address this critical issue sooner, this government has directly 
negatively impacted health care for thousands of people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
At this time, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move this Bill to 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
(16:00) 
 

Bill No. 5 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 5 — The 
Dietitians Act be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak 

on the Bill No. 5, The Dietitians Act. Mr. Speaker, we’re 
encouraged by the overall content of this Bill which will 
formally put in place a regulatory body for dietitians across the 
province. Public accountability has also been strengthened by 
expanding the number of public representatives on the council, 
requiring open disciplinary hearings, and requiring the filing of 
an annual report. 
 
As health care and health care delivery has changed over the 
years, changes were needed to reflect this within the 
professional bodies that are represented. The scope of a 
dietitian’s work is far reaching. Dietitians are employed in 
many sectors of the health care field — food services, clinical 
dietitians, public health, community dietitians, nutritional 
supplement programs, even specialized clinical areas like 
pediatrics. 
 
One of the primary roles that dietitians play in health care is to 
improve and maintain health and well-being. With the increased 
emphasis on personal responsibility for health and wellness, 
dietitians have played an increasingly vital role in health care 
delivery. They have seen their roles expand and change 
dramatically in the last decade. Unfortunately, amended 
legislation has not accompanied that change until now. 
 
Mr. Speaker, hopefully this Bill not only recognizes the 
important contributions that dietitians make to health care 
delivery, but that it also ensures they have the tools and 
resources needed to deliver their programs and services to more 
people in a more timely manner. 
 
We’re pleased to see that discussion and consultation on this 
legislation took place over a two-year time period with the 
Dietitians Association. This allowed for a Bill that dietitians 
throughout the province can be proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of this government’s 1999 election promises 
was to hire 500 more health care providers. Last summer it 
announced that over 200 health care positions were lost. We 
know that a majority of those positions are nurses but we can’t 
help but wonder if dietitians were part of this number as well. 
 
And I should just clarify what I meant there, Mr. Speaker. It 
was made aware that 200 health care positions would be 
deleted, not that they were already lost. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some concern regarding a dietitian’s education. 
The University of Saskatchewan, the only place in the province 
where dietitians can train, has indicated that it will be hiking 
tuition fees this year by an average of 15 per cent. This will 
have a huge impact on students that are attending and will 
negatively impact the number of students that will study to 
become dietitians. 
 
While this legislation finally gives some long overdue respect to 
dietitians throughout Saskatchewan, it does not address the 
more serious issue of increased funding to universities or 
increasing the number of seats in the various health care 
programs. Currently there are only 24 seats available in the 
dietitian program at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another concern we have that isn’t addressed in 
this Bill is with regards to student financial aid. We know this 



1932 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

government has a bursary program in place that will allow 
students going into the health-related fields to get help with 
their tuition costs if they promise to work in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
While this is good news for rural Saskatchewan, it’s bad news 
for students who want to study dietetics. From what we’ve seen, 
those bursaries are going to students in physical therapy, 
occupational therapy, speech and language pathology, 
audiology, public health inspection, respiratory therapy, and 
early childhood psychology. 
 
We also know that continued lack of funding to health districts 
has forced health boards to cut back even more on critical 
program services which has negatively impacted the access and 
delivery of health care in many communities. 
 
We’ve been told that there’s a two-year shortage of dietitians 
very similar to the problem facing nursing in this province. This 
Bill does not even begin to address this extremely important 
issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no denying that hospitals are necessary to 
treat the sick and injured, but it’s also important that people 
understand and therefore take responsibility for their own 
personal health. This is where dietitians come in. 
 
Unfortunately we haven’t seen much initiative from this 
government that will address its disappointing and overall lack 
of vision regarding health care in Saskatchewan. At this time, 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to move this Bill to the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 54 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Melenchuk that Bill No. 54 – The 
Education Amendment Act, 2001/Loi de 2001 modifiant la 
Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My colleagues and I 
would like to acknowledge the importance of teachers to our K 
to 12 education system. Last fall’s job action resulted in our 
offices hearing from residents right across the province 
regarding their concerns that the work teachers do is not being 
recognized. 
 
We also know that the collective agreement that was reached 
must be honoured and the minister has indicated that the Bill is 
part of this. 
 
We also know that while most teachers excel at their jobs, there 
will be occasion where, for whatever reason, a contract will 
have to be terminated, and in those instances, there is a 
provision for appeal. This is done through something called a 
board of reference. 
 
This board of reference is not new. It’s been in The Education 
Act for quite some time. But what is changing is that in addition 
to appealing not only a termination or a suspension, there will 

now be an opportunity to appeal a formal reprimand. The 
problem with this Bill is that there is no definition of what a 
formal reprimand actually is. This is no doubt causing concern 
for teachers. 
 
When they sit down for a discussion with the principal or with 
someone from their local board of education, is this considered 
a formal reprimand? Is this something they would put in their 
permanent record. If the director of education discusses some 
issues or events with a teacher, will this also be considered a 
formal reprimand? 
 
This grey area, Mr. Speaker, leaves a lot of room for 
interpretation and application. We’d hate to see teachers 
spending a good deal of their free time defending themselves in 
front of a board of reference for a formal reprimand. 
 
The members opposite could have gone quite a bit further in 
their legislation. They could have defined what a formal 
reprimand actually is. This would have clarified the issue for all 
groups — teachers, boards of education, parents, students, and 
stakeholder groups. Unfortunately what we have is something 
that does look like it could be up for an amendment this time 
next year, and will cause a lot of uncertainty and unhappiness in 
years to come. 
 
Overall, while we’re encouraged to see the government 
honouring its commitment to the teachers’ collective 
agreement, there are still some questions we have regarding this 
Bill’s intent. These questions however we’d like to address in 
Committee of the Whole so I’d like to move this to Committee 
of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 53 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 53 — The 
Highways and Transportation Amendment Act, 2001 be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
gives me pleasure to give a few comments on Bill 53 this 
afternoon. There are a couple of concerns with the Bill and 
some items that may be a little bit controversial dealing with 
truck routes and weight restrictions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what this Bill does is give the minister the right to 
prohibit or restrict trucks from travelling routes which the 
minister thinks may cause the road damage, and there’s a bit of 
a problem with that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to just quote what the minister has stated with 
respect to the highway infrastructure. And I quote from 
Hansard and the minister says: 
 

Our primary concern continues to be the protection of our 
transportation infrastructure. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s intuitively obvious to me that the 
minister has not travelled in the southwest part of this province 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1933 

 

at all. When we look at the infrastructure in my constituency 
and in other parts of the southwestern part of the province, how 
do you protect an infrastructure that is already pretty much 
crumpled and destroyed? 
 
And I’d like to just identify a couple of those concerns. We talk 
about re-routing trucks on roads through the constituency of 
Wood River. We have three major arteries from south of the 
border into Saskatchewan — Highway 2, Highway 4, and 
Highway 37 — and all of them are in an absolutely deplorable 
state for any kind of traffic. So when we say we want to save 
our infrastructure, how do we, how do we do that? 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, we had a lesson on how we save 
our infrastructure as witnessed a couple of years ago when the 
good citizens of Val Marie and Climax took it upon themselves 
to save the infrastructure. At that time we were a little worried 
about the road going back to gravel, and in fact that is still the 
case to this day — that we’re worried about our highways going 
back to gravel — because there’s no money going back in to 
preserve the infrastructure. So that, Mr. Speaker, is very much a 
concern of ours and it’s going to be exacerbated with this Bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, another item on this Bill that I have some 
concern with is how this Bill can and will affect businesses. 
Now we have discussed this in the House and in estimates, 
where you’ve got a highway that is . . . that weight restrictions 
are put on by the minister. And if the restrictions are put on the 
highways for truck traffic, how do you get vehicles into towns 
for resupply, such as stores and fuel? And the minister stated, 
well, that’s pretty, that’s pretty easy. They can ask for a permit 
to go on the road. 
 
Well there’s a bit of a dichotomy here. If you say no heavy 
traffic on the road unless you have a permit, does a permit help 
you save the road? And the answer is no. So now, Mr. Speaker, 
we say you can go and ask for a permit. 
 
Well to my knowledge, Mr. Speaker, permits don’t come for 
nothing. You are going to have to pay for a permit. So now if 
you have a road going into a small rural town and you have to 
have a permit, there is nothing about . . . no doubt about it, that 
that’s another form of taxation. You just put a weight restriction 
on the road and say, okay, everybody that’s over a 2 ton truck 
has to pay for a permit. Is that going to save the roads? I don’t 
think so. 
 
So in essence it’s another form of taxation and I’m a little bit 
worried about that. When I look at some business development 
in rural Saskatchewan, and I look at heavy haul for feed lots, 
feed right now is moving — it has to move, Mr. Speaker. With 
the drought situation that we have, with the winter that we had 
and feeding cattle, there’s an awful lot of hay moving. What are 
we going to do? We’re going to say this is . . . this road’s got a 
restricted weight on it and so we’re going to charge you a 
permit. You can still take your hay on it — but we’re going to 
charge you money for it. 
 
So I have some deep concern over this, Mr. Speaker, and I think 
this is going to actually cause a real problem with any potential 
growth in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
The other thing that really concerns me on this Bill is we say 

we’ll make a truck route here, and now it’s going to be partially 
gravel or maybe all gravel, we’re not going to force it into 
gravel. We’ve got to go in partnerships with the RM on it. But 
eventually, I think, we know the history of this government and 
it’s going to go back to gravel. 
 
So gravel is not really an all-weather road when you’re talking 
heavy haul. It doesn’t take a rocket scientist to figure it out. If 
you’ve got a lot of rain and you got a heavy truck on it, you’re 
not going to move on one of those roads. So that is a concern 
also. 
 
But another deep concern within this whole plan is once a road 
becomes gravel, you can rest assured it’s going to be off-loaded 
on to the RM. And that is a very deep concern from a lot of 
people in the rural areas. It’s another form of downloading. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my concern is that this whole Bill will in fact 
prohibit growth in rural Saskatchewan. We’ll have a lot more 
questions about it. But I recommend we move it to Committee 
of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 51 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Cline that Bill No. 51 — The Income 
Tax Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to stand today in the Assembly and 
express a few points on Bill No. 51, the amendment to the 
income tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we see in Bill No. 51 . . . and we’ve had the 
ability to have this Bill looked at by a number of people in the 
accounting field, professionals whose job it is to check numbers 
and check formulas and to look at all of the suggestions put 
forward in Bill No. 51 to incorporate a number of things. 
 
Mr. Speaker, two things are happening in Bill 51. We’re trying 
to address some of the concerns that have been changed at the 
federal level to ensure that The Income Tax Act for the 
province of Saskatchewan complies with regulations and 
changes at the federal level. 
 
And secondly, of course, is to put in place the recommendations 
that have been put forward by the Minister of Finance in the 
budget. And it’s not only the budget of this current year, but it’s 
to also put in place the plan as identified by the Minister of 
Finance in the 2000 budget. 
 
(16:15) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of changes, and any person 
in the province who has had the opportunity to see a copy of 
Bill No. 51 would recognize that there are many formulas. 
There are complicated formulas regarding calculations and 
changes, but there are some things there that I think people are 
looking forward to. 
 



1934 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

When we see the changes to tax credits, and there have been a 
number of changes in the charitable contribution for instance, 
that now people will be able to have the calculation for 
charitable donations done at two different levels. At $200 or 
lower, there will be one provincial tax rate, and then at a 
donation of anything over $200, there will be a different tax 
rate. So those kinds of changes are being incorporated. 
 
One of the ones, Mr. Speaker, that is I think necessary and that 
people who are attending post-secondary education, whether 
they be students or whether they be parents of those children, is 
the changes to the post-secondary tax credit that will now 
change the tax credit to $400 per month, and this Bill will allow 
that tax credit to be put in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other changes is that the changes to the 
GST (goods and services tax), the federal rules that have been 
put in place for credits, are going to be incorporated into the . . . 
for the purposes of the sales . . . Saskatchewan sales tax credit. 
So those two things are going to be put in place. 
 
One of the other changes, Mr. Speaker, is in the area of 
business, and while we commend the government, and the 
business owners of Saskatchewan have looked forward to this 
change for many, many years, we see that effective July 1 the 
rate of tax calculation on small business will be reduced from 
eight to six. So that is something that businesses will be looking 
forward to. 
 
Hopefully, it would have occurred . . . it would have occurred a 
long time ago, but nevertheless it might be an incentive to 
businesses to look at the fact that now taxes are lower. 
 
One of the other concerns of many individuals, Mr. Speaker, is 
that, as inflation erodes the amount of money and as of course 
our dollar changes, there is always a concern about indexation. 
Are we moving forward each year? Is the dollar value of 2001 
the same as it was in 1996 or ’97? 
 
And one of the proposals, Mr. Speaker, deals with the 
indexation of the entire system. And when we look at the 
non-refundable personal tax credits such as, of course, the basic 
personal amount, the spousal amounts, the caregiver, age 
amount, dependent child credits — all of those are now going to 
be indexed so there’s going to be a situation, Mr. Speaker, 
where I think that there’s no longer a need for people to not 
understand what changes are being made. It is a situation where 
the indexation is going to look at the credits so that we know 
that each and every year they’re finally going to keep up. 
 
Now there are many people in the province, Mr. Speaker, who 
are very concerned about indexation as well, or the lack of it. 
And those are people who are collecting pensions, where 
pensions and the changes to pensions of course are at the whim 
of the government. And in many cases, indexation has not taken 
place. 
 
So there is a lot of people that are expressing the point of view 
that if we have made some changes to get into line with the 
federal government, that it’s time that maybe this government 
also took a look at some of those other changes as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the identification of the various changes in the 

provincial budget are incorporated into this Bill. It is an 
extensive Bill. It addresses 33 clauses and there are many 
formulas and changes. 
 
There are a couple of points, Mr. Speaker, that we will require 
the Minister of Finance to clarify, concerns that have been 
raised by some people in the accounting field as to a particular 
wording of some of the sections. But we will be able to deal 
with those questions and concerns, Mr. Speaker, in Committee 
of the Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 56 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 56 — The 
Tobacco Control Act be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad to have the opportunity to speak to Bill No. 56, as I was a 
member of the Tobacco Committee that went around the 
province listening to people and listening to their presentations. 
 
I think the one thing that we heard across the province was the 
fact that we have to denormalize the use of tobacco in the 
province of Saskatchewan. The other thing I think we heard 
loud and clear was that we should be starting with young 
people, Mr. Speaker. And I agreed extensively with that idea. I 
think if we can keep young people from starting to smoke, in 
time our problem will be . . . will start solving itself. 
 
We’re getting many calls though, Mr. Speaker, now that the 
legislation has been brought forward and actually two main 
concerns — although there’s others — but two of the main 
concerns that we’re hearing out there, and the first one being 
. . . 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, this was a recommendation that 
the Tobacco Committee as you know brought forward was that 
the seller of cigarettes, if he sells to someone under age, is 
fined. If he has a young person, say 18, 19 years old, working 
for him and that person sells to someone underage, they are 
fined for that infraction. In fact we’ve had confectionaries, 
stores, gas bars and that say they’ve actually let young people 
go because they’ve been caught once, maybe twice, three times 
selling to underage so the young person that’s working there are 
selling the cigarettes to someone underage loses their job. 
 
What the recommendation of the committee was, and I find it 
amazing that the government didn’t see fit to bring that 
recommendation forward, was that we were told all across the 
province — at least that’s what I heard, Mr. Speaker — was 
that people underage that were trying to buy cigarettes should 
also face some penalty. It would not have to be a drastic fine, 
but it had to be something that would go back to what the 
people of the province had said. Denormalizing the use of 
tobacco, I think that would go hand in hand, Mr. Speaker, with 
that. 
 
Of the calls we’re getting in, Mr. Speaker — and I know many 
of the MLAs are probably getting the same calls — is that 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1935 

 

businesses out there feel that it’s not fair for them to be put in 
one situation where they are responsible and yet young people 
can go from store to store, be refused at 10 in a row, but if they 
are allowed to buy in one store that store can be fined and yet 
the young person pays no retribution for trying to buy cigarettes 
under age. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think if we were listening when we were on 
the road, that was a message we heard loud and clear and I find 
it very disappointing that the government didn’t see fit to 
include that in the legislation. 
 
We will be dealing with that, Mr. Speaker, at a later date within 
this debate and bringing an amendment forward that would 
address that issue. 
 
The other thing, Mr. Speaker, that we’re getting a lot of 
complaints and a lot of concerns from businesses out there is 
the fact that cigarettes now have to be stored out of sight in a 
business. And I know we had a lot of concerns when the 
committee was on the road with what we were recommending 
within the Bill, Mr. Speaker, would do to businesses all over 
this province — whether it was hoteliers, whether it was 
restaurateurs, small shops of any kind, convenience stores, gas 
bars that sell a lot of cigarettes, Mr. Speaker — and how it 
would affect their business. 
 
And I think I know on the Saskatchewan Party side, the 
members on that committee, we wanted to treat this issue fairly. 
We wanted to deal with the idea that tobacco use, especially 
with young people we have to find ways to deter the use of it, 
but at the same time meeting business halfway so that we’re not 
driving business under or driving business out of this province. 
I think, Mr. Speaker, we’re losing businesses fast enough in this 
province. We don’t need to do anything more that will help that 
trend continue. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know my colleague from Weyburn wants to 
speak on this issue today. I think those concerns keep coming 
up loud and clear. 
 
I’d like to just read from some letters that we’ve had in — these 
ones I received today, and we’ve had many of these, Mr. 
Speaker — but I’d like to just quote from some of these to show 
you the concerns that people are bringing forward out there. 
 
And this is a store owner, Mr. Speaker. And he goes on to say: 
 

. . . that I’m not impressed with the proposed legislation. 
Probably will not be able to keep the store open if this Bill 
is passed. 

 
She says that she has no place to put the tobacco products 
except back in storage which would mean leaving the till when 
someone wants a pack of cigarettes. So it’s either going to be 
adding another staff member to go and get the cigarettes, and 
while she’s gone, I think her concern is probably that someone 
has to be there. So it would cost her another employee — 
something which she just isn’t capable financially to do. 
 
Another one goes on to say they are against the proposed 
changes to the tobacco legislation. And the person goes on to 
say: 

Why not just make it illegal for youth to smoke? 
 
And that was some of my comments earlier, Mr. Speaker; 
something I thought we heard loud and clear when we were on 
the road with the Tobacco Committee. 
 
Another letter, and I quote, Mr. Speaker. Sheldon’s talking 
about an IGA that his dad owns and he said: 
 

He is already struggling because of competition with the 
major chains and if he has to put all the tobacco products 
out of sight, it will decrease his profits even further and 
probably he will go out of business. He has no place to put 
the tobacco products except away in a storage room (Once 
again we’re hearing this, Mr. Speaker) which would be 
terribly inconvenient. 

 
Another letter, Mr. Speaker. George is a grocery store owner 
and he’s upset with the proposed changes to the tobacco 
legislation. He says: 
 

Not only will they lose money but they will have to do 
renovating to creating a proper place to put tobacco 
products where they cannot be seen. (He thinks) Politicians 
are wasting valuable time and money and should be 
spending it on more important issues. 
 

And that’s a quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another letter. It’s from Dwight, and he’s also a retailer. And 
he says he would have to do some fairly extensive renovations 
to have tobacco products put out of sight. He would have a 
substantial loss of income and he suggests the following 
instead: 

 
If a retailer is caught selling to minors, he should have his 
licence revoked and you should fine the underage smokers 
just like you would do for underage drinkers. 
 

And I know, Mr. Speaker, we heard many times on the road that 
maybe tobacco should be compared to alcohol when it comes to 
underage. And I think . . . I thought we did in our 
recommendations actually deal to that degree, something 
though that the government has seen fit to neglect within the 
Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Craig is the owner of a convenience store and gas station. He’s 
also not very happy with the changes to the legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, and has the same concerns that many others. 
 
Arnold’s not happy with the proposed changes to the tobacco 
legislation. He thinks it’s not right that people who have 
depended on selling tobacco products for their livelihood 
should have to babysit other people’s kids. 
 
And I guess what he’s saying there, Mr. Speaker, he goes on 
more, but he’s saying there is that the responsibility for what 
we’re trying to do here, I think, is, number one, yes, us as 
legislators but also with the parents and with the young people 
out there. We have to put some onus on them that when they go 
and buy cigarettes they have some responsibility knowingly 
buying these cigarettes or attempting to buy these cigarettes that 
they are doing wrong and they are breaking the law. 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

When we can . . . we say the law — on one hand, it’s illegal for 
someone to sell underage tobacco products, but on the same 
hand, we’re saying it’s not illegal for young people to go and 
try and purchase cigarettes. I think we are missing the boat on 
that one, Mr. Speaker, and wished we had of included that in 
the legislation. And I hope the government will see fit when we 
bring our amendment forward later in the debate that they 
would see fit to support that amendment. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I know this is going to be a fairly intensive 
debate on this issue, and at this time, I would like to let my 
colleague from Weyburn also speak to this Bill. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Prebble: — To take part in the debate. Thank you very 
much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to speak in 
support of this important piece of legislation, The Tobacco 
Control Act. I think this is one of the most significant pieces of 
preventive health legislation that we’ve debated in the 
Assembly during my years here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say first that I think we need to look at 
this legislation in the context of the health problem that we 
know tobacco is causing among our population today. And I 
want to say, Mr. Speaker, that there’s clearly two thrusts to this 
Bill: one is reducing tobacco use by youth, and the second is 
expanding the restrictions on tobacco use in public places. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I said, I think we need to look at this in 
the context of the reality that tobacco use in Saskatchewan is 
the leading cause of disease and the leading cause of premature 
death in this province. Smoking in Saskatchewan is killing 
more people than AIDS (acquired immune deficiency 
syndrome), illicit drugs, suicides, murder, and traffic accidents 
all combined each year. 
 
And it’s in that context, Mr. Speaker, that we need to judge this 
Bill and realize that we have to make significant moves forward 
in terms of reducing access, particularly by young people, to 
tobacco. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Tobacco users are at risk of developing an array of diseases that 
I think are well-known to the public, and these include 
cardiovascular disease, chronic obstructive pulmonary disease, 
and cancers of the lung, mouth, tongue, throat, esophagus, 
larynx, urinary tract, and bladder. 
 
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer deaths among men 
and women in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
An exposure to environmental tobacco smoke can also result in 
ear infections, asthma, sudden infant death syndrome among 
young children, and heart and lung disease, lung cancer, and 
other cancers in people of all ages. And as I say, Mr. Speaker, 
it’s in the context of the health impacts of tobacco exposure that 
we need to judge this Bill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased, first of all, that this Bill is 
going to make Saskatchewan a leader in the country in terms of 
prohibiting tobacco displays and advertising in retail outlets that 

children can access. And I think that’s a very, very important 
feature of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier, the member for Saltcoats was expressing 
some of the concerns that retailers in his constituency have with 
the Bill. But I should point out, Mr. Speaker, that there was 
all-party agreement on the part of the special committee that 
looked at tobacco control, there was all-party agreement that 
these restrictions on the display and advertising of tobacco in 
any retail outlet that a child can access were appropriate. 
 
This was a recommendation that was agreed on in terms of the 
restrictions on tobacco display and tobacco advertising in retail 
outlets. This was agreed to by every member of the special 
committee, both opposition and government. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to see this legislation 
extending a complete ban on smoking in a wider array of public 
places than we’ve ever seen before in this province. There are 
of course six significant exceptions, and that is that there are 
exemptions for restaurants, bingo halls, casinos, bars, billiard 
halls, and bowling alleys where there is a phase-in of restriction 
on tobacco use. 
 
But in all other public places in the province, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re now going to see a complete ban on smoking in public 
places. And this is an important step forward for our province 
and it will reduce exposure to environmental tobacco smoke, to 
second-hand smoke, for all residents of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, I think one of the very important initiatives 
in this Bill is that there is also action being taken to restrict 
tobacco use province-wide in restaurants, bars, billiard halls, 
bowling alleys, and casinos, Mr. Speaker. And what we are 
going to see there is a gradual phase-in over the next three years 
until we have 60 per cent of all these facilities as being 
designated as non-smoking. 
 
And that is going to be an important gain, both in terms of 
workers in those facilities, Mr. Speaker, whose exposure to 
second-hand tobacco smoke will at least be reduced, and it will 
also be an important gain in terms of reducing overall public 
exposure, including exposure of children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also very pleased that this Bill is going to give 
municipal government the ability to set stricter regulations with 
respect to no smoking in the six categories of facilities that we 
have just discussed. Because in a restaurant or a bar or a casino 
or any of the other facilities that I have just made reference to, 
municipalities will be able to set stricter regulations to in effect 
extend the prohibition on tobacco use. 
 
But that will be made, those decisions will be made at the local 
level. And I think that reflects the reality in our province, Mr. 
Speaker, that there are differing views on this issue in different 
communities across our province. 
 
I just want to say in closing, Mr. Speaker, that personally I 
would have liked to have seen the Bill go a little further in some 
areas. I would have preferred to see the age of purchase be 19 
rather than 18. I would have preferred to see a prohibition on 
tobacco on pharmacies being able to sell tobacco. And I would 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

 

have liked to see a 100 per cent ban on tobacco use in 
restaurants, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But these are my own personal views as I attempt to represent 
my constituencies. I recognize we need to find balance and 
compromise on this Bill in the Assembly. I’ve been pressing for 
these measures and will continue to do so, but I think this Bill 
represents a major step forward in terms of reducing access to 
tobacco and denormalizing tobacco for young people. 
 
It also represents an important step forward in terms of 
increasing smoke-free public places in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And I think we will see the benefits of this Bill 
in terms of the health of future generations of Saskatchewan 
people and in terms of the health of our current generation of 
our Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker. And I think we will see 
long-term benefits in terms of reduced health costs for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d urge all members in the Assembly to 
support this very important piece of legislation. Thank you so 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to also 
speak on the legislation, Bill No. 56, The Tobacco Control Act, 
2000. And, Mr. Speaker, the government says the overall intent 
of this Bill is to reduce youth smoking and to provide protection 
from second-hand smoke and to denormalize the use of 
tobacco. 
 
While we’re encouraged to see steps taken to further reduce 
smoking in young people and to protect the public from the 
second-hand smoke, we still have concerns regarding some of 
the legislation that will severely impact business owners and 
retailers. 
 
We are also concerned with the government’s decision not to 
impose penalties or fines on minors found to be in possession of 
tobacco products. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important at this time that I read 
from our final report and the mandate that we were charged 
with as being members of the Committee on Tobacco Control 
in Saskatchewan. And I’d just like to read this into the record. 
 
First, we were to study; 
 

the impact of tobacco use in Saskatchewan, especially 
children and youth; 
 

Secondly: 
 

the need for, and content of, provincial tobacco control 
legislation protecting children and youth; 
 

Thirdly: 
 

strategies to protect the public from the health risks of 
second hand smoke, including consideration of smoke-free 
public place designations and jurisdictional authority 
related to tobacco use bylaws; 

And fourthly: 
 

effective and appropriate strategies related to enforcement, 
pricing, education and public awareness as may contribute 
to the prevention or reduction of tobacco use, especially by 
children and youth in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that the legislation has lost much of the 
intent regarding the main issues that we were charged with 
when we started the study on tobacco. 
 
One of the main downsides that I see, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
spent excessive time travelling to schools throughout this 
province, and to speaking to educators about the impact of 
tobacco on our youth. 
 
The recommendation of the committee was that we were to 
enhance education in the schools to prevent children from either 
starting to smoke, or to cause them to quit smoking if they’d 
already started. The message that we received was that we 
should start this as young as kindergarten, and that it should be 
mandatory and continue throughout from kindergarten through 
to grade 12. 
 
There is not one word in this legislation to do with education. 
And we have the member from Saskatoon Greystone getting up 
and telling us that this Bill is going to go far to prevent the harm 
to health of the people of this province. And yet how are they 
going to know the harmful effect if they’re not educated within 
the school? 
 
We also do not see anywhere in the legislation any kind of an 
ad program to impact the harmful effects to people’s health in 
the province of Saskatchewan, which was also a 
recommendation of our committee. And so, Mr. Speaker, I 
think that the members opposite need to look seriously at this. 
And how are we going to impact our young people if we’re not 
going to even tell them about the harmful effects to their health. 
 
The second part about not educating them is that we do not 
denormalize the use of cigarettes for young people. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the committee that travelled throughout this province 
and studied this, heard time and time again that that was of the 
utmost importance that we make it mandatory within our school 
system to educate our young people about the harms of tobacco 
and to make it . . . to denormalize it, to make it something that 
isn’t cool so that kids will not start to smoke. Because we all 
know that once they start to smoke, it’s a lot harder to stop. 
 
And so I believe that this is a huge neglect from this legislation 
to address this whole issue. And it also needs to be stressed that 
under denormalization of the use of the tobacco products, one 
of our main points was that the possession of tobaccos had to be 
. . . there had to be repercussion for that. If there isn’t any 
repercussion for the possession of it, then how are we going to 
teach them not to engage in this activity? And yet those two 
important parts were left out of it. And I dropped my paper, so 
I’m just picking it up. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, although there’s some good parts to this Bill, 
there certainly are some parts that have been left out that were 
recommended to the committee and that we felt very strongly 
about. And I think it’s a huge mistake by the government not to 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

do something in this regard. 
 
And what we found out when we did talk to those in the school 
was that even some of the teachers that did talk about the 
harmful effects of tobacco use in the school, they made that 
decision on their own. It is not mandatory within the province 
of Saskatchewan to have any component of the health 
curriculum dealing with the harmful effect of tobacco. 
 
And so I would hope that this government will look at that 
seriously and consider bringing in an amendment to this or 
bringing in legislation that would address that serious issue, and 
so we can educate our young people at a very young age about 
the harmful effects of tobacco. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the other issue that I wanted to address was the 
concern by retailers that are finding the brunt of this legislation 
is on their backs. I think that the member from Greystone 
makes the comment that all committee members agreed on the 
way we were going to address it within business places. But 
when we agreed to that as committee members, we agreed to it 
on the basis that there would also be repercussion for the users. 
 
And what we have lost in this legislation is that there is 
absolutely no repercussion for usage. All the repercussion is on 
the seller, and I find that to be very unfair. And the retailers of 
this province are finding it to be very unfair too, because young 
people can walk in and if they get away with buying it and they 
have possession, there is absolutely no repercussion to them. 
And yet a business owner has the full brunt of the repercussion 
on actually selling it, or one of his employees selling it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have received numerous communications 
from business owners in this province who are very upset and 
who are saying that this is going to be a huge financial barrier 
for them. 
 
And I’d just like to read a couple of letters that I have received, 
and I’m sure that other members of the legislative body have 
also received similar letters. And one is from an owner of a gas 
bar in Saskatoon. And quoting part of his letter, he says: 
 

I feel that the proposed legislation as drafted by the 
Saskatchewan legislature is wrong. It is shifting the moral 
responsibility on the retailer to police the sale of tobacco 
and away from the Government of Saskatchewan that is 
collecting huge tax dollars levied on tobacco products. 
 
Part of that tax dollar should flow back to retailers to offset 
the cost of implementing the proposed legislation in regards 
to the sale of tobacco at the retail level. If the provincial 
government isn’t prepared to cover the retailer’s cost of 
implementation, then I do not agree that the retailer should 
bear the cost. Those who are implementing the costly 
legislation change should bear the cost. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, another fax that we’ve received from a 
grocery store. And this is in a rural area, and it says: 
 

Re: hiding tobacco products. Kick this out. We can’t afford 
to make these changes. This is going to be a major pain. 
This is not the answer. Small stores cannot do this. 

 

And then he gives his number to call regarding this. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, something that is very alarming is that we’ve 
been contacted today by Mac’s stores who are a huge retailer in 
the province of Saskatchewan. They’re very concerned about 
this, and we cannot afford to lose any more businesses in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And so I think that it’s very 
important that we look at this whole issue and be concerned 
about it. 
 
We’ve done enough in this province to drive business away and 
we don’t need to bring in more legislation that’s going to cause 
further negative impact on the province. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, overall we find this legislation to be unbalanced. 
The members opposite had the opportunity directly to affect 
young smokers where it hurt the most, in their wallets. And it’s 
the opposition’s view that imposing a penalty or fine is the best 
way to stress to young people that this is not a normal thing to 
do, and that we can denormalize it in our young people and 
hopefully start a new wave in Saskatchewan that young people 
will grow up with this and impact on others around them. 
 
It is ironic that the NDP says that their number one goal is to 
keep youth from smoking. Yet nowhere in this legislation are 
there any provisions that would penalize those under 18 for 
possession. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again I would like to emphasize that the 
education component is missed completely from this 
legislation. That we believe that the education within the 
school, that there should be component to make it mandatory 
from K to 12, that there be education within our schools to 
stress the harmful effect of tobacco, and also that it is not a 
normal use. 
 
The intent of . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order, order. Order. I’m sure all 
members will have an opportunity to have their voices heard. 
Right now the floor belongs to the member for Weyburn-Big 
Muddy. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the Government House Leader is 
stressing the fact that maybe we would like to put into the 
legislation that there should be a charge for possession of 
cigarettes. We absolutely do agree with that. We think we need 
a level playing field in this province. And that was part of the 
recommendation by this committee, that there is repercussion 
for possession of underage. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the intent of the committee was to 
denormalize the use of tobacco, especially for youth, and to 
protect our children from environmental tobacco smoke. 
 
I believe the legislation fails to adequately address the main 
issues that this committee was charged with, and this Bill needs 
further discussion. And so I move to adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

 

Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 50 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 50 — The 
Mineral Resources Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to speak to Bill No. 50, The Minister Resources 
Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this amending Act seems to be of a housekeeping 
nature. It appears to be advanced to support the announcement 
in last provincial budget of a temporary 10 per cent 
non-refundable tax credit that will allow investors ineligible 
flow-through share offerings for exploration activities in 
Saskatchewan, to claim a 10 per cent tax credit in the 
calculation of their Saskatchewan income tax. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the amendments contained in this Bill are 
fourfold. They provide authority for the province to establish a 
tax credit applied to flow-through share purchases that may be 
claimed by the purchaser under The Income Tax Act. 
 
They allow the development of regulations under The Mineral 
Resources Act, 1995 to govern reporting and administration 
requirements necessary to the operation of the tax credit 
program. They provide authority for the minister to recover the 
value of credits issued by an exploration company that do not 
meet the eligibility criteria. 
 
And finally, they provide consequential amendments to The 
Income Tax Act, and The Income Tax Act, 2000 to allow 
investors and eligible flow-through shares to claim the 10 per 
cent non-refundable tax credit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the devil may be in the details, the intent of 
this Bill seems laudable. Anything this government does that 
may have the effect of stimulating investment in exploration in 
Saskatchewan is surely worthwhile. 
 
In this province that is so rich in unrealized resource potential 
while our economy is in a shambles, we must do much more to 
promote exploration and development of our vast resources. 
 
Accordingly, Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill advance to the 
Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 52 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Atkinson that Bill No. 52 — The 
Railway Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is 
an important Bill the government has brought forward because 
of the implications that this particular piece of legislation has 
for short-line railways, for branch lines that have been slated for 

abandonment, and for the future of short-line railway operations 
in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we waited all session for this Bill to arrive and 
we’ve had a chance to look at it. And while I have some very 
serious concerns about this, I want to state at the outset that the 
official opposition is very supportive of the concept of rural 
railways, short-line railways, and the operators of such 
railways. 
 
I think that the very issue has been substantive in terms of our 
discussions, our considerations, and certainly the people who 
have been affected by rail-line abandonment have made their 
feelings known to the official opposition, as well as to the 
government. 
 
This legislation is, I’m sure, a response to the lobbying that has 
been done by the communities that were going to suffer most 
seriously with the loss of rail lines, and I think this legislation in 
many respects reflects that very serious concern. 
 
But I have my own concerns about the Bill because, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe in some ways and in some areas, it goes too 
far. 
 
I said at the outset that the official opposition supports the 
concept of short-line railways and recognizes the value that 
such operations would provide for rural Saskatchewan and for 
our rail and transportation infrastructure generally. We believe 
short lines should be encouraged for several reasons, not the 
least of which is the impact that the ever increasing amount of 
grain has had on our thin membrane roads and our highways 
generally throughout the province. 
 
The minister and the minister before her, both have alluded on 
many occasions to the heavy impact of grain being moved in 
this province, the increasing demands and the increasing 
damage that that movement of grain has created to the roads. 
And so the short lines can and will in effect play a very 
important role in taking some of that pressure off of the 
highways. 
 
So we think that there is value to the highway infrastructure 
having a very successful short-line industry develop in this 
particular province. We also think that the short lines provide 
value to the communities where there are wooden elevators still 
standing. 
 
You know, one of the things that has troubled rural 
Saskatchewan the most is the changing landscape, most 
noticeable in small communities where elevators that have been 
there for decades have suddenly disappeared under the 
consolidation that is being undertaken by the grain companies. 
 
And the changing landscape has brought with it not just the 
possibility of new opportunities, it certainly brought with it the 
possibility of the demise of many rural communities. 
 
So there’s been an effort on the part of individuals to salvage 
those elevators, to retain ownership in the community, to put 
those elevators to some different use, and to try and keep them 
as a participating business in the community where they’re 
located. 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

In order for those efforts to see real value, to come to complete 
fruition, to provide the economic benefit to their communities 
that they’re capable of providing, a short-line railway needs to 
serve that community. Rail-line abandonment in those instances 
will only short-circuit the plans of local operators to provide the 
economic activity that they have designed for that particular 
elevator in any given community. 
 
So we have the value to the roads, and I think we have a value 
that a short-line railway can provide to the people who have 
taken the initiative to maintain the existing wood-structured 
elevators. 
 
We also think that short-line railways will bring other economic 
benefits to rural Saskatchewan — not just in those small 
individual communities, but generally throughout the region. 
 
I think if short-line railways become an integral part of, and a 
significant part of our transportation infrastructure, they won’t 
just necessarily be limited to moving grain. I think short-line 
railways can play an important part in the movement of other 
products. 
 
Frankly the reason that railway service has dropped off 
significantly in rural Saskatchewan is that there was no 
reliability of service. If you only have a grain train coming 
through a given community infrequently or at some 
unscheduled time throughout the year, a business that is 
dependent on regular transportation can’t use the trains 
effectively. 
 
Short-line operators are only going to survive if they can 
provide regular and effective scheduled service. And I think that 
there is some opportunity for that type of service to be 
reintroduced to many of the smaller communities where 
manufacturing plants exist, where processing plants now exist, 
that have been without rail service in the past. And if we got a 
fairly consistent and reliable short-line operator in position in 
some of these areas, businesses would use them. So I think 
there’s an economic development element and prospect 
associated with short-line rails that we haven’t seen of late. 
 
And I guess the other factor at play here frankly is that when 
you have a business like a short-line operator coming into a 
region, that by itself will generate more economic activity. 
There are supplies that need to be purchased, there’s fuel that 
needs to be purchased, there are employees that need to be hired 
to run the train — those kind of purchases and hirings have a 
spinoff effect, a ripple effect in the economy of the region that 
the short-line railway serves. So from that standpoint, I think 
that we can see quite clearly that there is important and 
significant benefit to having a short-line system develop in this 
province. 
 
One of the things though that the official opposition is quite 
concerned about is the prospect of government subsidy of 
short-line railways. We believe that those provide significant 
business opportunities for entrepreneurs and people who are 
familiar with the railway business who want to maybe own their 
own rail line, even though it’s a short line. 
 
But I believe those opportunities should exist on their own 
merit, and that means their own financial merit as well. So if a 

person, a company that wants to develop a short-line rail 
operation feels that they can do so, they can operate it from an 
economic advantage point of view. They can make a few 
dollars on it. They can make it a situation that can stand on its 
own two feet financially. I believe that type of operation should 
be encouraged. 
 
But I certainly, Mr. Speaker, cannot encourage a situation 
where the provincial government would jump in with a subsidy 
program to sustain short-line rails. I think that there has to be a 
very clear delineation between the official opposition and the 
government on that particular point. 
 
This Act, Mr. Speaker, is a fairly interesting document. As I 
said I’ve read through it several times and there’s many, many 
points to discuss on this particular Bill. But I want to just 
review some of the highlights that jumped out at me as I went 
through it. 
 
This Act is very thorough. I can’t overstate the case, I don’t 
believe that the thoroughness of this Act in terms of the 
evaluation process is complete. In fact it’s almost overdone. 
The Act appears to want to be . . . or the Act appears to be so 
secure in the parameters of decision making that I’m afraid 
what might happen is that individuals or companies who want 
to start a short-line rail will be discouraged by the thoroughness 
of the process. 
 
You know it’s one thing to want to be careful about getting 
people of good reputation, of solid financial capability, of good 
management potential, to come in and take over a railway 
because you do want some longevity, some security in that 
particular industry. But it’s another to be so restrictive and so 
concerned about the details of the application that you 
discourage anybody from actually undertaking an application to 
run a short-line railway. And I’m afraid that this Act may go 
overboard in that regard, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(17:00) 
 
There is a thoroughness to this Act that I believe is overdone. 
There is requirements for financial information. The Act wants 
to be sure that the operator is fit to run a rail line. It wants to be 
sure that the safety management capability is there in place. 
And it goes into any number of small details relating to the 
suitability of any applicant to run a short-line railway. And 
ultimately all discretionary elements — all discretionary 
elements — are left to the minister 
 
Now I think that that says to me that it doesn’t matter how 
many hoops you have to jump through in order to get your 
short-line rail application before the Highway Traffic Board, 
and ultimately, the minister; it doesn’t matter how many 
questions you answer, how many rafts of paper you provide in 
response to requests for information, ultimately the minister can 
ask for more and more and more. 
 
I think that this particular element in the legislation will 
discourage, frankly, new short-line operators. It might protect 
the viability of any operators that do succeed, but I think what 
will happen, it will minimize the number of people who want to 
go through all of that to even try and start a short-line railway. 
 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

 

So maybe this part of the legislation will in fact be 
self-defeating. 
 
The issue of viability was very important to the minister when 
we talked about that in estimates early on in the session. She, at 
several instances, indicated that viability of any given short-line 
operator was very much the matter of her primary concern in 
this legislation. 
 
As I was saying earlier, the minister expressed a very deep 
concern for the issue of viability when it came to granting 
applications for short-line operations, and I can respect that 
concern and I think it’s a legitimate concern. But we, in this 
particular piece of legislation, find that issue being taken to, I 
believe, lengths that are unnecessary. And I think some of this 
particular piece of legislation grew out of the department’s 
experience with the application put forward by Great Western 
Railway that serves the region of the immediate and large 
southwest. 
 
Great Western Railway is a company that came to 
Saskatchewan out of British Columbia. It’s a subsidiary of a 
company that does a lot of rail salvage and rail construction in 
the province of British Columbia, but it saw this particular short 
line in the southwest as an opportunity to diversify and expand 
its rail operations. So the subsidiary purchased that piece of 
track from the Canadian Pacific. It was the first transaction of 
its type in the province, the first time an out-of-province 
operator came and bought trackage from an existing class one 
railway operator and determined to set up a short—line railway. 
 
The people that were fronting that particular application met 
with the Highway Traffic Board and the board didn’t have a 
real thorough process in place by which to evaluate the 
application. And so as the principals of that company met one 
set of demands from the Highway Traffic Board and satisfied 
the requests, a whole new set of requests were brought forward. 
 
I am told by the general manager of that company that he spent 
innumerable hours meeting the requirements of the Highway 
Traffic Board in terms of having his application approved. It 
wasn’t as though there was a process in place. It was sort of a 
situation where the board said, well, we need this information. 
And when it was provided, well, we need more information and 
now we need additional information. By the time the whole 
process was done, the applicant was nearly exhausted 
completely. 
 
I think this particular piece of legislation has codified that 
process that the Highway Traffic Board introduced by trial and 
error on the application by Great Western Railway, and I think 
that we are seeing the consequences of that type of situation, 
that experience, encoded in this piece of legislation. 
 
So while we have, we have a situation where viability is of 
concern and the process is very, very intense, we have a 
situation on the other end of the legislation that is equally 
challenging and equally of concern to me. It might be tough to 
get into business, Mr. Speaker, as a short—line operator, but 
this legislation makes it even tougher to get out of business. 
 
Let’s assume that for purposes of the discussion today that you 
have a short-line operator who is successful, who is financially 

viable, whose process is ongoing. He’s satisfied the customers 
and he’s done everything he can in order to keep his rail line 
business going. But through circumstances beyond his control, 
whether it’s a change in crops, a change in product that might 
use his rail line, whatever the case, if five years into his 
operation he finds that viability is no longer possible, this Act 
almost makes it impossible for him to quit business. And I don’t 
think that’s a situation that any prudent businessman would 
want to put himself in, in any type of business let alone the rail 
business. 
 
And if I may, Mr. Speaker, I just want to summarize some of 
the conditions that are put in place for any short-line operator 
who is even thinking about going out of business. To 
discontinue service this is the procedure: 180 days notice has to 
be given to the Highway Traffic Board — so that’s a full six 
months — and anyone else that might be deemed necessary or 
appropriate by the minister. 
 
So here we have a situation where things aren’t going very 
good. It looks like your business is going slower than you 
expected. You’ve been subsidizing it for a year or two and now 
you think that it’s impossible to maintain your operation. You 
have to give 180 days notice to the Highway Traffic Board, to 
the minister, or anybody that she deems appropriate in this case. 
 
The dismantling requires advertising, very thorough advertising 
as a matter of fact. It has to be directed to anyone else who may 
visit — I’m sorry — who may wish to buy or lease that railway 
for the purpose of continuing service on the line, and 60 days is 
required as part of that advertising procedure. 
 
Then after that, after the advertising is completed, there’s four 
months during which any respondents to the ad, any prospective 
purchasers, and the owner of the short line have to come to an 
agreement. So if there’s no agreement reached within that four 
months, then the railway is obligated to continue service or to 
offer to sell that short line to the Government of Saskatchewan 
or to a municipality for net salvage value. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve got a situation here where the 
operator hardly could get into business to begin with, now he 
can’t get out of business. And if he does want to get out of 
business, he’s got to follow this complicated procedure. It’s 
going to take a huge amount of time, a lot of expense, and 
ultimately, if he hasn’t got a buyer, he’s going to be forced to 
sell the rail line to the Government of Saskatchewan or to a 
municipality for a net salvage value. 
 
Well the net salvage value, Mr. Speaker, might be an acceptable 
value if the owner of the line could determine what that value 
was. But by this legislation the owner can’t even do that. The 
net salvage value is something that’s going to be imposed on 
the owner of that short-line railway. 
 
Now I can imagine if I was that individual and I had paid net 
salvage value to get into the business, getting out at the same 
value might be acceptable. But if I had to pay a retail value or a 
set cash price that somebody else had determined and then 
when I wanted to get out of business, I had to accept whatever 
somebody else was going to determine the value was, I don’t 
think I’d be very happy with that. And that’s not the kind of 
condition that business people are going to respond to 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

positively. 
 
And if I was in a situation where I was going to invest money 
and those conditions were put in place, I wouldn’t even think of 
taking up that challenge, that investment. I’d walk away from it. 
How is that going to help the short-line rail business in this 
province? I think, frankly, Mr. Speaker, it is a detrimental 
element that is almost going to be impossible to overcome 
unless of course the minister and the government are prepared 
to make changes in that piece of legislation. 
 
Now if, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to offer the rail line to the 
minister. In this case, she has 30 days to accept. And if the 
minister decides not to accept, then the municipalities may 
accept the offer. The RMs then have 60 days to accept after the 
minister has already taken up her 30 days. 
 
Now this is an interminable, ongoing situation, and by that time, 
if the rail line operator isn’t completely broke, he certainly 
won’t have much money left in his bank account. If the 
government and the railway operator can’t agree on a price, the 
net salvage value will be set by the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
Now that sounds fair enough I suppose, but I don’t think we’d 
want to get to that point, frankly. If an RM and a railway can’t 
agree on a price, then the Highway Traffic Board would be the 
determinant in the salvage value. 
 
There’s another element to this piece of legislation, Mr. 
Speaker, that has companies and individuals and interested 
groups somewhat concerned, and that is that the legislation 
seems to expand the authority of the Highway Traffic Board in 
its regulatory role as it pertains to short-line rails to the point 
where there is a considerable amount of duplication between the 
provincial legislation and the federal CTA (Canadian 
Transportation Agency). 
 
I’m almost certain I’ve heard members on the government side 
indicate that it has been their intention to reduce red tape 
wherever possible, to facilitate business in this province. This 
particular piece of legislation goes in the opposite direction. It 
frankly makes it more complicated and more difficult to get into 
the short-line rail business. And as I mentioned several times, 
once you’re in you can’t get out. But now we’ve also seen some 
duplication of this legislation with the CTA. 
 
For instance, we have what is called final offer arbitration that 
is introduced in this particular piece of legislation. And without 
going into any great detail about how that will work, people in 
the industry know that final offer arbitration is a feature of the 
CTA and it has been used with some satisfaction, I might add, 
by various parties in times recently passed. 
 
But in this case the arbiter is going to be appointed by the 
Highway Traffic Board. Now I’m not so sure that that’s in 
anybody’s best interests because the Highway Traffic Board is 
also the regulator. And we have a situation where the regulator 
is the arbitrator, which is also the body that licenses the 
applicants in the first place and oversees the dismantling of an 
application if his financial fortunes go south on him. So we 
have too much overlapping jurisdiction. And in some cases, 
potentially contradictory issues being decided by the same 
board. 

Mr. Speaker, there are a number of other areas in this particular 
Bill that need to be addressed, but at this point I think you can 
see that we have enough concerns which I’ve already raised that 
we feel needs more attention and more opportunity to address. 
 
I know that there is strong support for this legislation from 
SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities). 
They have talked to me about their concerns and have asked 
that we support the Bill. And I can see why they would want us 
to support it, and I think that the intent is probably proper on the 
part of the government with this piece of legislation. I’m just 
not happy with the mechanics of it and I think that we need to 
spend more time reviewing it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(17:15) 
 

Bill No. 49 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 49 — The 
Land Surveyors and Professional Surveyors Amendment 
Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’ve had a 
number of occasions to speak to Bill No. 49 before and we also 
understand that this Bill has the support of the Saskatchewan 
Land Surveyors’ Association, the Saskatchewan Applied 
Science Technologists and Technicians, and I think it’s also 
supported by the Association of Professional Engineers and 
Geoscientists of Saskatchewan. So we will have some questions 
in committee, Mr. Speaker, but we’d be willing to let it go to 
committee at this point. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Lautermilch that Bill No. 33 — The 
Legislative Assembly and Executive Council Amendment 
Act, 2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to speak to Bill No. 33, The Legislative 
Assembly and Executive Council Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as it has been pointed out by some of my 
colleagues and the member from North Battleford, this Bill 
changes the definition of third party caucus. Currently members 
have to be sitting in opposition to obtain all funds. And so the 
upshot of this Bill is simply that the two Liberals sitting with 
the government will receive another $65,000 on top of the 
160,000 they already receive to support the NDP government. 
 
When it comes to Bill 33, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan can see clearly what it’s all about. It’s not about 
fairness, as the Minister of Economic Development suggests; 
it’s only about bolstering that shaky coalition by providing 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

 

more funds for the two so-called Liberals who now sit with the 
NDP. 
 
In realistic terms, those two members constitute a Liberal 
caucus about as much as I, along with the member from 
Saltcoats, constitute a Liberal caucus. Like the Minister of 
Education and the minister of Municipal Government, I and 
some of my colleagues left the Liberal Party long ago when it 
was under the leadership of the Minister of Education. 
 
Those members pretend to be the voice of the Liberal Party in 
this Assembly, but the people of Saskatchewan know 
differently. Those two members presently have a full ministerial 
staff as well as the current $160,000 grant to the Liberal caucus. 
To justify calling them a separate caucus in order to give them a 
grant of another 65,000 is totally unjustifiable and government 
largesse at its worst. 
 
Those two members are now totally indistinguishable from the 
NDP, so this Bill might as well be unilaterally increasing the 
NDP’s caucus grant. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party opposes this Bill. Like the people of 
Saskatchewan, we see it for what it is. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to make some comparisons here. 
Right now the Saskatchewan Party caucus grant per MLA for 
the year is $31,370. The Saskatchewan Party considers this 
adequate funding to perform its role as official opposition in the 
legislature. 
 
The current Liberal caucus grant equals $80,000 per Liberal 
MLA per year. This is in addition to two fully funded staff in 
the ministers’ offices and a number of Liberal staffers in the 
Premier’s office. 
 
And now, Mr. Speaker, what we see is that if this Bill passes, 
the new Liberal caucus grant will equal $112,000 per year . . . 
per Liberal MLA per year. That is nearly four times what the 
Saskatchewan Party MLAs receive for caucus grant. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move that this Bill be referred to 
Committee of the Whole at this time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 29 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 29 — The 
Student Assistance and Student Aid Fund Amendment Act, 
2001 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
almost missed that Bill, but we have the opportunity to look at 
this Bill and listen with interest, Mr. Speaker, to the comments 
made by the Minister for Post-Secondary Education this 
afternoon in the House; timely, in that we see the announcement 
of the Canada-Saskatchewan Integrated Student Loans 
Program, as announced this morning with the Minister of 
Post-Secondary Education and the federal minister here for the 
province of Saskatchewan. 

So even though I note that second reading of this Bill took place 
back on May 17, we have the opportunity to still have the 
ability to look at some of the points that have been raised by the 
minister and by our critic, the member for Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, who was also in attendance at that 
announcement this morning, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as pointed out by the minister, we have had a 
program in place for Saskatchewan students for a number of 
years now — that expires on July 31 of this year — with the 
Royal Bank of Canada. And it’s now . . . the opportunity is here 
because the banks and the financial institutions across Canada 
are not looking at being involved with student loans. So we now 
have to develop a program that is going to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan students, and we’re going to do that collectively 
with the federal government. 
 
And I want to express my support for the fact that the minister 
announced that we should see a more efficient program; we 
should see a more cost-efficient program. And that should only 
translate into more dollars being available for Saskatchewan 
students. 
 
I think while the minister travelled around the province over the 
last couple of years and both government and opposition 
members did the same thing, we had the opportunity to hear 
from many students, from many parents that expressed a 
number of concerns. Mr. Speaker, a number of concerns were 
expressed by many people including some people in the 
Legislative Assembly today, Mr. Speaker, that continue to 
express concerns even though I’m not quite able to hear them. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what we did hear is that many families in the 
middle-income brackets, Mr. Speaker, are concerned about the 
fact that while their salaries indicate that they should be able to 
provide assistance for their children to attend post-secondary 
institutions, that is not always possible. And as a result of 
evaluations by the Canada-Saskatchewan student loan program, 
many times a student was ineligible for a loan of any degree or 
they were limited in the amount of money that was provided to 
the student and were thus not able to have additional financial 
support given to them. 
 
One of the statistics that I find very distressing, Mr. Speaker, is 
that over the years we see a great number of students from the 
low- and middle-income brackets — and this is a Canadian 
statistic and it’s not just relative to Saskatchewan — is that the 
number of students attending post-secondary education 
institutions from those categories has fallen. And the reason 
stated of course is that financial support is not available. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, one of the many concerns that comes to my 
office — and I’m sure it does to members on both sides of the 
House — is concerns raised by students about the ability to 
access . . . or the inability to access sufficient funds to meet 
their educational obligations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the proposal that has been signed today and 
puts Saskatchewan as one of the first provinces to introduce the 
Canada-Saskatchewan integrated program — the first. The 
minister, and I want to compliment the minister for taking the 
lead and for a change putting Saskatchewan first — for a 
change, Mr. Speaker. We seem to be last on a number of things 



1944 Saskatchewan Hansard June 19, 2001 

 

but finally — finally — he does indicate that we are first. 
 
But I think what we need to now ensure is that students who 
have concerns about whether or not funds are available to them, 
whether or not they will be able to access those loans, are those 
changes being implemented? 
 
A number of concerns were raised, Mr. Speaker, at the time of 
second reading as to who would administer this new program. 
And I know the minister has commented about EduLinks and 
the kind of program that’s being put in place. 
 
There are concerns expressed by people that . . . I guess the 
same kinds of concerns that were there prior to the Royal Bank 
being the major financial institution that provided the loans over 
the last five years. Those concerns dealt with bankruptcies and 
the fact that students could not meet their obligations and, as a 
result, the province incurred losses. And I recall the 
announcement about the Royal Bank taking on the program for 
the province of Saskatchewan, and they indicated very clearly 
that they needed a percentage of monies made available that 
would deal with bad debt. And there is going to be some bad 
debt. 
 
So the situation I think that we have to be very careful with is 
how will the one institution . . . as the minister has indicated — 
one student, one loan. When we see greater access to loans, we 
hope . . . when we see additional students from the lower- and 
middle-income brackets being able to access these loans, 
hopefully the program is going to be administered in a much 
more cost-effective manner. 
 
But at the end of the day — and I’m assuming that, you know, 
depending upon the length of the education program, we may 
see students in two or three or four years coming out of their 
educational programs with a significant student loan, whether 
that be 20,000 or 30 or 40,000 — who is going to administer 
that program? 
 
Are we going to create greater government bureaucracy to be 
able to implement the rules and the procedures that will be dealt 
with? 
 
Minister has talked about the ability for students to access 
interest-free programs, the ability to look at debt reduction. 
Who will dictate what conditions and regulations are 
implemented? Will it be the minister of Post-Secondary 
Education of the day? Will it be the government? Will it be 
some other program that’s implemented? 
 
So those are concerns that are being raised by individuals as 
they have looked towards this Bill and knowing full well that 
there is going to be a new program put in place effective August 
1. That announcement has taken place. 
 
And I think the minister will be able to provide a number of 
those answers to questions that we will direct to him in 
Committee of the Whole. Thank you very much. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 
 

Bill No. 9 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Sonntag that Bill No. 9 — The Power 
Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I just have a 
couple of quick comments and maybe a couple of concerns I’d 
like to register before we move this one on to committee, 
because I think we’ll have an opportunity then to expand on 
these concerns. 
 
One of the things that I’ve noticed in reviewing this particular 
Act or the amendments, Mr. Speaker, is of course the lifting of 
really the monopoly restrictions on Saskatchewan Power, albeit 
just to two of the cities or municipalities, Swift Current and 
Saskatoon, at this time. But it does open up the possibility of 
expanding this third party access to power maybe in a broader 
way. 
 
So I’m really pleased to see this and I think we could support 
this. But we have to make sure that a couple of concerns are out 
of the way first. 
 
The first one of course is that of transmission. If power’s going 
to be supplied to municipalities it has to go over a transmission 
line. That’ll be the function really of deregulation. And so here 
this Act is in fact opening up the possibility then of deregulating 
partially, and probably further into the future, deregulating 
SaskPower. 
 
The concerns therefore arrive from this deregulation. And it 
seems odd to me, Mr. Speaker, that the deregulation word, as it 
was applied to Alberta by this particular government, was in 
fact a very derogatory term that applied in a situation in the 
natural gas industry. Now we’re seeing a Bill coming forward 
that in fact does exactly the same deregulating for the future 
transmission of power. 
 
The questions are this. What happens is that the Act will allow, 
Mr. Speaker, the SaskPower to actually regulate what 
conditions are in place by other people producing the power, 
and what conditions they have to comply with in order to be 
able to use the transmission lines. So in effect, SaskPower still 
becomes the monopoly force in terms of setting the conditions 
that are going to have to be addressed by other people wanting 
to use those lines. 
 
It really forces these third party competitors to follow the 
standards as set by SaskPower, and it may in fact set these 
regulations in such a way that they . . . to become 
non-competitive. That’s a concern that we would like to address 
with the minister when we get into Committee of the Whole. 
 
Also there’s a provision in here to allow SaskPower to employ 
people outside the provisions of The Public Service Act. I 
would like to explore that a little bit further to see what the 
intent was, what protection there would be, and how that fits 
into the overall objectives of both The Labour Standards Act, 
SaskPower, and under the deregulated form of energy 
transmission. 
 



June 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

 

With those remarks, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that we move 
this on to committee so that we can explore these concerns a 
little bit further in detail. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 19 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 19 — The 
Land Titles Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a second 
time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to make a few 
comments on The Land Titles Amendment Act, Bill No. 19. 
Apparently there’s a few amendments on this Bill. A few of 
them I’ll read: remove the requirement for certification of 
mineral commodities; also to permit registration of prescribed 
interest against a non-certified mineral title; and also clarify that 
implied interests are only implied in titles where they are 
otherwise applied by law; to provide discretion to the register to 
set the hours of the registry. 

 
Now some of the groups we talked to — people in the real 
estate, surveyors, and the legal community — one of the biggest 
concerns with Land Titles was the time. I think in 
Saskatchewan was anywhere from 10 to 14 days, they had to 
work. In Alberta, BC, and Ontario, the waiting time apparently 
is just one day. 
 
So the questions are — about this Bill — is this going to speed 
up the time? We hope it will and these people are hoping that 
it’s going to. 
 
Another point about it though, unfortunately, is the Crowns. 
They always want to set up . . . When they want to set up 
another business or to do anything in this province, seems like 
they always have to have a Crown to do it. And when a Crown 
gets involved, Mr. Speaker, it just seems to drag things out, 
costs more money, and everything just . . . you can just go after 
fiasco, fiasco when it comes to the Crowns. So that’s a concern 
to the business people that we’ve mentioned, Mr. Speaker, in 
this province, is the Crowns when they get involved in this. 
 
Now the Crown involved is ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). Now whether it’s going to do its 
job, we hope it’s going to. Because of the people that we’ve 
sent the Bill to are fairly happy with Bill. The biggest concern 
they . . . we said and we want to stipulate, it will speed the time 
up for things to go through Land Titles Office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now one of the other concerns we have about it is the money 
that’s lost. Apparently ISC lost $11 million last year. It’s going 
to cost 40 to $50 million to operate them this year. They’ve had 
a plan to sell their LAND system, Land Titles Automated 
Network Development Project. Unfortunately they haven’t had 
any buyers yet and it . . . so that’s also a little worrisome. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, mentioning them few things and the 
biggest issue is to speed up the time in this province so to work 
with the Land Titles Office, and those are questions we’ll ask 
under Committee of the Whole. So I will propose that this Bill 

move into Committee of the Whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Ms. Crofford that Bill No. 45 — The 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 
be now read the second time. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to stand in this Assembly to speak on Bill No. 45, An 
Act to amend The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Act, and 
I am going to be very brief as I am sure that the . . . I know the 
member from Regina South is getting extremely hungry so I 
will be brief. 
 
It is our understanding that one of the things that this proposed 
legislation will do is set up new stakeholders, who along with 
the previous ones will deal with revenues and very importantly, 
accountability. Mr. Speaker, I am sure everyone would agree 
that the Liquor and Gaming Authority has had more than its 
share of problems lately. This government department seems to 
be out of control, completely lacking in leadership, and very 
busy covering up its many embarrassments. 
 
As the minister stated in her second reading speech, a 
percentage of funds paid into the Associated Entities Fund are 
currently allocated for Métis economic development. What this 
Bill will do is create a Métis Development Fund separate from 
the Associated Entities Fund. The government will pay to that 
fund $2 million a year for the next three years, for a total of $6 
million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the social and economic growth of the Métis 
people in this province are very important to members on this 
side of the House. And we hope that the government will be 
able to keep their eyes on this and that this board will have to be 
accountable as accountability is very important also to members 
on this side of the House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, there are questions we have and there will 
probably be more as we study this Bill. But, Mr. Speaker, I 
move that this Bill No. 45 be moved to Committee of the 
Whole. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Yates): — Seeing the hour, we will 
now recess until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 
 


