















































Hansard: April 20, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 639 
 April 20, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to stand today to present a petition from people within 
the Bruno area, and actually the whole area surrounding Bruno, 
that are petitioning for the Bruno telephone exchange to become 
part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. And the prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt, from Pilger, Bruno, Raymore, Meacham, and St. 
Gregor. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
again today from people who are concerned about the EMS 
(emergency medical services) report and the negative impact it 
could have on rural Saskatchewan: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

The people that have signed this are all from Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with proposed weight restrictions on 
Highway 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the economic harm its plan to close Highway 43 
to heavy traffic will do to south-central Saskatchewan and 
instead to vote necessary funds to upgrade Highway 43 in 
order to preserve jobs and economic development in the 
area. 
 

And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Vanguard and Neidpath. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I have a 
petition today to present on behalf of my constituents that are 
deeply concerned over the power and energy rates in this 
province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 

portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And this is signed by folks in Estevan and also a couple of 
sympathetic people from Alberta signed it. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of people in 
Swift Current and area I rise to present a petition with respect to 
our hospital in Swift Current. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the city of 
Swift Current, from Waldeck, from Pambrun, from Wymark, 
Admiral, Stewart Valley, and from Jansen, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who 
are concerned about the EMS report. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the prayer is signed by citizens of Pangman and Radville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d also like to 
present a petition concerning retaining the Hafford hospital. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take necessary steps to ensure the Hafford 
hospital remains open. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
From the good citizens of Speers and Richard. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents concerned about the 
centralization of ambulance service. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



640 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition come from the community of 
Wynyard and the Kawacatoose First Nation. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
in regards to the health care and what’s happening with Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, the 
current levels of services and care be maintained at Pioneer 
Lodge in Assiniboia. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from 
Assiniboia, Limerick. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise 
again on behalf of concerned citizens with reference to cuts at 
the Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker the signatories on this are from Limerick, 
Assiniboia, and Mossbank. 
 
I so present. 
 
Clerk: — The following petitions for private bills are hereby 
presented and laid on the table: 
 

By Ms. Higgins, of the International Bible College of 
Moose Jaw, in the province of Saskatchewan; 
 
By Mr. Addley, the petition for the Our Lady of the Prairies 
Foundation, in the province of Saskatchewan; 
 
By Ms. Higgins, the petition for the Providence Hospital, 
Moose Jaw, in the province of Saskatchewan; and 
 
By Mr. Wartman, the petition for the Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities, in the province of 
Saskatchewan; and 
 
By Ms. Higgins, the petition for St. Anthony’s Home, 
Moose Jaw in the province; and 

By Mr. Addley, the petition for St. Thomas More College, 
Saskatoon, in the province of Saskatchewan. 

 
READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 

 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of the citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

To allow Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone 
exchange; 
 
The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
Level of services and care at Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia; 
 
Necessary funding for Highway 43; and 
 
A substantial energy rebate to consumers. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once again 
I submit the same question to a different minister, at the request 
of the government. 
 

To the Minister of Aboriginal Affairs: how much money 
was transferred from the federal government to the 
provincial government in the 2000-2001 fiscal year for 
services provided to off-reserve Indians, which provincial 
government agencies and departments received money, and 
how much did each of these agencies and departments 
receive? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to members of the Assembly 
two guests seated in your gallery. We have with us Mr. Bill 
Cooper, and Mr. Dustin Duncan, two young gentlemen that are 
very interested in politics. They’ve been here for the last few 
question periods, and they’re here for . . . here to enjoy today’s 
question period. 
 
And I’d just ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
them here to the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I see this morning in 
your gallery someone that I would like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, a former resident 
of the city of Prince Albert, someone who’s moved to Regina 
now, working with the Department of Education. I would like 
to ask all members to please join me in welcoming Brent Toles 
to the Assembly this morning. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 641 

 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and all members of the legislature, I’d like to introduce, seated 
in the west gallery, Mr. Bob Loewen, the principal of the school 
in Eston. And I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
an excellent principal for our school at home. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to join with my colleagues in recognizing 
and welcoming Brent Toles, a former resident, and I might say, 
colleague of the Speaker. Brent is a well-known educator in the 
Prince Albert area and I very much wish him good luck in his 
new position and I would ask all members to join with me. 
 
Also just to recognize Mr. Loewen as being a well-known 
educator in this province as well. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I ask 
all members to join me. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Canadian Western Agribition Elects New President 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it is with pleasure that I rise in the 
House today to announce an appointment of a resident in my 
constituency of Arm River. Mr. Gary Anderson of Bethune has 
been elected as the new president of the Canadian Western 
Agribition. 
 
Mr. Anderson is well-respected farmer and purebred Limousin 
breeder in the Bethune area thus giving him the necessary 
knowledge to carry out his duties as president. In addition, he 
has spent the last six years on the board of directors, one of 
which was spent serving as vice-president. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know Agribition is one of the great 
success stories we have here in Saskatchewan. The huge event 
draws people from around the world and brings experts in the 
livestock industry together. Purebred cattle are shown and sold, 
there are many industry related displays, and of course, one of 
the best rodeos in Western Canada. 
 
This show is clearly an economic success for the province and 
as well, I believe, Mr. Anderson’s expertise will enable 
Agribition to soar to even more successful heights. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gary's vision is to bring Agribition into the new 
millennium by expanding into the e-commerce field. As well, 
he’s committed to providing the same high quality of show that 
has been provided in the past. I have no doubt that with Gary’s 
dedication and experience, Agribition will achieve great things 
in the years ahead. 
 
Please join me in congratulating Mr. Anderson on his recent 
appointment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Holocaust Memorial Day 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this week 

Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor gave Royal Assent to the 
Holocaust remembrance day Act passed by this Assembly. This 
Act provides for Yom haShoah to be recognized as an official 
day of remembrance in the province. 
 
In passing this Act the legislature has asked that Saskatchewan 
people think about the atrocities that occurred during the 
Second World War and ask that we remember the important 
role ordinary people played in combating the hatred and terror 
that was the Holocaust. 
 
On Sunday the Saskatchewan Jewish Council will hold a 
ceremony of remembrance in Regina to observe Yom haShoah. 
This year the ceremony will include a performance by the 
Regina Symphony Orchestra under the direction of conductor 
Victor Sawa and will feature baritone Robert Ursan. 
 
The orchestra will be performing the works of Viktor Ulmann 
entitled “On the Wings of the Soul.” Mr. Ulmann was a Jewish 
composer and a victim of the Holocaust who was murdered in a 
Nazi concentration camp. 
 
The performance will serve to remind us of the more than six 
million men, women, and children murdered in concentration 
camps; that they were each individuals with unique talents, 
skills, views, and abilities; and that while they were persecuted 
as a group, they lived their lives as individuals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will have the honour of bringing greetings to the 
Holocaust memorial ceremony on behalf of this legislature on 
Sunday. In doing so I will ensure that those in attendance know 
that this legislature and the people we represent remain 
committed to ensuring that the lessons and the legacy of the 
Holocaust are remembered. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Broncos Advance 
in Western Hockey League Playoffs 

 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Earlier this spring as the 
WHL (Western Hockey League) playoffs began I stood in the 
Assembly and implored my NDP (New Democratic Party) 
colleagues from Moose Jaw and Regina to consider crossing the 
floor, if only temporarily, to help their WHL teams avoid the 
longstanding NDP curse on sports teams in our province. They 
refused and the Pats and the Warriors were dispatched in the 
first round, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Conversely our own Swift Current Broncos, with a great win 
over Kootenay on Tuesday night in game 7 of their second 
round series, are off to the third round of the playoffs. 
 
I know that all hon. members will want to join with me in 
wishing Coach McEwen and all the Broncos the very best as 
our last Saskatchewan team in the WHL playoffs. The Broncos 
will begin their series tonight in Red Deer at the Centrium. 
 
And as for the fans of the Warriors and the Pats, I ask them not 
to be too hard on their teams. Don’t be angry with your coaches 
or your players. Rather place the blame squarely where it 



642 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

belongs for their teams’ failures — on their NDP MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly). 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Day to Eliminate Racial Discrimination 
 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of making the 
first members’ statement of this session on the International 
Day to Eliminate Racial Discrimination. 
 
(10:15) 
 
Last week we unanimously passed a Bill to officially mark and 
remember the most virulent exercise of racism in the last 
century. 
 
And until prejudice is completely eliminated, we need to 
constantly guard against the pestilence that is racism. 
 
Yesterday at the Rainbow Youth Centre, which I am proud to 
say is located in Regina Elphinstone, the centre’s Peer Helper 
project posted a United Youth Peace Summit to develop 
strategies to fight racism and celebrate diversity. 
 
I was happy to attend the opening ceremonies with the Minister 
of Culture, Youth, and Recreation. Regina youth from a wide 
variety of ethnic and cultural backgrounds gathered to learn 
more about racism and to find out about what they can do in 
their own lives to eliminate this ugly reality. 
 
At the end of the day the participants compiled a number of 
recommendations to form a quote, Declaration for United 
Youth and Diversity, a document which will give some 
direction on how to take a stand against discrimination and to 
raise awareness of Regina’s diverse community. 
 
I want to congratulate the participants, the presenters, and the 
staff at the Rainbow Youth Centre for demonstrating that each 
colour is special in its own right, but when they come together 
in a rainbow, it makes for a thing of remarkable beauty. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Grandson for Rosthern Member 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to pay tribute to a member of our Assembly. Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Rosthern has served his constituency 
and this legislature well for the past six years. The member 
serves as our caucus chairman where he rules with an iron 
gavel. He commands and deserves respect. 
 
We delight as the members opposite recoil in sheer terror when 
the member from Rosthern rises in this House to ask a question 
or to speak, for we know of the tongue-lashing, the glare, and 
the finger pointing that is about to be unleashed. 
 
The member is often regarded as the stern grandfather of our 
caucus and of this Assembly, aided in the perception with his 
steely grey hair and his bifocals. Now his stature more correctly 
matches his appearance with an event that occurred during the 
early morning hours of Thursday, April 19. At 3:07 a.m. that 

morning, the member from Rosthern was blessed with a 
grandson, a bouncing baby boy to carry on the Heppner name. 
A grandson, Dillon Heppner, tipped the scales at 10 lbs. and 
measured over 22 inches long was born to the proud parents, 
Ken and Sandy Heppner. 
 
One family member commented on the newborn said, and I 
quote: 
 

He has a normal-size head, unlike a Heppner head. 
 
As his robust, newborn cries filled the maternity ward, other 
relatives smiled and nodded as he sounded just like his 
grandfather. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Indian Federated College Building Launch 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
proud to stand before the House today to speak about the 
building launch of the Saskatchewan Indian Federated College 
campus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ceremonies are taking place at the Centre of 
the Arts as I speak here now. The SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College) is a proud, honourable member of our 
academic community. It is the only Aboriginal university 
owned and operated by Aboriginal people in all of North 
America. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, they are receiving a building that they 
can call their own. For years the SIFC has rented space from the 
University of Regina, but now with the funding, the architect, 
and the land in place it is time for the SIFC to start to build their 
own buildings. 
 
This government, the federal government, and the whole 
community, has thrown their financial support behind this 
exciting project, Mr. Speaker. The government has committed 
to this project by investing 5 million in the future of education 
in our province. This sum of 5 million is also the amount put 
forward by the SIFC themselves towards the project. As well, 
Mr. Speaker, a contribution of 1.5 million is coming from 
Saskatchewan Crown corporations. 
 
This truly is a community effort that shows the spirit of 
Saskatchewan. On behalf of the government, I’d like to 
congratulate the students, staff, and faculty, and the board of 
governors on their wonderful achievement. 
 
Thank you, very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Melfort Constituent Receives Lieutenant Governor’s Award 

 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, and members of the 
legislature. Lynda Haverstock, our distinguished Lieutenant 
Governor, recently presented a constituent of mine with a 
Lieutenant Governor’s Award for Outstanding Service to Rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 



April 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 643 

 

Gerald Audette served as a councillor for the RM (rural 
municipality) of Flett’s Springs for 10 years, and another 21 
years as reeve. During this time he also served eight years on 
the Melfort Public Library Board and 12 years on the Melfort 
Hospital Board. 
 
His list of involvements goes on. He served on the Highway 41 
Extension Committee, the Boundary Commission for Health 
Districts, and the Rail Retention Committee. Gerald was 
instrumental in forming the Melfort Rural Pipeline Association 
and the Saskatchewan Association of Rural Water Pipelines, 
and continues to chair both organizations. 
 
He coached hockey in Melfort. Was a director of the Melfort 
Curling Club, and served on the UGG (United Grain Growers 
Limited)and the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool Boards. 
 
Gerald has worked tirelessly to improve the community he lives 
in, and it’s people like him who are the solid building blocks of 
our province. His hard work deserves to be recognized, and it 
gives me pleasure to ask the Assembly in joining me in 
recognizing Mr. Audette’s contributions. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Samuel McLeod Awards for Prince Albert Businesses 
 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, Wednesday night members of the Prince Albert 
business community met to honour some of their own who have 
demonstrated over the past year excellence in a number of 
different categories. 
 
I speak of course of the Samuel McLeod Awards for the year 
2000. PalmX Route Accounting won in the new product for 
service category. Prince Albert Co-op received the award for 
the investment category. And for new business, the Floor Store 
was honoured. 
 
The Marlboro Inn was honoured in the category of community 
involvement. In the service industry category, there was a tie, 
both Drs. Degelman, Rae & Degelman of the P.A. Vision 
Centre — by the way, where I get my spectacles, Mr. Speaker 
— and Rod’s Decorating Centre were honoured. Prince Albert 
Daily Herald won the category for marketing. And the Business 
of the Year Award was the Prince Albert Co-op. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know the very important role that business 
play in the community of Saskatchewan and the different towns 
that we all come from, and I want to ask members to join with 
me in congratulating all of these very, very important and very 
successful businesses in Prince Albert. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Review of Fyke Commission Report 
 

Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, 10 months ago, the NDP hired 
Ken Fyke to fix the mess they made of Saskatchewan’s health 

care system. And yesterday, Ken Fyke came to the legislature to 
explain and defend the recommendations in his report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my office has been swamped with questions about 
the potential impact of the Fyke Commission, and I was very 
much looking forward to asking Mr. Fyke many of the 
questions on behalf of my constituents. Unfortunately, last night 
the NDP House Leader broke his word and abruptly ended the 
session with Mr. Fyke before I was able to ask my questions. 
 
So today I have a question for the Premier. Mr. Fyke said 
yesterday that the closure of 53 hospitals in 1993 didn’t hurt the 
quality of patient care in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, does the 
Premier agree with that statement and does the Premier think he 
can shut down another 50 hospitals without doing further 
damage to an already failing health care system? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would want to 
respond and I would want to quote Hansard with respect to the 
facts. As the committee sat last night and as it convened, sat for 
six and a half hours, the rules which we had agreed to are 
clearly stated in Hansard on pages 602 and 603, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now I ask members opposite to read the opening statement of 
the chairman, which is what we had agreed to with respect to 
the proceedings that were to take place, and then determine 
whether or not our word was broken. 
 
We extended the hours beyond, Mr. Speaker, what had been 
agreed to in order so that members could listen to Mr. Fyke and 
question Mr. Fyke. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, if they’re interested in the 
discussions with respect to health care in this province, they 
should join us on the all-party committee so we can hear all the 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Premier today. I too was looking 
forward to asking Mr. Fyke questions last night on behalf of my 
constituents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had questions from the CEO (chief executive 
officer) of the health district, I had questions from an EMT 
(emergency medical technician) with 24 years experience in our 
health district. I even had questions from a former NDP 
candidate to ask Mr. Fyke last night. But the NDP’s House 
Leader prevented me from asking those questions of Mr. Fyke. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, I’m asking the Premier. My 
constituency of Cypress Hills covers the entire southwest corner 
of Saskatchewan — 45,000 square kilometres. But if the Fyke 
Commission is implemented there will not be a single hospital 
in that constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier tell me what services the people 
of my constituency can expect after the NDP shuts down all of 
their hospitals? 
 



644 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, by agreement, Mr. 
Fyke joined the members of this Legislative Assembly and he 
responded to questions, he responded . . . well if they don’t 
want to listen, Mr. Speaker, there’s no sense me responding. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
Premier unless he chooses to duck this one also. When the NDP 
closed 53 hospitals in their failed attempt at health care reform, 
the result was that Saskatchewan people now face the longest 
hospital waiting lists in Canada. The result was a mass exodus 
of doctors and nurses. 
 
One of the groups that has paid the highest price for the NDP’s 
failed health system are Aboriginal people living in northern 
Saskatchewan. Now the NDP is on the verge of closing 50 more 
hospitals. So it’s not hard to understand why Northerners are 
concerned. 
 
I was anxious to ask Mr. Fyke about how his recommendations 
would improve health services in the North. But the NDP 
House Leader broke his word and shut down last night’s session 
with Mr. Fyke. 
 
So I’ll ask the Premier, Mr. Speaker, why should Northerners 
believe him when he says closing another 50 hospitals is going 
to improve northern health services? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to attempt 
again to answer the question. If members opposite are interested 
in hearing what Mr. Fyke has to say with respect to his report 
they need only to join us on the . . . there they are again, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. The minister will continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, six and a half hours of 
questions, one individual, but there is more time to question Mr. 
Fyke. Mr. Fyke can be asked to come before the all-party 
committee and those members know clearly that that is a 
process that can work and will work. 
 
I only ask, Mr. Speaker, if they’re interested enough in health 
care in this province, and if they’re interested enough in dealing 
with what is the most important issues that are going to face the 
people of this province for decades to come, I ask them to join 
to make health care better in this province as opposed to playing 
silly partisan politics. Rise above it, join with us, come to the 
committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Premier. 
 
Today my colleagues have expressed concern about the NDP’s 
refusal to allow us to answer questions . . . or ask questions of 
Mr. Fyke. 

Our caucus had been verbally assured by the Government 
House Leader that we were going to be able to have all of our 
members ask the questions that our constituents had for Mr. 
Fyke. But after just two hours of questioning from our 
members, the Government House Leader unilaterally shut down 
the committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on top of all the other concerns we have that we 
listed about co-operating with the NDP, last night simply 
confirmed what we already suspected — you can’t trust the 
NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier has asked us to join and participate in 
an all-party committee on health. Will the Premier put in 
writing the specific mandate, parameters, terms of reference, 
structure, and timeline for the committee that he is proposing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to 
members opposite, we are willing to sit down, we are willing to 
sit . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order. The 
minister will continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, we are willing to sit 
with members of the opposition; I as House Leader am willing 
to sit with their House Leader to discuss the terms and the 
conditions and the mandate and the structure of the all-party 
committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members from that side have indicated to us that 
they were not willing to discuss participation in a committee 
until after Fyke report . . . appeared before this legislature. 
 
(10:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have taken them at their word. I am willing, 
we are willing, this government is willing to sit down to discuss 
mandate, structure, timing of the committee — all of the things 
that are pertinent to being able to allow the people of this 
community to be heard by the legislatures, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, after last night’s performance 
by the Government House Leader we simply are not prepared to 
enter into verbal discussions with that member. 
 
To the Premier. Mr. Premier, Mr. Premier, you have asked . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Will the member continue to direct all of his 
questions and his comments through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we 
would ask the Premier if the Premier is willing to put in writing 
under his signature the specific mandate, the parameters, the 
terms of reference, the structure, and the timeline for the 
committee that he is proposing. We were asked to participate by 
the Premier. We want his request in writing under his signature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 645 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me make very, 
very clear the proceedings that took place last evening. And I 
want to quote from Hansard, page 602: 
 

If there are any objections to the procedures, then I will ask 
for a motion so that the committee can formally decide (on) 
its procedures. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that was from the Chairman last evening. 
 
Now I want to say if they are concerned about the mandate, if 
they’re concerned about the timing of this committee, I ask 
them to sit down and negotiate with us the terms of reference. 
We’re willing to do that. 
 
What I am saying, Mr. Speaker, is, is that we have a political 
party on that side of the house who puts partisan political 
politics above the future of health care and the people of this 
province. And I say shame on them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Premier. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, it seems that the Premier has finally received a reply to 
his strongly worded letter to the Prime Minister and apparently 
the Prime Minister has told him to take a hike. There will be no 
more money for Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on March 21 this Assembly passed an all-party 
resolution calling for additional farm aid. The Premier then 
wrote — and he said he would do it on his own — the Premier 
then wrote to the Prime Minister on behalf of this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier table the letter he received from 
the Prime Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite, as I did in the House yesterday, that we have received 
a letter from the Prime Minister’s Office. And I said yesterday 
to the members opposite and to the media what the letter had 
highlighted. 
 
It highlighted that for Canadian farmers — not just 
Saskatchewan farmers, Mr. Speaker — but for Canadian 
farmers today it looks like there isn’t going to be any additional 
resources. No additional resources, number one. 
 
Secondly, what the Prime Minister said, Mr. Speaker, is that he 
said that he’s prepared . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I just want to be able to hear the 
answer. The minister will continue. Order, order. I would like to 
hear the response. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, as I said yesterday to the 
member opposite and to the media, that the letter that we 
received from the Prime Minister is not only to Saskatchewan, 
it’s to all Canadian premiers. 

And it says that there are three things. One is that today the 
Canadian government provides $2.6 billion to Canadian farmers 
— not just Saskatchewan but to Canadian farmers — and that 
that money in fact will be distributed through the course of this 
year. 
 
Secondly, the Prime Minister said that he’s prepared to open up 
the safety net discussion — is what we wanted to have, Mr. 
Speaker — and that the 60/40 formula that the federal 
government has had in place will remain. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Well this is very interesting. Four weeks ago the 
Premier invited the Saskatchewan Party to join with him. He 
said if we would support his call for a billion dollars in new 
farm aid then he would go on and send a letter to the Prime 
Minister on behalf of the entire legislature; on behalf of all of 
us. 
 
The Premier said he would write to the Prime Minister on 
behalf of this entire Assembly and now that he’s received a 
response — so he says — all of sudden it’s private 
correspondence. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it any wonder we don’t trust an NDP all-party 
committee resolution. 
 
This is a pretty simple request, Mr. Speaker. We would like to 
know why Ottawa is refusing to provide more farm aid. Will 
the Premier provide for this Assembly a copy of the letter that 
he received from the Prime Minister? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the members 
of this Assembly and to the member opposite that the concern 
that we have about the Saskatchewan Party and the member 
opposite is that we have a long history with their workings with 
farm organizations and farm groups to bring money to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year we included the Saskatchewan Party in 
the discussion about how we get more money for Saskatchewan 
farmers. And they worked with us for a period of time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The minister will continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — And last year, Mr. Speaker, the members 
opposite participated with us in trying to get more money for 
farmers across Saskatchewan and across the country. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, as soon as the heat got a little hot for them — 
when it was too hot in the kitchen for them, as it’s too hot for 
them in the kitchen today in health care — what happens to 
these guys is they get in their little ponies and they’re gone. 
And this is the same situation. We have a long history with 
these people. 
 
They have no interest, Mr. Speaker, in bringing about change or 
betterment or enhancement for Saskatchewan farmers. No more 
than for health care. These people are about partisan politics. 



646 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

They’re about themselves, Mr. Speaker, not about 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t understand what this Premier is attempting to 
hide from this Assembly. He shouts from his, he shouts . . . The 
Premier of this province shouts from his chair, where is your 
letter from Stockwell Day. 
 
Well I would like to know what Stockwell Day possibly has to 
do with an all-party letter, all-party resolution from this 
Assembly with respect to agriculture? What is it that is so 
incriminating or is wrong with this letter that you’ve so-called 
received from the Prime Minister’s office? Or more accurately, 
Mr. Speaker, from the Prime Minister’s junior assistant, more 
likely. 
 
In fact I think a bigger question, Mr. Speaker, right now is: 
what is the Premier of this province going to do now that the 
Prime Minister has told him to take a hike? What is the Premier 
going to do to add any further weight to our call for farm 
assistance for the people of this province? When is the Premier 
going to meet with the Prime Minister to press for additional 
aid? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the House 
and to the member opposite that I’ve already said that I had a 
conference call yesterday and will have another next week with 
my colleagues across the country to have a discussion about the 
further process. I’m meeting with Saskatchewan farm 
organizations in the next couple of days to have a discussion 
with them about the correspondence that we’ve received from 
the Prime Minister. 
 
But I’ll tell you what Stockwell Day has to do with this 
discussion, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you what Stockwell Day has. 
That member from Kindersley there, he supported Stockwell 
Day. He supported Stockwell Day and that’s the same 
Stockwell Day who flew into Regina a couple of . . . during the 
November election who said there’s no more money for 
Canadian farmers; no more money. And that’s what Stockwell 
Day has to do with this House. 
 
And that’s who that member supports. And that’s who that 
government or that opposition supports, Mr. Speaker. It’s the 
Saskatchewan Party — Stockwell Day, no more money for 
farmers, no more money for health care, zero, Mr. Speaker, 
from the federal government — that’s what they support. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investments by Crown Corporations 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is sitting on millions of dollars worth of 
Crown profits, and they’re socking it away apparently in some 

sort of an election slush fund. And any money that isn’t going 
into this election slush fund is being gambled away on 
money-losing ventures like potato companies and dot-coms if 
you can believe it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to ask a few questions about some of these ventures if I 
may. For starters, Mr. Speaker, to the minister, what is IQ & A 
Partnership? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well I think the question he’s just asked 
— what is IQ (intelligence quotient) — is a very good question 
coming from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
something obviously they don’t have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all I have said in this legislature many, 
many times, Mr. Speaker, that our Crown corporations, in order 
to be viable and strong, Mr. Speaker, in order to be viable and 
strong in a deregulated environment that largely exists today, 
needs to invest in other ventures outside of our provincial 
borders, the same way as private utilities are investing in 
Saskatchewan and take earnings from the province . . . from our 
province and from our taxpayers. It’s the only way our Crowns 
will survive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I can assure the member that our Crowns will continue to 
do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister could use his 
considerable IQ to actually answer some questions in the 
legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Or maybe, or maybe, Mr. Speaker, maybe he 
could take the time to read the annual reports from his own 
Crown corporations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1998 SaskTel bought 60 per cent of IQ & A 
Partnership for $1.2 million. These are the details that the 
minister doesn’t know, but we’ll share it with him. In 1999 
SaskTel bought the remaining 40 per cent, and in 2000 IQ & A 
Partnership went out of business. Mr. Speaker, according to its 
financial statements, IQ & A Partnership never generated a 
dime of revenue, and it lost $2.3 million in two short years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question is this: will the minister please 
explain what exactly was this company doing? Why did it never 
generate one thin, forlorn dime in revenue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the member chooses to 
select, select, Mr. Speaker, investments that have not made 
money, and we’ve acknowledged, Mr. Speaker, that that will 
happen. There is risk in investing, Mr. Speaker. There is risk. 
 
I could go through the litany of investments, however, Mr. 
Speaker, that our Crown corporations have invested in where 
they have made millions of dollars, hundreds of millions of 



April 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 647 

 

dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I refer to one, Mr. Speaker, the Chunnel, where they made over 
a hundred million dollars for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. We’re looking at ways, Mr. Speaker, that our Crowns 
can invest, defer risk if it comes to insurance, and make 
additional revenues for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. I think that makes only reasonable, good, common 
sense for our Crown corporations to do that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister’s saying we’re 
selecting a few money-losers out of the Crown corporation 
annual reports. Well thanks to this government, Mr. Speaker, 
the pickings are pretty good. It’s a veritable smorgasbord of 
lamebrain ideas coming from across the way, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, here’s how the NDP is safeguarding 
taxpayer dollars. SaskTel bought into IQ & A in 1998. It was 
belly up by April, 2000. It lost $2.3 million and it didn’t 
generate a single, thin dime — not exactly a Fortune 500 effort 
on behalf of the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what exactly was this company up to? What 
services did it provide, who did it provide services to, and why 
did it go out of business? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — So well hidden, Mr. Speaker, it’s in all 
of the annual reports — in all of the annual reports. Some big 
secret this member’s revealing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to tell the public in Saskatchewan though, Mr. Speaker, 
what they did when they were in power, Mr. Speaker. They ran 
up an additional $2 billion worth of debt in our Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. They stripped away all the retained 
earnings, Mr. Speaker. They sold assets, Mr. Speaker. They 
added $1 billion a year annually to our operating deficit . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I just want to be able to hear some of the 
responses and most of the question. The minister may continue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And this all happened, Mr. Speaker, 
while that member was in the Premier’s office, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll tell you what we did, Mr. Speaker. We paid down that 
debt by $2 billion. We now have some retained earnings, Mr. 
Speaker. We have some. And believe it or not, Mr. Speaker, as 
a result of that our credit rating has seen nine consecutive 
increases, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this minister in 
questioning over this week continues to refer to some 
Saskatchewan Party government. Now for the minister’s 
benefit, it hasn’t happened quite yet but it will happen soon 

enough, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
(10:45) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, especially when we look at 
lamebrain schemes like this, it’ll happen soon enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let’s slow it down. Let’s slow down the pace a 
little bit for the minister. We’ll slow down the pace a little bit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who did SaskTel buy IQ & A from and what was 
the total purchase price? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to again 
respond by saying the following: that our Crowns will continue 
to invest in ventures outside of our province, Mr. Speaker, and 
perhaps outside of the country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There will be due diligence on all of the investments, Mr. 
Speaker. There will be audits on all of the investments, Mr. 
Speaker. There is risk involved in investing, Mr. Speaker, 
whether you invest inside of Saskatchewan or outside of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, our Crowns must remain viable so that they 
can provide services — services, Mr. Speaker — in many of the 
rural constituencies that those members represent. If we don’t 
have strong Crowns, our Crowns will not be able to provide the 
quality of service at the reasonable, low cost — in many cases, 
lowest cost in all of North America — in those constituencies. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, these are important questions. 
We’re asking the minister responsible for a company that 
apparently lost $2 million worth of taxpayers’ money. I’d say 
that’s a pretty important issue, one that he might want to 
familiarize himself with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel spent a couple of million dollars buying 
up a company. They never generated any revenue from the 
company, and these barons of Bay Street lost $2.3 million in 
just two years of operation. So I think it’s reasonable, very 
reasonable to ask: who did they buy this company from? 
 
Mr. Speaker, why won’t the minister answer this question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well this is interesting, Mr. Speaker. 
Yesterday that member spent all day talking about the Crowns 
making too much money — all day, all day criticizing us for 
having too much money, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday he would 
have spent it all and then some, Mr. Speaker — all and then 
some. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that it is only reasonable, Mr. Speaker, that 
our Crowns will invest in ventures that may sometimes fail, but 
we will do . . . for the people of Saskatchewan we will perform 



648 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

due diligence. We will do audits on every investment that we 
make, Mr. Speaker. There will be some that fail but our record 
will show, Mr. Speaker, that there will be many more that will 
make much profit for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, order. The House will come to 
order. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Before order of the day . . . Order! Before 
orders of the day . . . Order! Before orders of the day, I have 
received two reports, members, I have received two reports. 
One is a report the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on 
the 2000 financial statements of CIC Crown Corporations dated 
April 2001, submitted by the Office of Provincial the Auditor. I 
hereby table this report. 
 
And secondly, I have received their report to the Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan on the 2000 financial statements of 
CIC Crown Investments. It appears to be a duplicate, members. 
One report. I apologize for that. Hereby tabled. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I’d ask 
for leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
thank you to the members in the House. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
introduce a family seated in the west gallery, a family currently 
residing in . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, they’re in the 
west gallery, Mr. Speaker. A family currently residing in 
Yorkton, Mr. Speaker, but the parents of this family were 
former students of mine in the community of Invermay. 
 
I’d like to introduce Robert and Lydia Sliva and their family, 
Jason, Eric, Timothy, Stephanie, and Joseph. And I’d ask all 
members to welcome them here to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, before the business of the 
day, I’d like to ask leave of the Assembly to move motions of 
condolence. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. And to all 
members of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I rise today to pay 
tribute to the passing of a former member of the Assembly, Mr. 
Martin Semchuk. 
 
Martin Semchuk was born in 1914 to Sophia and Bill Semchuk 
of Meath Park, Saskatchewan. He married Josephine Grelowski 

and had three children — David, Carol, and Sandra. Josephine 
died in 1981. Martin died in Oliver, B.C. on November 15, 
2000. He is survived by his children, seven grandchildren, eight 
great grandchildren, and by his friend and companion Marg 
Tatum. 
 
Martin will be greatly missed by all of us who knew him. He 
was a passionate man, a poet, a painter, a businessman, an 
adventurer, a social activist, and a politician. 
 
In the 1950’s, Martin initiated the first winter road to Uranium 
City with Art Nelson, Johnny Midgett, Art Porter, and Jonas 
Clark. In 1980, the all-weather highway was named the 
Semchuk Trail in his honour. 
 
Martin was elected to the Saskatchewan Legislature for the 
CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) member for 
Meadow Lake in 1960 and participated with Tommy Douglas 
and Woodrow Lloyd in the fight for medicare. 
 
During his four years of service, he worked to improve the 
housing and road access for First Nations people to the north, as 
well as foster a clear knowledge of northern people and their 
land. Martin also fought to have the Meadow Lake Provincial 
Park a reality. 
 
Martin also served the people of northwest Saskatchewan in 
several other capacities. He was president of the Meadow Lake 
Board of Trade, a member of the Council of Meadow Lake, 
Director of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, and the 
Saskatchewan Tourism Advisory Board. 
 
When he and Josie retired from their grocery store, Martin was 
called by the hon. Eiling Kramer to work as the deputy assistant 
for the Department of Natural Resources and later the 
Department of Highways in Regina. He was known for his 
remarkable and innovative mediation. 
 
Martin dearly loved nature, especially he loved the little 
chickadees. 
 
Martin will long be remembered for his caring about social 
justice and economic parity and acting on his principles. He will 
also be remembered for his service to the people of 
Saskatchewan while a member of this Legislative Assembly 
and for his role in the creation of medicare. His contributions 
helped to make Saskatchewan a caring and compassionate place 
and that are lasting legacies of his love for this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move, the member from Yorkton, 
seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly, I would move: 
 

That this Assembly records the sorrow and regrets the 
passing of a former member of the Assembly, and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
Martin Semchuk, who passed away on November 15, 
2000, was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1960 until 1964, representing the constituency of Meadow 
Lake for the Co-operative Commonwealth Federation. 
 



April 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 649 

 

Mr. Semchuk was born on August 20, 1914 in Meath Park. 
He grew up on the family farm before being sent to Prince 
Albert for his schooling. Mr. Semchuk was predeceased by 
his wife, Josephine. He is survived by their three children, 
and by friend and companion, Marg Tatum. 
 
In his private life, Mr. Semchuk operated a grocery store in 
Meadow Lake. He was an active participant in the affairs of 
his community, and a variety of organizations benefited 
from his involvement. These included service groups like 
the Elks Lodge, the Rotary, the Red Cross, and the 
Salvation Army. He served on the town council and the 
credit union, and Mr. Semchuk was the president of the 
Meadow Lake Board of Trade. He was a director of the 
chamber of commerce and the Saskatchewan Tourism 
Advisory Board. He sought to establish and bring 
organized sports for many young members, and minor 
sports to his community. 
 
Mr. Semchuk’s concern for the well being of his fellow 
citizens in northwestern Saskatchewan was evident in his 
endeavours. He participated in the efforts to create the 
Meadow Lake Provincial Park. In recognition of his role in 
establishing a winter road to Uranium City, and an 
all-weather highway being named the Semchuk Trail in his 
honour in the 1980s. 
 
Mr. Semchuk was elected to the Assembly in 1960. He 
later returned to work in Regina with the Department of 
Natural Resources in Saskatchewan. 
 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy to the 
members of the Semchuk and bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
indeed an honour to second the condolence motion for Mr. 
Martin Semchuk on behalf of the official opposition. 
 
I want to join with all colleagues in this House in noting with 
regret the passing of Martin Semchuk. 
 
Much of Mr. Semchuk’s life was committed to issues facing 
northern Saskatchewan as the Deputy Premier has alluded to. 
Particularly he was instrumental in the development of the first 
winter road to Uranium City. And I think, Mr. Speaker, so 
much emphasis was placed on that road that the people of the 
community and the people of the province saw it necessary in 
1980 to name that all-weather highway in that area the 
Semchuk Trail. And I think that speaks very, very importantly 
for the tribute that is paid to Mr. Semchuk. 
 
Martin Semchuk was deeply involved in his community. He 
was a businessman. He helped organize youth activities in 
Meadow Lake. And he also went on to a career in the civil 
service. Outside of his professional life, Mr. Semchuk took 
pleasure in poetry and art. 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Semchuk’s interests show a very 
accomplished and talented individual with a number of diverse 
interests. 
 
To Martin Semchuk’s family, I want to again extend sincere 

condolences on behalf of the official opposition. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
(11:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today to pay tribute to the passing of a former member of 
this Assembly, Mr. Gordon Grant. 
 
Mr. Grant was born on September 13, 1910 in Regina, 
Saskatchewan. He leaves to mourn his wife Helen; children 
Don, Sharon, and Linda; eight grandchildren; 10 
great-grandchildren; and Helen’s children, grandchildren, and 
great-grandchildren. Gordon was predeceased by his wife 
Eileen. 
 
Mr. Grant completed his primary and secondary education in 
Regina and attended the University of British Columbia, 
University of Toronto, and graduated with a B.A. (Bachelor of 
Arts) from the University of Saskatchewan in 1933. 
 
Mr. Grant was involved in real estate and owned Walter M. 
Logan insurance in Regina. Gordon, Mr. Grant, was a Regina 
alderman from 1947 to 1951. While in Regina he served on 
numerous boards and societies. In 1952 Mr. Grant became the 
first native-born mayor of Regina. He served as the mayor for 
two years. 
 
In 1964 Gordon was elected as a member of the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly representing the Liberal party in the 
Regina South constituency. During his three terms as an MLA 
he served as the minister of Telephones, Public Health, 
Highways and Transportation, and Industry and Commerce. 
And Gordon also served as the Opposition Whip from 1971 to 
1975. 
 
Mr. Grant retired to Kelowna in 1975. Surrounded by his loving 
family, Gordon passed peacefully on January 16, 2001 in God’s 
tender arms. 
 
Gordon will be remembered for his service to the people of 
Saskatchewan while a member of the Legislative Assembly. He 
contributes as a lasting legacy of his love, of his city, his 
province, and his country. 
 
In his private life Mr. Grant was a businessman. He was 
involved in real estate and owned Walter Logan insurance 
company in Regina. Mr. Grant was also an active participant in 
the affairs of his community. He held a variety of positions 
from member, to president, to chairman in a number of local 
and provincial organizations. 
 
He served on the Regina Public School Board and General 
Hospital and Grey Nuns Hospital, the Cancer Society, and the 
Salvation Army. He donated his time to the Kinsmen. He lent 
his business experience to the chamber of commerce and the 
Exhibition Board and the Western Canadian Fairs. 
 
Mr. Grant was also involved in the Saskatchewan Association 
of Urban Municipalities. Mr. Grant was first elected to the 
office of an alderman of the city of Regina, later to be held in 
distinction as being the first native-born mayor of Regina. 



650 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

Mr. Grant was first elected to the Assembly in 1964 and 
successfully retained his seat in the following two elections. Mr. 
Grant was responsible for several portfolios including 
Highways, Transportation, SaskPower, the SaskPower 
Corporation, Department of Health, and also served as the 
Opposition Whip. 
 
In recording this deep sorrow and loss of bereavement, this 
Assembly expresses its most sincere bereavement for the 
family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would move, seconded by the member from 
Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow the regrets of the 
passing of a former member of the Assembly and expresses 
its grateful appreciation for the contributions he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to this province. 
 
Mr. Gordon Burton Grant, who passed away on January 
16, 2001, was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1964 until 1975, representing the constituency of Regina 
South and then Regina Whitmore Park for the Liberal 
Party. 
 
Mr. Grant was born on September 13, 1910 in Regina, and 
he spent his childhood in Regina and attended the local 
primary and secondary schools. He furthered his studies at 
the University of British Columbia and Toronto before 
graduating with a Bachelor of Arts from the University of 
Saskatchewan in 1933. 
 
Mr. Grant was predeceased by his wife Eileen, but is 
survived by three children and his second wife, Helen. 
 
In his private life, Mr. Grant was a businessman. He was 
involved in real estate and owned the Walter Logan 
insurance company in Regina. 
 
Mr. Grant was also an active participant in the affairs of his 
community. He held a variety of positions, from member to 
president to chairman, for a number of local and provincial 
organizations. He served on the Regina Public School 
Board, the General Hospital, the Grey Nuns Hospital, the 
Cancer Society, and the Salvation Army. 
 
He dedicated and donated his time to the Kinsmen. He lent 
his business expertise to the chamber of commerce, the 
Exhibition Board, and the Western Canadian Fairs. And 
Mr. Grant was also involved in the Saskatchewan 
Association of Urban Municipalities. 
 
Mr. Grant was first elected to office as alderman to the City 
of Regina. Later he held the distinction of being the first 
native-born mayor of Regina. 
 
Mr. Grant was first elected to this Assembly in 1964 and 
successfully retained his seat in the following two 
elections. Mr. Grant was responsible for working in several 
portfolios, including Highways, Industry and Commerce, 
Telephones, Saskatchewan Transportation, Saskatchewan 
Power Corporation, and the Health department. He was 
also the Opposition Whip. 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Certainly there is no 
question that Gordon Grant left a mark both on this city and on 
this province. He had a distinguished political career, both at 
the civic level and here in this Assembly. 
 
A well-known businessman here in Regina, he also served as an 
alderman in this city before taking over as its mayor. Mr. Grant 
served on both sides of this Assembly, very ably, from 1964 to 
1975. While in government he held a number of portfolios 
including Highways, Industry, and a number of Crowns. 
 
Away from politics, Mr. Grant remained involved in his 
community. As the Deputy Premier has indicated, he has 
devoted a huge number of hours and days to working for the 
community groups in this city, and I think they remember him 
very, very fondly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Gordon Grant was a distinguished citizen of this 
city and this province. And I know I join with all members in 
this legislature in extending to his family our heartfelt sympathy 
at his passing after a long and rewarding life. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And it is 
with sorrow that I stand before you today on behalf of the 
Liberal caucus to extend our condolences to the family and 
friends of Mr. Gordon Burton Grant. 
 
As you may remember, Mr. Speaker, it was just last year that I 
had the pleasure of introducing Mr. Grant to this Legislative 
Assembly, on his visit to Regina from his retirement home in 
Kelowna. And now, with his recent passing, we pause to remind 
ourselves of his contributions to our great province. 
 
Mr. Grant was first elected in 1964, then re-elected in both 1967 
and 1971. During his terms, Mr. Grant served the people of 
Saskatchewan with dedication and commitment. During the 
Thatcher government he held a number of portfolios, including 
Highways and Transportation, Industry and Commerce, Public 
Health, SaskPower Corporation, and the minister of 
Telephones. 
 
Yet, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Grant not only served the people of 
Saskatchewan as an elected member of this provincial 
Assembly and a minister of the Crown, he was also a former 
alderman and mayor of Regina, positions he equally held with 
distinction. 
 
An active businessman, Mr. Grant had a sense of dedication to 
his community, a dedication that was reflected in his 
participation as an active member of several boards and 
organizations, including the Regina Public School Board, the 
Grey Nuns Hospital, the Regina General Hospital, the Cancer 
Society, and the Salvation Army. 
 
Mr. Grant’s contributions to our province and the city of Regina 
remains evident even today, reflected in the number of streets 
and roads that have been named throughout our capital city in 
his honour. 
 



April 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 651 

 

Mr. Speaker, I believe that Mr. Grant’s passing represents a loss 
for all of us. To his family, and on behalf of the Liberal caucus, 
I would like to express our sincere condolences for their loss. 
And while he is no longer with us, Mr. Grant’s contributions 
will not be forgotten. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to pay 
tribute to Mr. Gordon Grant, who was the first member for 
Regina South to serve in this Assembly. Mr. Grant represented 
the south part of the city, both when the constituency was called 
Whitmore Park and also as it moved into being called Regina 
South. 
 
He was a very dedicated legislator, a man dedicated to his party, 
and a man dedicated to improving his community. He is fondly 
remembered throughout the constituency, even to this day, for 
the work that he did on behalf of Regina residents. 
 
During Mr. Grant’s time, both in this Assembly and in the city 
council, we saw a great deal of development in the south part of 
Regina. Mr. Grant has — as my colleague, the Liberal leader, 
has pointed out — has been honoured for much of that work 
with the naming of many streets. In fact, I live on one of the 
streets named after him — Grant Road. 
 
I think it’s worth noting that you can in fact stand on the corner 
of Gordon and Grant at the same time. Just to show how 
respected he was, simply naming Grant Road after him was not 
enough. They went on to also name Grant Drive, which 
intersects with Grant Road, after him. 
 
Mr. Grant was a powerful, powerful man in terms of the 
presence that he had within our community. And I can tell you, 
the fact that he was returned three times to this Assembly I 
think speaks very highly to that. Mr. Grant is the only member 
in the southern part of this city, in Regina South, to have been 
elected three times in the seat. It’s a seat that’s not particularly 
kind to incumbents — or at least in the past it’s not been. And I 
have to tell you that his ability to be re-elected twice is 
something I personally admire a great deal. 
 
I was pleased to have the opportunity to meet Mr. Grant when 
he came to the Assembly last year, I believe it was. And it was 
certainly an honour to meet a man that was such an important 
part of our community. 
 
His loss will be certainly felt but his accomplishments, Mr. 
Speaker, will be very much remembered. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, there was an 
additional member that wanted to pay tribute to Mr. Martin 
Semchuk and I would ask the indulgence of the Assembly at 
this time to recognize the member for Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I appreciate the 
indulgence of the House to add my comments of condolence to 
the Semchuk family. 
 
I was born and raised in Loon Lake which was in the Meadow 

Lake constituency, and my parents knew Mr. Semchuk very, 
very well. And I feel obliged to rise and add some comments of 
condolence. 
 
Some of the comments I’d like to make with regards to Mr. 
Semchuk are enclosed in a clipping, and I’ll just read some of 
the highlights about it. 
 
Some attributes of Mr. Semchuk — smiling, busy, a hustling 
merchant, crowded much activities into his life, and full of 
efforts and activities. 
 
In the 20 years since he had moved to Meadow Lake, following, 
seems to have waged a constant campaign of community 
betterment and has identified himself with the multiplicity of 
organizations including the president of the Meadow Lake and 
District Board of Trade, member of the town council, member 
of the Saskatchewan Chamber of Commerce, as well as the 
Motor Club. 
 
He was a very big booster of tourism in the Meadow Lake area 
and aware of the growing industry that tourism was bringing to 
that area of the province. And to that end, he served on the 
Tourist Advisory Council, as well as vice-president of the 
Northwest Tourist Associates. 
 
He was also involved with the Meadow Lake Rotary Club and 
was the exalted ruler of the Meadow Lake Elks Lodge. 
 
He was one of the group that was responsible for building a 
winter road to Uranium City and they honoured him by naming 
it the Semchuk Trail. 
 
He was also a member of the Credit Union in Meadow Lake 
and was a very able proponent of the great economic work that 
credit unions provided for Meadow Lake area. 
 
He took an active part in organizing sporting events for the 
people of Meadow Lake and he was instrumental in promoting 
one of the first peewee baseball leagues in the province. As 
well, for three years running, he coached the local softball team 
to the provincial finals; and also, in the winter, lent a hand with 
hockey. 
 
(11:15) 
 
He was also involved with the Red Cross, the Salvation Army 
Shield Campaign, and he was also a successful business person. 
He had many, many involvements and was also supportive of 
fighting to have the Meadow Lake Provincial Park become a 
reality. 
 
There’s a whole list of attributes that Mr. Semchuk brought to 
the job. When I knew we were going to be expressing 
condolences, I phoned my parents and asked for some personal 
thoughts about Mr. Semchuk and they had many, many good 
things to say about him. One of the main ones was the Semchuk 
Trail; that he was an MLA for four years and then worked for 
Eiling Kramer, minister of Highways for many years. 
 
Some of the words that were used to describe Mr. Semchuk 
were excitable — he had high energy, was enthusiastic. In fact 
even while standing still, he looked like he was moving. It can 



652 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

be summed up in this: that he was the most energetic MLA they 
had ever seen. 
 
He operated the Red and White Store in Meadow Lake and 
when he entered politics, his wife, Josie, took over the running 
of the store. He enjoyed door knocking and probably knocked 
on every door, and assumed that everybody was a supporter of 
the CCF when he knocked on the door and was astonished that 
some people weren’t. 
 
He was a very good family man and a good father and he 
cherished his children, Carol, David, and Sandra. And he was a 
good husband to Josie as well. 
 
Not many people today are boosters of their community, but 
Mr. Semchuk was an unabashed booster of Meadow Lake. 
When he did lose in 1964, he still went on to work for the 
province of Saskatchewan in Regina. And he was very proud of 
his family. 
 
One of the things that people don’t know about Mr. Semchuk, 
he was also a poet and I’d like to read into the record a poem 
entitled “Northwest” about the constituency in the area of 
Meadow Lake. It’s “Northwest” by Martin Semchuk. 
 

Sometime, somehow in ages past, Unto an area of rock and 
sand, A power greater than our own, Laid down this plot of 
fertile soil, we call our own. 

 
This precious, wondrous, great northwest, We proudly call 
Saskatchewan’s best, Was left here for all generations, To 
enjoy with but few reservations. 

 
The hungry thirties sent us here, To see God’s green 
pastures, And greener trees, We brought our hopes, our 
fears, our dreams, It’s just like yesterday it seems. 

 
The greatest artists of our times, Should paint the scent I 
see, The lakes like diamonds in a green, velvet stand, Then 
again, like silver in rings of golden sand. 

 
These boisterous streams of fabulous waters, So fill my 
eyes with wonder, The hills, the trees, the good clean air, 
All here for all, to have, and to share. 

 
Tho’ death may walk the night in nature’s court, And 
sudden sentence may be passed on sight, To feel with your 
heart, this land of ours, You must learn to read the 
darkened hours. 
 
But, hark! they greet another day, The birds, and the bees, 
and all the trees, The waters glisten, as the fish flash by, 
The flocks, winging into a gold decked sky. 
 
This picture is yours to keep in your mind, For someday, 
somehow, You must find the time, To see all this with your 
own eyes, While all is still here, and before it dies. 

 
I too would like to join with the member from Canora-Pelly and 
the Deputy Premier in expressing my sincere condolences and 
appreciations to Mr. Semchuk for his contributions for the 
province of Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to pay tribute to 
the passing of a former Member of the Legislative Assembly, 
Mr. Delmar Storey Valleau. 
 
Delmar Storey Valleau, who passed away on August 5, 2000, 
was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 1944 to 1948 
as an active service voters representative for the servicemen and 
women in Great Britain. 
 
Mr. Valleau was born on July 1, 1917 in Saskatoon. He spent 
his childhood in Regina and attended the local primary and 
secondary schools. He served at the Royal Canadian Air Force 
during the Second World War, and upon his return to Canada, 
he married Olive Greer on January 29, 1945. 
 
Mr. Valleau was a wheat farmer in Saskatchewan when he 
chose to pursue studies at the University of California at Los 
Angeles. When graduating with his Doctor of Philosophy, he 
joined the faculty of Sonoma State University in California. Mr. 
Valleau played an important role in development of the School 
of Social Science and served as its Chair. He later took a 
leadership role in his capacity as the first Chair of the 
Department of Management, a department which he helped to 
found. 
 
Mr. Valleau was first elected to the Assembly in 1944 and had 
the unique experience of serving as a member at the same time 
as his father. 
 
Mr. Speaker, moved by myself, the member from Yorkton, and 
seconded by the member from Canora Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 
made to this community, his constituency, and to this 
province. 
 
Delmar Storey Valleau who passed away on August 5, 
2000, was a Member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1944 until 1948 as an active service voters representative 
for servicemen and women in Great Britain. 
 
Mr. Valleau was born on July 1, 1917 in Saskatoon. He 
spent his childhood in Regina and attended local primary 
and secondary schools. He served with the Royal Canadian 
Air Force during the Second World War, and upon his 
return to Canada, he married Olive Greer on January 29, 
1945. 
 
Mr. Valleau was a wheat farmer in Saskatchewan when he 
chose to pursue his studies at the University of California at 
Los Angeles. Upon graduating with his Doctor of 
Philosophy, he joined the faculty of Sonoma State 
University in California. Mr. Valleau played an important 
role in the development of the School of Social Sciences 
and served as its Chair. He later took a leadership role in 
his capacity as the first Chair of the Department of 
Management, a department he helped to found. 
 
Mr. Valleau was first elected to this Assembly in 1944 and 
had the unique experience of serving as a member at the 
same time as his father. 



April 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 653 

 

In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 
 

Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, again 
on behalf of the official opposition, I’m honoured to join with 
all members in the Legislative Assembly in recognizing the 
passing of one of our residents, Mr. Valleau. 
 
Though I believe he spent much of his life as a distinguished 
academic in the United States, it is clear from Mr. Valleau’s 
biography that he did contribute mightily to his country and this 
province. 
 
Mr. Valleau served valiantly as a member of the Royal 
Canadian Air Force during the Second World War, just as so 
many brave, young Saskatchewan people did. He also took on 
the interesting and significant role as a member of this 
Assembly representing all our brave soldiers overseas. 
 
Of course, after his time as a member of this Assembly, Mr. 
Valleau made a huge mark at the University of California as a 
leader in the development of not one, but two departments 
there. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, Delmar Valleau led a very 
distinguished and impressive life. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I extend to Mr. Valleau’s 
family our sympathy at his passing. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m also glad to 
have this opportunity to stand and express condolences for Mr. 
Valleau. Mr. Valleau resided in the . . . and was a member for 
the Lake Centre area, as well as being a member during the war 
years for the active service members in Area 1, which was 
Great Britain. 
 
Mr. Valleau served the country well through his time in the 
service, in the armed services, the air force. But when he came 
back, he also served here in his community. He was elected to 
the Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union, was very active in that 
body; elected as president for the Sherwood local and 
committed a great deal of time to helping build the community. 
 
He was continually interested in politics and political life, and 
through some of the articles that he wrote in the paper, letters 
that he wrote to the paper, you got a sense of his commitment to 
social justice and to the good of the community. 
 
In one instance, he wrote in response to an editorial that had 
gone into the newspaper that was challenging the opportunity or 
the right of civil servants to actively engage in politics. And he 
wrote saying at this time there was one of the chief civil 
servants in the United States who was actively campaigning on 
behalf of the Democratic Party there, and he also pointed out 
that the presidential candidate at the time who was also serving 
as a general in the military in the US (United States) was also 
running his presidential campaign while he was a top civil 
servant in the military. 
 
So he had a clear sense that just because you were serving in the 
capacity of civil service, you should not be excluded from your 
democratic rights to also be engaged in the political forum and 
wrote this into the newspaper in Regina. 

He also in some of his own campaigning had to deal with a little 
bit of red-baiting, which was more common then than it is now. 
The member for Prince Albert, a certain John Diefenbaker, at 
the time was saying . . . trying to slander Mr. Valleau by saying 
that he had all the communist support in the particular area 
where he was serving. 
 
Mr. Valleau’s response to that was, well Mr. Diefenbaker must 
have been speaking to those people after I was to get that kind 
of information. 
 
He was a committed socialist. There is no doubt. He brought 
those values to his time of service both in the community and to 
this legislative body. But he also took those values with him 
when he went and studied and got his Ph.D. (Doctor of 
Philosophy) in the US. And he taught very well and taught 
using the example of Saskatchewan and was very, very well 
respected amongst his colleagues for the values that he brought 
into his teaching. 
 
I would like to just read portions of a couple of comments that 
were made following Mr.Valleau’s death. The first is by a 
student who wrote: 
 

Dr. Valleau gave me purpose, a sense of what I wanted to 
do in life. A social science view of management which has 
made me better understand the world in which I live and, I 
think, given me a better appreciation of issues and how to 
develop solutions. We called Dr. Valleau, Del, behind his 
back and when we were in study groups we felt very close 
to him and all of us just thought the world of him. He was 
so proud of me (writes this man) when I was accepted to 
graduate school at UCLA. 

 
He didn’t get to attend graduate school, this student, but he 
much appreciated the grounding that Mr. Valleau had given him 
in the social sciences and respected him greatly. 
 
I would also like to read briefly from the eulogy — the Delmar 
Storey Valleau eulogy — as it was written by Victor Garlin on 
August 21. 
 

Del Valleau, who died on August 5 at the age of 83, when 
he retired Del was a professor in the management 
department, a department he founded in 1967. Now our 
department of business administration. A lifelong adherent 
of socialist ideals, Del was born in Saskatchewan. 

 
And I believe Del was raised . . . He went to high school in the 
Melfort area. It doesn’t say that in this but I think that’s where 
he was, he was raised. 
 
(11:30) 
 
Victor Garlin went on to say: 
 

Most of all Del wanted to use his academic understanding 
and his organizational experience in the service of socially 
useful objectives and to teach others to do the same. He 
never wavered from the view that the application of human 
reason in the service of political organization is the only 
way out of social chaos, oppression, and misery. 

 



654 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

He writes: 
 

To those of us who knew him, loved him, and appreciated 
him, he remains unforgettable. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to add to those of us who have 
read about Mr. Valleau and who have inherited the socialist 
traditions that we try and express through this government, he is 
unforgettable for the gifts that he gave, and we hope that we can 
carry on those traditions and that we can do our best to make 
sure that we use and apply human reason to find a way out of 
social chaos, oppression, and misery for all people. 
 
With those words I add my condolences to the family of Mr. 
Delmar Valleau. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to pay tribute to the passing of a former member of the 
Assembly, Mr. John Kowalchuk. 
 
John was born on August 30, 1921 at the family farm near 
Goodeve, Saskatchewan, the eldest son of Nicholas and Mary 
Kowalchuk. He received his public school education in 
Shappert, a country school about one and a quarter miles from 
his home. He completed grade 9 and 10 by correspondence, and 
then attended the Goodeve High School for grades 11 and grade 
12. 
 
In 1941-42, John received his teaching certificate at Normal 
School in Regina and taught for 14 years at the following 
schools: Wilton, Late Star, Cherryfield, Fenwood, Mount 
Hecla, and Hard Rock. 
 
John was united in marriage to Emma Amelia Dohms on 
September 1, 1951 at Sacred Heart Ukrainian Catholic Church 
in Ituna. After their marriage, John and Emma moved to British 
Columbia. The couple then returned to Saskatchewan in 1952 
and John resumed his teaching career. 
 
On October 8, 1955, John and Emma were blessed with the 
birth of their daughter Joanne. In 1958 John purchased the 
Goodeve Locker Plant and it was here where John first ran as a 
candidate for trustee for the Melville School Unit and was 
elected. 
 
They sold the locker plant in 1961 and they moved to Melville 
where John sold SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
insurance with Peter Elash of Elash Agencies. 
 
During the two years in Melville, the Kowalchuks were also 
farming. The farm was becoming a greater part of their lives, so 
in 1963 they moved back to Goodeve. 
 
John’s public service included chairman of the Melville 
Comprehensive School Board, reeve of the RM of Stanley, and 
chairman of the Melville (North) School Unit Board. 
 
John was a passionate member of the CCF and later the New 
Democratic Party, participating in every aspect of political work 
from the poll clerk to campaign manager. And John eventually 
ran as a candidate for the CCF and was elected. And he served 

as an MLA for the Melville constituency from 1967 to 1982. 
 
John was on the committee which selected the official 
Saskatchewan flag. He served on the committee dealing with 
the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance and the family farm 
protection Act and was the chairman of the committee of the 
land tenure in Saskatchewan regarding foreign and corporation 
ownership. 
 
John was also the first minister of Tourism and Renewable 
Resources in Saskatchewan during which time he was chairman 
of the Saskatchewan Fur Marketing Board and vice-chairman of 
Saskatchewan Forest Products. 
 
During John’s term of office as minister he was involved in 
many, many new programs and projects, some of which 
included the opening of the regional office in Melville and 
Qu’Appelle; an agreement and the signing of the memorandum 
of intent for the Grasslands Park. 
 
It was also during this time that John was instrumental in the 
Battersby Wildlife Protected Area and it would also be one of 
his proudest achievements. 
 
In 1977 John was awarded the Silver Jubilee Medal with 
commendation for his 25-year reign of Her Majesty Queen 
Elizabeth and is intended as a mark of appreciation for 
exemplary community service to all people in all walks of life. 
 
In 1981 John announced that he would not be seeking 
re-election. After his retirement, John served on the board of the 
Rail City Industries. He also served on the Goodeve Village 
Council from 1973 to 1985 — the last three years as the mayor. 
 
John and Emma continued to farm and live in Goodeve until 
they moved to Melville in 1986. John continued to follow 
politics and public affairs and was always an avid reader and a 
debater. 
 
He had many friends in Melville and was a regular member of 
coffee row for many, many years and I know will be greatly 
missed by that community. 
 
On a personal note, Mr. Speaker, I want to add my own 
personal involvement with Mr. Kowalchuk. I know Mr. 
Kowalchuk as being a very quiet and soft-spoken individual and 
who had a tremendous passion for helping people and working 
with communities. And much of his record that I’ve read today 
talked about his involvement in working with individuals, 
young people, and families to help better quality of life in their 
communities. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I know Mr. Kowalchuk to have had a 
very passionate, passionate interest in politics and a very 
inspirational individual to our part of the province. I can 
remember the campaign of 1991 where Mr. Kowalchuk arrived 
in Yorkton to talk about how in fact we would be working at 
trying to win the Melville constituency. 
 
And at that time of course, sitting in this Assembly was an 
individual by the name of Mr. Grant Schmidt, who most of us 
on that side of the province believed that he was the member of 
this Assembly that we would have a very difficult time in 



April 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 655 

 

defeating because of the number of contributions that many 
people believed that Mr. Schmidt provided to his constituency, 
and that he served his constituency in a fashion which many, 
many people believed were exemplary. 
 
But Mr. Kowalchuk said to us on many occasions that it 
required a great deal of hard work and that we needed to knock 
on as many doors as we could in our constituency or in the 
Melville constituency. And because of Mr. Kowalchuk’s long 
interest in community and his service to this Assembly and the 
people of that region, there were very few doors that we 
knocked on at which Mr. Kowalchuk didn’t know people 
personally. And it was through his encouragement and through 
his strength that we were able to win the seat of Melville with 
Mr. Carlson. 
 
And so on a personal note, I want to include that in our record, 
Mr. Speaker. Because on the east side of the province, I want to 
say that people like Mr. Kowalchuk have been a tremendous 
inspiration to those of us who serve in our party and continue to 
work at representing our part of the province. 
 
John will long be remembered for his service to the people of 
Saskatchewan while a member of the Legislative Assembly and 
as a minister of the Crown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would at this time like to move, seconded by the 
member from Canora-Pelly: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of its contribution he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province. 
 
John Russell Kowalchuk, who passed away on August 18, 
2000, was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1967 until 1982 representing the constituency of Melville 
for the New Democratic Party. 
 
Mr. Kowalchuk was born on August 30, 1921 at the family 
farm near Goodeve, Saskatchewan. He received his 
primary education in Shappert. He completed grades 9 and 
10 by correspondence and grade 11 and 12 at the Goodeve 
High School. In 1941-42, he furthered his studies at the 
Regina Normal School, and received his teaching 
certificate. He married Emma Dohmes in 1951 and they 
had one daughter. 

 
Mr. Kowalchuk was a teacher by training but did pursue 
other careers and interests. He owned the Goodeve Locker 
Plant and later sold insurance with Elash Agencies. Mr. 
Kowalchuk’s family has also been involved in farming and 
this became a very important part of much of their lives. 

 
Mr. Kowalchuk demonstrated his commitment to his 
community by a lengthy record of public service. He was 
on the board of the Rail City Industries, he was the 
chairman of the Melville Comprehensive School Board, 
and he was the chairman of the Melville (North) School 
Unit Board for 12 of the 14 years that he served. 

 
Mr. Kowalchuk devoted many years to civic office. He first 

served as the reeve of the Rural Municipality of Stanley. 
Later, Mr. Kowalchuk served as the mayor of the village of 
Goodeve council from 1973 to 1985. 

 
Mr. Kowalchuk was first elected to the Assembly in 1967 
and successfully retained his seat in the following three 
elections. He was appointed the first minister of Tourism 
and Renewal Resources in 1974. 

 
In recording its own deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses its most sincere sympathy with 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I join with the 
government in extending our sympathies to the family of John 
Kowalchuk on his passing. 
 
It’s obvious, Mr. Speaker, that John Kowalchuk was firmly 
committed to this province and to his beliefs. He commitment 
to public service extended from local government to school 
board, to the legislature and to the provincial cabinet. 
 
Mr. Kowalchuk ably served in this Assembly for 15 years and 
spent several years as a cabinet minister. Throughout his life, he 
also farmed, taught school, and was a businessman. Throughout 
his career in provincial politics, John Kowalchuk was also on 
hand for many memorable times in Saskatchewan, including the 
selection of our official flag. 
 
Mr. Kowalchuk was recognized for his commitment to public 
service in 1977 when he received the Silver Jubilee Medal. It 
should be noted that John Kowalchuk remained committed to 
his community and this province long after leaving political 
life. 
 
Once again, to his wife, Emma, and their daughter, Joanne, and 
to the rest of John’s family, the members of the official 
opposition note with sadness the passing of John Kowalchuk. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise with 
respect and to add my sympathy and condolences to the 
Kowalchuk family on the passing of Mr. Kowalchuk. 
 
I did not know Mr. Kowalchuk personally, although we did on 
occasion have some discussions about issues that may have 
been considered to be debatable. However, I would like to add 
to what the Deputy Premier and the member from Canora-Pelly 
has said about Mr. Kowalchuk and his service to the people of 
this community and the people of this great province of ours. 
 
Very evidently, Mr. Speaker, it’s obvious the high esteem in 
which Mr. Kowalchuk was held — to be elected, to serve for 15 
years in this venerable institution. People that did know Mr. 
Kowalchuk, and who knew him from the times he spent in his 
many efforts on behalf of his community . . . communities 
throughout his constituency and throughout the province, used 
words like, very caring attitude towards others, towards the 
welfare of his neighbours. And that being one of his most 
obvious attributes. 
 
And as we’ve heard the eulogies that have been expressed that 
has come through loud and clear — the high esteem in which 



656 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

this gentleman was held. 
 
I just wanted to read an excerpt from the letter that Mr. 
Kowalchuk wrote in 1981 when he announced that he would 
not be seeking re-election. And this typifies again his deep, 
sincere feeling towards his involvement and his opportunity to 
serve the province and his constituency: 
 

Nearly 15 years have passed since I was first elected as a 
representative of the people of the Melville constituency in 
the Saskatchewan legislature. It’s a lot of years that have 
gone into serving the people of Melville and community — 
years which I have never regretted; years which were 
challenging and productive; years which I look back on 
with a great deal of pride and satisfaction. 
 
As I prepare to take leave of public life, I want to thank the 
many fine people who have given me encouragement and 
support over the years. Serving as your representative in the 
legislature has been challenging and rewarding. I’m retiring 
with the satisfaction of knowing that our constituency has 
shared in the benefits of Saskatchewan’s progress and that 
my time in the legislature has been worthwhile. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I believe that typifies and exemplifies the true 
feeling that Mr. Kowalchuk did have for this province and for 
this venerable institution. And I would like to extend my sincere 
sympathy and condolences to his family. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d also like to say a few words about John Kowalchuk 
and express my sympathy to his wife and his family. 
 
I had the great privilege of serving with John and I enjoyed the 
time that we spent together very much. 
 
John Kowalchuk was a warm and gracious person. He had a 
love of people and, as other members have said, he was very 
well loved by the people of the Melville constituency and he 
was a very well-respected member of this Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
John always had a twinkle in his eye and a warm smile. And I 
know that when I was first elected to the Legislative Assembly, 
he was very kind to me — and kind to me in a lot of ways in 
terms of giving me good advice, being supportive of me even 
when I may have made some comments that not everybody in 
my caucus agreed with. And I certainly enjoyed the time I spent 
with John. 
 
And John was very knowledgeable on a wide array of issues 
that impacted on his constituents. As my colleagues have noted, 
he served both at the municipal level and also in the education 
field. He was the chairman of the Melville (North) School Unit 
Board and he was the reeve of the Rural Municipality of 
Stanley and served on the Goodeve village council. 
 
He made many contributions in the discussion we had in the 
government caucus on education issues and on issues related to 
municipal affairs. And he was very knowledgeable on a wide 
array of rural matters and rural concerns and had a passionate 

interest in the environment and in matters pertaining to natural 
resources. And it was very logical that he was appointed as 
Minister of Tourism and Renewable Resources in 1974. 
Unfortunately, because of health reasons, he had to step down 
from that portfolio. 
 
And in the years that I was serving with him, he was serving as 
a private member. And we served together on the caucus 
Committee on the Environment and Natural Resources, where 
John would have a very keen eye for potential difficulties that 
draft legislation that we were looking at might pose, and he’d 
make very useful suggestions about how we could accomplish 
our goals with this legislation, but make the changes that were 
needed to ensure that it wasn’t going to create problems for 
local people on the farm or in the bush. So he had a keen eye 
for making sure that we accomplished our goals, but did it in a 
way that was going to meet the needs of people in his 
constituency and in this province. 
 
John Kowalchuk was committed to building a more 
compassionate society in our province. And I saw that reflected 
in many ways during the years that I served with him in the 
government caucus. 
 
He also had a strong commitment to ensuring that 
Saskatchewan gained control of our natural resources — our oil 
and our potash. And that was a commitment that we both felt 
very strongly about. 
 
And he was very committed to building a province in which 
there was a fair share for all and he made a very important 
contribution towards achieving that. 
 
And finally I might say that John had a passion for our 
God-given environment. And I enjoyed working with him in 
helping to ensure that that passion was reflected in the 
government legislation that we passed in the early ’80s. There 
were a number of important environmental bills that were 
passed in ’81 and ’82 that John and I had the pleasure of 
working together on with Ted Bowerman, who was the minister 
of Environment at the day. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I feel Saskatchewan’s lost a great man in John 
Kowalchuk. And I want to express my sympathies to his family 
on his passing. And I think he’ll be long remembered in this 
province for the work he did. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — I would request the indulgence of the House 
at this time to pay tribute to Yvonne Mack, a legislative 
employee. 
 
Yvonne Mack joined the Legislative Library in 1989 as the 
first member services librarian. It was her work which 
developed an approach to MLA information service unique at 
the time in Canadian provincial legislatures and which has 
provided a model to other smaller legislative libraries since. 
 
Yvonne was a leader in her professional community, taking on 
executive positions in the Special Libraries Association, 



April 20, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 657 

 

Western Canada Chapter. 
 
She was a woman of the information age, attuned to the 
developments of electronic information and the Internet, 
constantly on the outlook for ways to use these new 
developments to provide a valuable and useful current 
information service to the members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Yvonne was diagnosed with advanced breast cancer in 1994, 
only six months after the birth of her much-loved twins — 
Nicholas Allen Mack and Alexander Fee Quon. 
 
Even as her illness worsened and difficult treatments were 
endured, Yvonne continued to be engaged in the outside world, 
returning to work as much as her health would permit. 
 
She was devoted to her young family. 
 
Yvonne died in Regina on September 17, 2000 at the age of 40. 
 
We express regret at the passing of this respected, fine young 
professional, whose spirit and courage during her long struggle 
with cancer was an inspiration to all who knew her. Our 
sympathies are extended to her husband, David Quon, and 
family, who are with us here today. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to join with you 
in paying tribute to the immense contribution of Yvonne Mack 
to our common service for those of us who serve in this 
Assembly, and also to express appreciation for her work and for 
her life to her family, to her husband David, and her sons, 
Nicholas and Alexander. 
 
As you most appropriately outlined, Mr. Speaker, she came to 
our Assembly back in 1989 and became our first member 
services librarian. In many ways this was I think for Yvonne, 
the crowning conclusion to a distinguished career in the world 
of library studies and library service. 
 
I think those who knew Yvonne recognized that it was a 
profession that became a labour of love for her because 
throughout her entire life she was one who loved the written 
word and exceeded only by her love for her family. 
 
And it was certainly my privilege, Mr. Speaker, when I served 
in your office, to come to know Yvonne’s love for her work in 
this building. And also I think for those who were close to 
Yvonne, to appreciate her tremendous capacity to love life right 
to the very end. 
 
It is without a moment’s doubt that I am absolutely positive that 
the bedtime story in the Quon-Mack household was a sacred 
event. And I know that the love for the written word is 
something that is shared by her husband David and also by the 
boys. 
 
I will long remember the opportunity that I had to visit with 
Yvonne the last day that she served in this building, when she 
was taking leave to deal with her health. And we went and met 
in her office, in her kingdom, and talked about just the joy and 
the privilege of being able to serve in a profession that she 
loves, in this building, and for the tremendous purpose of 

service to her province as well. 
 
And it’s kind of interesting that, although she was taking leave 
to deal with her health, Yvonne’s spirit was typically upbeat 
and positive and very much indicative of just her positive 
outlook on life in so many kinds of ways. It was, I think, an 
indomitable spirit. 
 
And it was through her final years, with a great deal of love and 
respect by her colleagues in the Legislative Library and 
throughout the Legislative Assembly, that Yvonne knew that 
she had tremendous support from people who are here. 
 
If prayers and good wishes could heal, Yvonne’s illness would 
have gone away very rapidly. I know that she has developed 
some tremendous friendships and common loyalties from 
people who are here in this building that served together with 
her. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that Yvonne neither beat cancer but 
nor did she become a victim of cancer, because she refused to 
allow that to happen. And her experience of her life and love of 
life became even deeper as a result of that. 
 
I will long remember as well, on September 29 of last year, 
attending the celebration of Yvonne Mack’s life at the Hotel 
Saskatchewan. And a good number of her friends and 
colleagues — and those are the same for Yvonne — from the 
legislative services here, were there. 
 
And it was a wonderful, wonderful celebration, Mr. Speaker. It 
was a time in which certainly those who were there felt a sense 
of sadness, of loss, but because of Yvonne and her indomitable, 
positive spirit being what it was, it really became one of those 
things that we so often hope for but so rarely achieve when we 
come to a celebration of life. It truly was that. 
 
And I was touched by being able to meet at that time, and to . . . 
and just to be witness to so many expressions of love and 
appreciation from so many facets of Yvonne’s life, and 
including from those who are attached to the services of the 
Legislative Assembly, and the members here, a great source of 
pride for Yvonne. 
 
I think there’s no more appropriate way to conclude a tribute to 
Yvonne Mack than to directly quote her own words when she 
commented on her struggle with the final period of her life. And 
she said this, and I quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

This experience is not about how I will die, it is about how 
I will live. So I will live each day and try to do it the way I 
want — with dignity, humour, and with as much energy as 
I can muster. 

 
And it is with the recognition of the tremendous statement 
about the love of life and living each day to its maximum that 
was so typical of Yvonne throughout her 40 years, Mr. Speaker, 
that I want to conclude by saying to her husband David and to 
her sons, Nicholas and Alexander, thanks for sharing Yvonne 
with us. And thanks for sharing your mom with us here, with 
the members of the Legislative Assembly, and the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



658 Saskatchewan Hansard April 20, 2001 

 

Yvonne Mack, Mr. Speaker, will be thought of very fondly for 
a long, long time. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege 
to be able to rise today to talk of the life of Yvonne Mack. 
 
Yvonne was in the library when I first got elected in 1991 and 
we shared some common interests — particularly computers. I 
was always in there talking to Yvonne about how can I access 
the information that you have available. And we would carry on 
this discussion, because I could find out what she had available 
over . . . at that time it wasn’t really the Internet, but through a 
BBS system. 
 
But then I would have to go and to actually talk to her to get the 
files that I wanted. And so we would always discuss why this 
couldn’t be improved and changed. And that is very much what 
Yvonne was working on and enjoying. 
 
I remember coming out of our caucus office one day, and 
Yvonne was coming down the hallway just after the birth of her 
two children, and she was introducing them for the first time to 
the legislature. And she was there with her twin carriage, side 
by side. Both the boys were there, and she introduced them to 
me as Nicholas and Alexander. And I always remember that, 
Mr. Speaker, because that is the name of my son, Nicholas 
Alexander. So it was a memorable moment. 
 
I’d like to offer my condolences to husband David and to 
Nicholas and Alexander. 
 
I enjoyed working with your mother and she is missed in this 
legislature. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to move, by leave of the Assembly, a motion, 
seconded by the member from Souris-Cannington: 
 

That the resolution just passed, together with a transcript of 
oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — I would like to thank all the members for their 
service to the people of Saskatchewan through this legislature 
and wish all members a weekend of good cheer. This House 
stands adjourned until Monday at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:03. 
 
 
 


