















































Hansard: May 10, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1041 
 May 10, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
the EMS report was released late last year, it struck fear and 
consternation into many of the communities that I represent in 
the extreme southwest. One of the communities in particular is 
the town of Richmound, which would have a 50-mile call for an 
ambulance to respond. And as a consequence, they have signed 
this petition in large numbers. The petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of Fox Valley, 
Richmound, Leader, and Sceptre, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of people in the Bruno 
telephone exchange area who would like to become part of the 
Humboldt telephone exchange. And the prayer reads as follows, 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 

 
And the signatures on this petition are from the communities of 
Humboldt, Nokomis, Bruno, and Carmel, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
to present today from people in my constituency who are 
concerned about the recommendations of the Fyke report. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctorial services available as well as laboratory, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services available to 
users from our district and beyond. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Elfros, and Kuroki. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from across the southwest part of Saskatchewan who are 

concerned with the state of the hospital in Swift Current. And 
the prayer of their petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by residents of the city 
of Swift Current, Rush Lake, Stewart Valley, Sceptre, 
Hodgeville, Kyle, Mankota, Shaunavon, and Tompkins. I so 
present. 
 
Mr. Harper: — I have a petition here from some concerned 
Saskatchewan citizens expressing interest in funding of school 
divisions. And the prayer goes: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 
increasing the foundation operating grants to school 
divisions by $40.8 million for the fiscal year of 2001-2002, 
the largest increase in 15 years. 

 
And this petition is signed by the good citizens of Fort 
Qu’Appelle and Regina. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about retaining their current 
ambulance system. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Ceylon, Radville, and 
Buchanan, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here, 
citizens concerned about the high rates of SaskPower, 
SaskEnergy: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to Saskatchewan consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Pilot Butte, Davidson, Regina, 
and Elrose. 
 



1042 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned about their ambulance service. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners are from the good community of Leroy. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the energy 
rate rebate program: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, and Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition of 
concerned citizens of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed from folks from Assiniboia, 
Lafleche, McCord, Willow Bunch. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again I 
rise with a petition to stop further cuts at Assiniboia Pioneer 
Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signators on this come from 12 different 

communities ranging from Coronach to Crane Valley. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
These are addendums to petitions presented as sessional papers 
no. 3, no. 5, no. 57, no. 58, no. 121, and no. 136. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, SELECT 

AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 
 

Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 
 

Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As Chair of the 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills, the standing 
committee presented the fourth report of the said committee 
which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and has 
agreed to report the same without amendment: 

 
 Bill No. 301 - The International Bible College Amendment 

Act, 2001 
 Bill No. 302 - The Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation 

Act, 2001 
 Bill No. 304 - The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 

Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001 
 Bill No. 305 - The St. Anthony’s Home Repeal Act 
 

Your committee has considered the following Bills and has 
agreed to report the same with amendment: 

 
 Bill No. 303 - The Providence Hospital, Moose Jaw Repeal 

Act 
 Bill No. 306 - The St. Thomas More College Act, 2001 
 

And further: 
 

That the fees respecting Bills 301, 302, 303, 305, and 306 
be remitted to the petitioners less the cost of printing. 

 
That is moved by myself, and seconded by the member from 
Moose Jaw Wakamow: 
 

That the fourth report of the Standing Committee on 
Private Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Standing Committee on Public Accounts 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it is my pleasure to rise as Chair of the Public 
Accounts Committee and present the first report of the second 
session of the twentieth-fourth legislature to the members in the 
House. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, before I move the concurrence motion that 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1043 

 

will be seconded by the Vice-Chair, the member for Northeast, 
I’d like to indicate that the deliberations of the Public Accounts 
Committee have been many. We began our first meeting back 
on February 19, 2000, and since then, we’ve had the 
opportunity to meet well over a dozen times, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to indicate to the members that we had many, many 
issues to look at and to deliberate over. We had the Finance 
minister’s Special Audit Committee that had presented a report 
based on its recommendations about the changes necessary to 
The Provincial Auditor Act. We also had a report from the 
Provincial Auditor himself about recommendations. In our 
deliberations, we also enlisted the assistance of the Law Clerk 
of the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Ring. 
 
So after many, many meetings, we have come together to 
present the recommendations that you see in the report that I 
just tabled. 
 
Mr. Speaker: 
 

I move, seconded by the member for Regina Northeast, that 
the first report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 39 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister Responsible for Liquor and Gaming: what 
is the total number of days allotted for the horse racing 
season this year; is this number less than in other years; are 
there projected losses for the horse racing season; and, if 
so, what is that projected amount? 

 
Thank you. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to introduce to 
you and through you to the rest of my colleagues, sitting in the 
west gallery, 45 students from grade 8 St. Thomas Elementary 
School in Eastview, my riding in Saskatoon. 
 
With them are their teachers Gisele Jean-Bundgaard, Laureen 
Goulet, and Kelli Boklaschuk and their chaperone Sharon 
Chicoine. 
 
I’d like to welcome all of them and ask my colleagues to join 
me in that welcome and I look forward to meeting them later on 
in the day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wanted to 
welcome here to this Assembly and through you, Mr. Speaker, 
and to my colleagues and to the people that are here, I want to 
welcome, sitting in your gallery, a young lady that served this 
Assembly well during the last session, Ms. Charla Borowski, 

who has just returned from a five and a half month trip to 
Europe and will be proceeding on to Oregon to take on 
chiropractic studies, I understand, the medical chiropractic 
study. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure everyone here will remember the 
yeoman duties that this young lady performed in this Assembly 
and to welcome her back and wish her well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the second 
consecutive day I’d like to rise and introduce a group of 
students from the constituency of Cypress Hills. It’s not very 
often that this long trip is made on two successive days. But in 
your . . . I’m sorry, in the east gallery we have 16 students from 
the grade 5 class of Fox Valley and we’d like to offer them our 
special welcome today, because that is a long trip in a school 
bus. 
 
And with them are travelling Nicole Stein, Perry Anton, 
Charlotte Anton, Lori Ries, Colleen Schmitz, Roxanne Ternes, 
and Laura Lodoen. And we’d like to welcome all of them here 
today. And I appreciate this opportunity to introduce those 
students to you, Mr. Speaker, and to my colleagues. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, some very important people in my 
life — my wife Loretta, along with our youngest daughter, Jo 
Anne; our son, Stacey, and his wife, Chantel Perrin. And as 
well is with them my son-in-law, Darcy Furber. 
 
Welcome to the legislature and I hope you enjoy the 
proceedings, and I hope the opposition isn’t too tough on me 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you an old friend of this legislature who is sitting behind the 
bar, Mr. Clint White, who was a member in the southern part of 
Regina during the Blakeney government. 
 
And he’s a person who lives in my constituency and has 
provided me with very good advice over a lot of years. And I’d 
like to say thank you to him publicly and also welcome him 
here to the legislature. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Legacy of Milton Fair 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of all 
the members on this side of the House, I would like to send our 
sincere condolences to the family and friends of Milton Fair 
who passed away in Edmonton a few days ago. 



1044 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

As we all know, Mr. Fair was the chief executive officer of the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool, serving in that capacity from 1982 
until his retirement in 1994. 
 
As testament to his commitment to the agricultural community, 
Mr. Speaker, Milt spent nearly 30 years serving the 
Saskatchewan Wheat Pool and its clients. He was well 
respected in the community, not only for his business savvy but 
also for his management style. 
 
During his tenure as Pool CEO (chief executive officer), Milt 
was responsible for leading the company through some 
challenging times and was credited with spearheading the 
Pool’s progress during that period. 
 
He was a strong supporter of innovative agriculture and made 
the company a leader in specialty crop production and 
value-added processing — one of the many initiatives that were 
implemented to try to aid our troubled agricultural economy. 
 
Milt and I served on many industry task force committees and 
agriculture related initiatives and in so doing became a very 
close personal friend. 
 
So once again, our sincere condolences go out to Milt’s family 
and friends of his . . . and his friends on his untimely passing. 
And we wish them much comfort and strength in the days 
ahead. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SRNA Nursing Excellence Awards 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Monday I was 
pleased to announce to the Assembly that this week is National 
Nursing Week. One of the points I made in recognizing the 
12,000 Saskatchewan health professionals who are registered 
nurses, registered psychiatric nurses, and licensed practical 
nurses, is that the variety of work they perform is far more 
extensive than is commonly known. 
 
Last night in Saskatoon an awards ceremony was held which 
gives concrete evidence of this fact. The local chapter of the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses Association announced its 
annual Nursing Excellence Awards in five categories, and each 
category is but one example of how nurses serve. 
 
Primarily of course, the Excellence in Nursing Awards 
ceremony provides an opportunity for nurses to honour their 
colleagues for their contributions to the nursing profession. I 
want to announce the award recipients. 
 
The nursing practice award went to Janine Koroluk, who nurses 
at the Kinsmen Children’s Centre. The excellence in nursing 
education award was given to Patti Simonar from the Royal 
University Hospital emergency department. Carleen Sutherland 
from Royal University Hospital was recognized for her work in 
professional nursing administration; while Monica Beavis of the 
Saskatchewan Health Care Corporation received the corporate 
nursing administration award. Finally, to recognize the nurses 
of tomorrow, the student leadership award went to Grant Fraser 
in the nursing education program. 
 

My congratulations to these five, and again, during Nursing 
Week, to all Saskatchewan nurses. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Former Minister Resides at Hotel Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I noted with interest 
a story that appeared on the front page of this morning’s 
newspaper. It seems, Mr. Speaker, that the cozy relationship 
between at least some of the members opposite and the labour 
leaders may be coming a little frayed. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Idylwyld, former minister of 
Finance, Economic Development, CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), has grown so attached to the 
luxurious surroundings of the Hotel Saskatchewan, her home 
away from home as it were, that she cannot bear to leave. Even 
though continuing to stay there means crossing a picket line on 
a daily basis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the current strike at the hotel caused the Prince of 
Wales to change his accommodations when he visited our city a 
couple of years ago however this former queen of the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) will not be deterred. But the union 
members walking the picket line can take heart. That member 
says she only uses the hotel for accommodations and does not 
visit the bar or use the restaurant. She does, however, avail 
herself of the hotel steam room. 
 
It’s only too bad the member doesn’t have a better relationship 
with the folks over at CIC and the Crowns. If that was the case 
she could probably use Ron Clark’s steam bath without turning 
her back on her union brothers and sisters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Math Competition 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It gives 
me great pleasure to share with the Assembly the recent success 
of several grade 6 students at Greystone Heights School in my 
constituency. 
 
A group of five students are enjoying the national spotlight after 
placing first in a math competition against 568 schools from 
across Canada. The 40-question, timed exam was coordinated 
by the University of Windsor math department. Students from 
across the country wrote it the same day and the top five scores 
from each school were considered in the national ranking. 
 
Greystone Heights School placed first, achieving a mark of 178 
— one mark higher than the Academy for Gifted Children in 
Richmond Hill, Ontario. The scores were also used to identify 
the top individuals in Canada and in each province. The 
Greystone Heights students took the top five individual 
placements in our province. 
 
The five students and their scores out of 40 were: Bobby Xiao, 
who scored 39 points; David Wang with 38 points; Yi Song 
with 35 points; Hope Huang with 33 points; and WuDi Wu with 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1045 

 

33 points. 
 
Bobby Xiao and David Wang placed second and fifth 
respectively in Canada, with Yi Song placing tenth. 
 
This is an outstanding achievement by the students and their 
school and their teachers, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to formally 
congratulate the fine efforts of these students and their teacher, 
Susan Kargut, and their principal, Dr. Neal Garvie, and all other 
students who took part in this competition throughout our 
province. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Special Olympics Plaza Dedication 
 

Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I had 
the distinct pleasure to attend an extremely important event that 
took place on Saturday last, May 5. On this day at the Gateway 
Mall in Prince Albert an impressive event was held to dedicate 
the plaza adjacent to the said mall. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a large crowd was gathered to witness the 
dedication of the Special Olympics Plaza in recognition of the 
2002 Canadian Special Olympic Games to be hosted by the city 
of Prince Albert. 
 
The host for this event was Mr. Phil Fredette who has the 
privilege of chairing the Special Olympics Games Committee in 
Prince Albert. But extra recognition must be given to Greg 
Dionne, the manager of Gateway Mall, for donating the plaza 
for renaming during this run-up to and during the games. 
 
The Special Olympics Games host committee also introduced 
their mascot, Mr. Speaker. Oly the Eagle made his first 
appearance of which will be many public appearances I’m sure. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I wish to inform the House that 
Jaymee Longclaws from Christopher Lake in my constituency 
was presented with a bicycle for coming up with the mascot’s 
name. Mr. Speaker, I ask all members to please join me in 
congratulating Jaymee Longclaws, Oly the Eagle, Greg Dionne, 
and Phil Fredette for the extra-special dedication. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Chili for Children Fundraiser Banquet 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had the good 
fortune of being able to attend a wonderful event on Friday 
night, the Chili for Children banquet that was held at the Centre 
of the Arts. 
 
Many artists from the Aboriginal community donated pieces of 
art and those pieces of art brought significant return for Chili 
for Children. It was an excellent fundraiser. 
 
Chili for Children, as most of you will know, helps in the daily 
struggle to feed young children in our community. The physical 
benefits Chili for Children brings to students is very obvious 
but what receives less attention are the broader benefits that it 

brings not only to the children but to the community; those who 
are able to volunteer their time and learn about working 
together in community. 
 
It’s a tremendous organization that has done tremendous work, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Friday night’s gala fundraiser featured four student speakers 
who had researched, written, and then delivered four very 
moving and powerful speeches about racism, unity of cultures, 
peer support in relationships, and the value of community. The 
four dynamic speakers are: Melissa Barnhart, Kelly Anne Cyr, 
Denise Uhryn, and Nicki Smith. The speeches were very 
moving, very powerful. 
 
During the evening, Mr. Speaker, we ate well, we received a 
wonderful program, and we all enjoyed the opportunity to help 
Chili for Children, a wonderful organization. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I hope all will thank them for their 
work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mental Health Week 50th Anniversary 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to rise today to 
speak on the celebration of the 50th anniversary of Mental 
Health Week in Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Canadian Mental Health Association has spent 
the past five decades devoting to . . . devoted to educating the 
public about mental illness and mental-health issues. In 
partnership with many organizations, the Canadian Mental 
Health Association has increased public awareness and 
understanding about mental health. 
 
While we know that there are significant advancements and 
progress over the years, we also know that there’s much work 
remaining to be done. There is still so much that is not known 
about mental illness. Many individuals still daily deal with the 
social stigma and isolation and uncertain future. We must all 
make a commitment to work to increase public awareness and 
understanding. Governments must ensure that there’s adequate 
funding to cover the costs associated with mental illness. 
 
It is not just the individuals who suffer, Mr. Speaker, but 
families and communities as well. Mr. Speaker, our mental 
health must never be taken for granted. We must strive to 
ensure that mental health is given the same priority as the needs 
of physical health patients in this province. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Cabinet Review of Drinking Water Quality Strategy 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier. 
 



1046 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

Prior to the current crisis in North Battleford, was cabinet ever 
warned that there is a high potential for a Walkerton-type crisis 
here in Saskatchewan? And was cabinet ever given a specific 
action plan to prevent this from happening in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
Saskatchewan Party has obtained a cabinet decision item, dated 
September 22, 2000. This decision item was prepared by SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management), 
Saskatchewan Health, and Sask Water, and it contains grim 
warnings about the safety of Saskatchewan’s water supply. It 
says, and I quote: 
 

. . . several key problems pose an elevated safety risk and 
threaten the security of Saskatchewan’s drinking water 
supplies to the degree that the potential for a “Walkerton” 
type situation exists within the province. 

 
Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . the potential for a “Walkerton” type situation exists 
within the province. 

 
Mr. Speaker, on September 22 of last year, the departments of 
Health, Environment, and Sask Water warned cabinet of the 
potential for a Walkerton-type crisis right here in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP ignore these warnings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very, very much, Mr. 
Speaker. First of all cabinet takes its job very seriously. There is 
no question that I’ve stood up in this House on a number of 
occasions talking about some of the proactive work that we 
have done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have put money into infrastructure programs. 
Mr. Speaker, we have done a number of other initiatives that’s 
very, very important. 
 
And what I want to ask the Leader of the Opposition is to do 
one thing, is to not speculate and not fearmonger. His party and 
his leadership have been doing that to Saskatchewan for a 
number of months, and enough of that fearmongering and 
speculation, I say to that member, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:00) 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, that entire caucus along with 
that leader, Mr. Speaker, they got up and they voted against the 
budget that called for 10 more additional people to help with 
water quality — 10 more, Mr. Speaker. What did they do? They 
have the audacity to get up today and say what are you guys 
doing? And not more than several weeks ago, Mr. Speaker, they 
got up and they voted against that budget, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the cabinet decision item 
goes on to say: 
 

In the aftermath of events in Walkerton, Ontario, an 
assessment of water supply systems and the related 

monitoring and protection programming . . . was 
conducted. 

 
Mr. Speaker, will the government release that assessment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, first of all, as soon as that 
information becomes available, it will be released. We are 
doing all that we can to make sure that we’re able to eliminate 
and to make sure we’re able to alleviate some of the challenges 
with water quality standards across this province and, 
hopefully, eventually lead the whole nation. 
 
And again I go back to my earlier statement, Mr. Speaker. We 
have been open and honest and accountable on all fronts of this 
particular challenge — on all fronts, Mr. Speaker. And what I’ll 
go back to tell the Saskatchewan people we are going to do that 
during the inquiry, we’re going to tell people exactly what went 
wrong, where and when. And if we can learn from this, Mr. 
Speaker, we will certainly learn. 
 
But the bottom line here and the questions I received from the 
Leader of the Opposition and from that caucus, Mr. Speaker, is 
all of a sudden now they’re getting up and saying, oh, what’s 
going on, why aren’t you helping Saskatchewan more with their 
water quality problem. And not more than two or three weeks 
ago they voted against a budget that increased the staff to help 
with monitoring water quality across the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
rather odd that the minister knows so little about this issue since 
his name was on the cabinet decision item document. Mr. 
Speaker, did the water quality assessment discussed in the 
cabinet decision item specifically look at the water treatment 
system in North Battleford? And will the government release 
those findings? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we looked across a wide 
variety of Saskatchewan communities and that work is going to 
continue. We’re going to work very closely with Health, with 
the Municipal Affairs portfolio, and with SERM, and with Sask 
Water as well, Mr. Speaker. We’re not taking this job very 
lightly at all. 
 
And one of the most important things, Mr. Speaker, is that 
we’re going to work with all the communities in making sure 
that we understand the roles and the responsibilities associated 
with providing all citizens of Saskatchewan with safe drinking 
water. 
 
And there’s no question that I stood in this House and I talked 
about the fact that it’s going to be a challenge. It’s going to 
continue being a challenge not only for Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, but for the whole country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And once again I go back to my earlier statement, Mr. Speaker. 
Whether they want to admit it or not, now they get up and they 
say oh, you guys should not have hired those kind of additional 
people. On this side of the House our act is together, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We have done a lot of proactive work and we are prepared to 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1047 

 

show off that work in the future, Mr. Speaker, and to make sure 
that we don’t politicize this process. And above all else, we 
don’t speculate and go back on our word. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we’re asking some very important questions of the minister 
about a cabinet decision item, and up to this point he hasn’t 
responded. Perhaps this one, which is very important, he will 
respond to. 
 
I quote again from the document. It says: 
 

At present . . . (121) Saskatchewan communities . . . have 
drinking water treatment deficiencies . . . 

 
One hundred and twenty-one communities — that’s an 
alarming number. 
 
Will the government release a complete list of the 120 
communities in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we 
will do, as we mentioned, is we’ll be open, honest, and 
accountable. That’s what we said we would do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And one of the things that we done last year as a result of some 
of the action — there’s been a lot of work being done — and 
one of the things that we done was we increased the staff. 
 
What did we increase the staff for, Mr. Speaker? For the lab — 
to make sure we are able to respond to some of the tests that are 
submitted to the lab for water quality challenges of all the 
communities. 
 
What are some of the other things done, Mr. Speaker? We 
increased some of the support staff in Sask Water. And what are 
some of the other things we’ve done, Mr. Speaker? We’ve 
increased the staff support for SERM, Mr. Speaker. All that is 
designed to help with water quality challenges across the 
province and to make sure we address the problem. 
 
So what you have is you have increases in four direct staff, Mr. 
Speaker, in four direct areas to help with water quality 
challenges in this province. 
 
We voted for it, Mr. Speaker, and they voted against that, Mr. 
Speaker. So you tell me who is not doing their job in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’ve asked the government five questions and given them five 
opportunities to make the public aware of the quality of water in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The cabinet decision item talks about the need to — and again I 
quote, Mr. Speaker — “raise public awareness and education 
for protection from unseen perils.” 

I’m sure most Saskatchewan people would be unaware that 
there are 121 communities with drinking water treatment 
deficiencies. 
 
I would say, Mr. Speaker, and ask through you to the minister: 
if he truly wants to raise public awareness, if he really meant 
what he wrote in that document, will he release the list to the 
people of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again for the 15th or 
20th time, as the Minister of SERM, we will release all the 
information that we have in a timely fashion so that the press 
and certainly the public of Saskatchewan and the opposition can 
get as much information as they want. We are going to be 
honest, open, and accountable on some of these fronts. 
 
And in saying that, as well, Mr. Speaker, I would invite the 
Leader of the Opposition to table that CDI (cabinet decision 
item) today. I want to have a look at that CDI and see exactly 
what note he’s making a point on. 
 
But as I mentioned before — I’m going to say this time and 
time again — the hypocrisy that’s associated with the 
opposition is just amazing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First of all they vote against a support system for all people in 
Saskatchewan that would help with water quality guidelines and 
to make sure that we’re able to make absolutely sure that a 
SWAT (special weapons and tactics) team’s in place to make 
sure that the people of the province can have a support team in 
place. We voted for that, Mr. Speaker, and all 26 of them across 
the way, Mr. Speaker, they voted against that. 
 
So what is up with that particular challenge, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t know if the minister 
understands the gravity of the situation. This document paints a 
grim picture about the safety of Saskatchewan’s water supply. It 
talks about 121 communities with deficient treatment systems. 
It talks about Saskatchewan people facing a high degree of risk. 
It actually talks about the possibility of a Walkerton-type 
situation here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But then you get to the communication strategy. And what does 
it say, Mr. Speaker? The government’s key communications 
message should be that the systems currently in place are 
effective. That’s what we’ve been hearing from this 
government; they’re following their communications strategy. 
This document clearly outlines the water quality crisis in 
Saskatchewan, but the government’s key message is 
everything’s fine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can we believe anything this government 
ever tells us again, if they won’t even tell us the truth about the 
safety of our water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — . . . the opposition to table that 
document. I want to have a copy of that document. So I’d 
challenge the minister . . . that member to table that document. 
 
And what I will say, Mr. Speaker, what I will say is that the 



1048 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

water quality challenges across Saskatchewan and across this 
province is something that people have to be aware. It’s an 
incredible challenge, Mr. Speaker, incredible challenge. 
 
And on this side of the House, we were proactive. We wanted 
to make sure we weren’t sitting on our hands saying, oh we 
have water quality problems, what can you do about it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we put a budget in 
place that talks about infrastructure. We put a budget in place 
that talks about increasing funding for a number of different 
staff members out there, Mr. Speaker. A budget in which they 
all voted against that, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps 
we can refresh the minister’s memory a little by reading directly 
from his own document, the cabinet decision item document 
that he is unaware of, supposedly: 
 

Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management 
(SERM), Sask Health, and the Saskatchewan Water 
Corporation . . . are requesting approval of a recommended 
drinking water quality strategy to reduce the current high 
degree of risk found in water supplies in the province (of 
Saskatchewan). 

 
. . . several key problems remain that pose an elevated 
safety risk and threaten the security of Saskatchewan’s 
drinking water supplies to the degree that the potential for a 
“Walkerton” type situation exists within the province. 

 
Is the minister denying the very statement that his own 
department is making? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Once again, I’m going to tell the 
opposition that we take that role very seriously on this side, that 
we have identified that there are challenges with water quality 
problems across the province and across the country, Mr. 
Speaker. There is nobody immune to that challenge. 
 
And what I will say to the member is exactly what I’ve said 
time and time again. We’ve done a document. We identified 
some of the challenges and some of the problems. And we’re 
addressing them. We’re being very proactive. We’re not going 
to sit on our hands and say gee, this problem is going to go 
away on its own. 
 
We had to stand up and take a very strong leadership role as the 
government. And that’s exactly what we done, Mr. Speaker, in 
spite of the fact that 26 of them on the opposite benches voted 
against the budget that helped address some of these challenges, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday, the 
minister couldn’t even answer questions around routine policy 
and procedures of his own department. Today, he’s denying the 

existence of a CDI with his own signature on it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cabinet decision item contains a number of 
recommendations that could have prevented the current 
problems in North Battleford. It says, and I quote: 
 

SERM and public health officials have requested enhanced 
monitoring capabilities including microbiological testing 
(for) . . . pathogentic bacteria, giardia, (and) cryptosporidia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, last fall SERM and Saskatchewan Health wanted 
to start testing for cryptosporidia. Why was this request ignored 
by cabinet? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, what I want to point out 
once again to the opposition, is very clear. We take our role 
seriously on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. And that 
document that they’re making reference to, Mr. Speaker, who 
initiated that document? This government, Mr. Speaker. This 
government initiated that document because we knew that there 
was challenges across the province, if not across the country, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And furthermore, not only did we work on that document, Mr. 
Speaker, but . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Not only did 
we put our name to that document, Mr. Speaker, and this is a 
government strategy, but we also worked very, very hard to try 
and accomplish some of the objectives associated with that 
document. And we’re not saying that this is an overnight 
solution, that every problem is going to be solved overnight, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But what I will say is that there is two points I’ll make. Number 
one is that we initiated the document. And number two is, what 
would we have done in Saskatchewan had we taken their advice 
and fired those 10 extra people that we hired for water quality 
monitoring, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The cabinet 
document goes on to say: 
 

At present there is no way for SERM and health districts to 
have immediate access to each other’s databases. Decisions 
may be delayed as to the proper action to be taken due to 
the lack of an integrated system. This can subject the public 
to unnecessary risks. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is incredible. Back in September the 
government was told that a lack of communications between 
departments could lead to slow decisions and unnecessary risks 
to the public. And isn’t that exactly what happened in North 
Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why didn’t the minister listen to these warnings? 
 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1049 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said time and time 
again, we initiated the document because we could not stick our 
head in the sand and pretend that this challenge did not exist in 
the province of Saskatchewan. As a government, we wanted to 
find out exactly what challenges that we were facing. And 
we’re prepared to put that particular challenge on paper, Mr. 
Speaker. And it makes reference to the CDI that he speaks 
about. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, is this government did take a 
proactive stance — we did, Mr. Speaker. Look at the 
infrastructure dollars that we’re spending, Mr. Speaker. Look at 
some of the increases in Saskatchewan Health with the 
provincial lab, in terms of trying to get the tests done in a timely 
fashion. 
 
(14:15) 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, we’re putting ten and a half 
full-time positions, Mr. Speaker, in place to help the 
communities with their water quality challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I say to those members across the way, Mr. Speaker, we put 
that CDI in place. We’re going to act on it. We have acted on it. 
We have a lot more work to do. But we are not going to stick 
our heads in the sand and pretend this challenge does not exist 
for this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This cabinet 
document also identifies huge potential liability for the 
government — something that that minister and this 
government have also denied. It says that Saskatchewan Justice 
has reviewed the current legislation and has found that the 
provincial government could be exposed to potential claims for 
injury or loss stemming from SERM’s failure to regulate in its 
assigned areas. 
 
So not only is the government exposing the people of 
Saskatchewan to serious health risk, they are exposing 
Saskatchewan taxpayers to a multi-million-dollar liability risk. 
Once again, these predictions have come true. A class action 
suit is being launched and Saskatchewan Justice is saying the 
province is liable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why didn’t that minister and this government 
listen to these warnings? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, this 
government takes her role very seriously when it comes to 
water quality. 
 
We are going to work very hard to work alongside the 
municipalities, with the city, with a number of other 
organizations to make sure water quality standards are followed 
and to make sure that we’re able to provide safe water to all the 
residents of Saskatchewan as a whole. 
 

Now what did this government do, Mr. Speaker? Well we 
responded with a CDI. We said, we’ve got to look at this. And 
this is exactly what we’re doing, Mr. Speaker. What did this 
government do? We also increased our funding for 
infrastructure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What did this government do? We also increased our staff to 
SERM, to Health, and to Sask Water, and to a number of other 
areas to make sure that we’re able to have the team in place to 
respond to some of these challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what’s more amazing, Mr. Speaker, to me, is that we have 
certainly put that document into place. We want to make sure 
that we’re proactive and we continue moving along in that 
direction. And if there’s improvements to be made, we’ll make 
them. 
 
But what’s most amazing, Mr. Speaker, is they voted against 
the budget to make a good, sound effort to try and resolve this 
particular issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This cabinet 
document also clearly shows the NDP was warned about the 
severity of this problem back in September. They knew that 
over 100 Saskatchewan communities had deficiencies in their 
water systems. 
 
They knew that they should have been testing for 
cryptosporidia. They knew they needed better communications 
between departments. They knew that a lack of communications 
could lead to delays and they put the public at risk. They knew 
the provincial government could be exposed to damage claims 
as a result of contaminated water. 
 
They knew all of this back in September. And what did they 
do? Nothing. Well, they went off to have their leadership 
convention and they put public safety at risk. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP ignore the warnings that they 
themselves issued last September? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, thank you very much. 
First of all, nobody ignored any document, Mr. Speaker, that 
the cabinet puts in front of all the ministers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re . . . it’s very important, as I mentioned time 
and time again. We want to make sure that we take our roles 
very seriously on this side. In case there’s a problem out there, 
we want to find out about it, Mr. Speaker, and that’s why the 
CDI was designed — to do exactly that. Now we’re on our way 
to making a lot of different efforts to make sure that we 
alleviate this particular problem. 
 
But what I will say again to the people of Saskatchewan is that 
in the inquiry that’s being planned for the Battlefords area, we 
have said we welcome the inquiry. As the Minister of SERM, 
we welcome that because the inquiry will certainly point out a 
lot of deficiencies in this system. Whether these deficiencies 
need to be improved through policy improvements, all that 
particular challenge is in front of us, and we’re going to look at 
that. 



1050 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

But what I will say again, Mr. Speaker, is as the Minister of 
SERM I’m proud of this government’s effort to try and resolve 
the water quality problems across this province. And I will say 
again, you voted against that budget; we voted for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, part of the cabinet decision 
item required that Saskatchewan Health was to have submitted 
a report by March 2001 as to the status of progress on these 
recommendations, and that Sask Water was supposed to have 
provided a report by March 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister and has the government received 
either of those two reports? 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I will be more than pleased to table 
the cabinet document identified as no. 1170-01/CDI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And once again, as the Minister of SERM, I’m very pleased to 
stand here and defend this government’s efforts towards helping 
resolve the issue of water quality problems across the province, 
and certainly trying to help across the nation. 
 
And some of the progress we’ve made, Mr. Speaker, is 10 
additional staff within SERM to help with standards and with 
testing of water across the province — nothing wrong with that, 
Mr. Speaker. And I also have here a list of some of the 
communities that had boil-water advisories last year that are 
now being improved . . . or being approved for infrastructure 
funding to help with water quality standards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial health lab now has an additional 
four and a half people to help with testing, so testing is able to 
be done faster, Mr. Speaker. And above all else, Mr. Speaker, 
we have gone throughout the province and staying on top of the 
issue and working with a lot of communities to make sure we’re 
able to stay on top of the challenges facing water quality. 
 
And once again, Mr. Speaker, that’s progress. They voted 
against that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for North Battleford 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the government refused 
an emergency debate into the North Battleford water situation. 
Today the people of North Battleford were shocked when the 
Minister of Municipal Affairs announced there was no funding 
for North Battleford. Why don’t they accept there is a problem? 
 
Four days ago the federal Liberal government allowed an 
emergency debate and voted for an opposition motion. The 
Saskatchewan NDP refused an opposition request for an 
emergency debate because, in the words of the Government 
House Leader, it was important the NDP show it couldn’t be 
pushed around. Besides, of course, there’s so much important 
and crucial legislation before us, such as the Bill proclaiming 
needle-and-thread grass the provincial emblem. 

Why the slap in the face? 
 
My question for the Premier. Will he stand in his place and 
formally overrule his Minister of Municipal Affairs in saying 
there is nothing for North Battleford? Will he stand in his place 
and overrule the decision yesterday and follow the example of 
the federal Liberals in allowing an opposition motion, and vote 
for it, as he should? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure 
where that recommendation for no funding came from. Perhaps 
it was from the former minister of Municipal Affairs. Because, 
Mr. Speaker, when we met with the people from the community 
of North Battleford — my hometown, Mr. Speaker — we 
assured them, the Premier assured them, that we would look at 
any aspect of any program where we might be able to assist 
them, sooner rather than later. 
 
We looked into the provincial disaster assistance program and 
when I was asked by someone whether or not there was money 
available to that community under that program, I did say no, 
Mr. Speaker. There wasn’t under that program, because the 
criteria did not apply. 
 
But I did assure the people, as did the Premier, and we will live 
up to that commitment to do everything we possibly can to 
resource monies to help that community and help the citizens 
— not only that community, but throughout the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENT BY THE SPEAKER 
 

Ruling on Points of Order 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day I would just like to make a statement with respect to 
some proceedings yesterday. 
 
Yesterday while the Assembly was considering a motion under 
rule 46, two points of order were raised. I’ve had the 
opportunity to review the record and I’m prepared to rule on 
both matters. 
 
The first point of order was raised by the Government House 
Leader concerning the comments made by the Leader of the 
Opposition in seeking leave under rule 46 for this motion. Rule 
46 does not require notice but does permit the mover to explain 
the “urgent and pressing necessity” of his or her motion. 
 
This has been consistently interpreted by the Speaker as a very 
brief and concise statement indicating why the mover believes 
the matter is of an urgent and pressing nature to warrant the 
setting aside of the normal business of the House, along with 
the reading of the motion itself. 
 
In reviewing the words of the Leader of the Opposition, I find 
that his comments stretched beyond the normally accepted 
boundaries. I draw members’ attention to a statement by the 
Speaker on March 16, 1999 wherein it was held that a mover 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1051 

 

might not introduce material that is more in the nature of the 
debate itself when seeking leave under rule 46. 
 
Therefore I find that the point of order is well taken. 
 
A second point of order was raised by the Opposition House 
Leader in regards to the comments made by the Government 
House Leader in denying leave under rule 46. The Opposition 
House Leader then sought to have these comments expunged 
from the official record. 
 
I wish to point out to members that Speakers in this Assembly 
have never been authorized to strike matters from the official 
record. This is the prerogative of the Assembly itself. The 
request of the Opposition Leader can therefore not be granted. 
 
I do wish to make one further observation on the proceedings of 
yesterday. The approach taken by the Government House 
Leader to voice his thoughts were not in order. There is no 
formal process provided to respond to a request under rule 46 
other than a yes or a no. 
 
The Government House Leader could have sought leave to 
make his explanation. It may seem unfair for the mover of an 
emergency motion to be able to articulate why he or she 
believes the matter is of urgent or pressing nature, but for those 
of opposing views to be precluded from voicing their reasons 
for denying leave. 
 
However, this is not a matter that the Speaker is authorized to 
change. Rather I would encourage any member who would like 
to see a change in the current practice to raise the matter with 
the Special Committee on Rules and Procedures. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day I ask for leave to introduce a number of motions with 
respect to changes to committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Deputy Chair of Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana, that by leave: 
 

Mr. Ron Harper, member for the constituency of Regina 
Northeast, be appointed to preside as Deputy Chair of 
Committees of this Assembly. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I also move, by leave: 
 

That the name of Mr. Warren McCall be substituted for the 
name of Mr. Lindy Kasperski on a list of members 
comprising the Standing Committee on Constitutional 
Affairs. 

 

Motion agreed to. 
 
(14:30) 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I also move, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Mr. Warren McCall be substituted for that 
of Mr. Lindy Kasperski on a list of members comprising 
the Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Continuing Select Committee 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I also move . . . or 
Mr. Speaker, I also move, seconded by the member from 
Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Ms. Deb Higgins be substituted for that of 
Mr. Lindy Kasperski on a list of members comprising the 
Continuing Select Committee. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I also move, seconded 
by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Ms. Deb Higgins be substituted for that of 
Mr. Lindy Kasperski on a list of members comprising the 
Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Substitution of Member on 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — And finally, Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatoon Nutana: 
 

That the name of Carolyn Jones be substituted for that of 
Mr. Lindy Kasperski on a list of members comprising the 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — To ask leave to move a motion of urgent 
and pressing necessity under rule 46. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member kindly read the motion 
into the record and briefly state the nature of the motion. 
 



1052 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think by now 
all members know the nature of the motion. I will be brief and 
concise. It calls upon the federal government to work with 
provinces to put in place a water quality infrastructure program. 
We’ve informed the Government House Leader of our intention 
to move this motion, though we are under no obligation to do so 
under rule 46. 
 
I understand that in the spirit of co-operation the Premier will 
second the motion. This is a very serious issue that should be 
debated by this Assembly without further delay. 
 
So once again I ask for leave to introduce the following motion: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government in 
consultation with provincial governments to develop and 
fund a national water quality infrastructure program, and 
that this initiative be added to the agenda of the western 
Premiers’ conference, the annual Premiers’ conference, and 
the next first ministers’ meeting. 
 

The Speaker: — Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

National Water Quality Infrastructure Program 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Premier, the member for Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government in 
consultation with provincial governments to develop and 
fund a national water quality infrastructure program, and 
that this initiative be added to the agenda of the western 
Premiers’ conference, the annual Premiers’ conference, and 
the next first ministers’ meeting. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the government for the 
agreement to this emergency debate and thank them for their 
co-operation. As we all know, Mr. Speaker, just recently in the 
federal parliament, the issue of water quality and standards for 
water was debated in our national parliament. And there was a 
rather broad consensus, both on the opposition side and the 
government side, in our federal parliament that there needed to 
be national standards set for water quality. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in the light of that willingness of our federal 
government to become more involved in the assurance that we 
have good quality water — which is something that all 
Canadians expect, certainly all people in Saskatchewan expect 
— I think that the motion that we are debating today is very, 
very appropriate; and it gives an opportunity for us at the 
provincial level, both on the government side and the 
opposition, to agree to take this a step farther and ask the 
federal government to show that they will put their money 
where their mouth is and participate in a national water quality 
infrastructure program. 
 
And it of course would be funded by municipalities, as now 
currently happens, by the province, as now currently happens, 
but also, and more importantly, by the federal government. We 

do know that the existing programs are not sufficient to deal 
with the water quality problems that we have here in 
Saskatchewan, and therefore, Mr. Speaker, we believe we 
should strike while the iron is hot. 
 
But furthermore, Mr. Speaker, in light of the leaked cabinet 
decision item no. 1170-01/CDI, we recognize how badly 
needed a national water infrastructure program is here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. We recognize from this document 
that there are 121 communities in our province that have 
deficiencies in their water treatment facilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people in Saskatchewan are beginning to realize 
that they cannot trust the glass of water they drink, and we 
know how much of a basic staple good drinking water is for the 
people of our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan cannot be trusted, as proven by this 
document, to deal with this issue alone. And again, we need to 
welcome the federal government to become more involved in 
ensuring that we have good safe water to drink in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, funding is required. I was rather dismayed 
yesterday as I saw the Minister for Municipal Affairs get up 
time and time again from his seat and basically say the funding 
is in place, the situation is being dealt with satisfactorily. Mr. 
Speaker, the cabinet decision item makes it clear that this is not 
the case — 121 communities where the water treatment 
deficiency, not enough money to rectify the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the document indicates that the province has 
off-loaded on municipalities. Mr. Speaker, we know that 
municipalities feel like they have been abandoned by this 
provincial government. We just have to think about the recent 
budget that this government introduced by the Minister of 
Finance, one that did not increase revenue-sharing grants with 
the municipalities after years and years of reduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province has been a participant in creating the 
water crisis that many communities are experiencing today in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in North Battleford not just a few people have 
been sick; not a few dozen people have been sick but actually 
hundreds of people have been sick as a result of drinking the 
water from that system. Mr. Speaker, there are people in Regina 
who passed through North Battleford and had a drink of water 
and they have become sick. There are people in other provinces 
who have passed through North Battleford and become sick 
drinking the water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of the situation in North Battleford, the 
focus of not only our province but of the whole country and 
even beyond the borders of Canada is on the community of 
North Battleford and wondering why the water system and the 
treatment of drinking water in that province could have gone so 
terribly wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only are the people of North Battleford 
plagued with unsafe drinking water, but there are 37 boil-water 
advisories currently in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Thirty-one communities who do not have safe drinking water 
and have to boil the water that comes out of the tap before they 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1053 

 

can drink it. 
 
And now we learn from this leaked cabinet document that there 
are 121 communities that have drinking water deficiencies. Mr. 
Speaker, that is shocking, that is disturbing, and it indicates that 
we do need a national water infrastructure program funded by 
three levels of government to deal with the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many existing water treatment works and 
distribution systems are nearing or have a exceeded their 
operational life. This is again part of the leaked document that 
the official opposition tabled in the House this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you have facilities that have reached or 
exceeded their operational life, obviously those facilities need 
to be replaced. And that again requires immediate action. And 
we are calling on all three levels of government to deal quickly 
and efficiently in solving this problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we find out today that the cabinet of our 
Government of Saskatchewan knew back on September 22, of 
last year, that they had a big problem — they had a huge 
problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is it that a half a year later, more than half a 
year later, it’s the opposition that has to raise this issue in the 
legislature? Why isn’t that government standing up for the 
people of Saskatchewan? Why haven’t they been calling for a 
national water quality infrastructure program? 
 
Because they knew back in September of last year that they had 
big, big problems. Why was their strategy, their communication 
strategy, to say let’s just assure everybody that everything is 
okay and let’s pretend that it’s not a serious problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial government needs to improve its 
infrastructure itself when it comes to dealing with water quality. 
Not only can we point the finger at municipalities, our cities, 
towns, and villages, and rural water systems, and farm water 
supplies and say that there’s real concern about the quality of 
the water and the way that the water is treated, but we recognize 
from this leaked cabinet document that the Government of 
Saskatchewan’s own infrastructure in dealing with water quality 
is lax and insufficient. 
 
We read from this document, Mr. Speaker, that the provincial 
lab is not accredited. And the document expressed real concern 
that the provincial laboratory itself did not meet national 
standards. 
 
That, Mr. Speaker, is a horrible revelation of inadequate 
management by the government. Mr. Speaker, the provincial 
laboratory that tests our water samples is not an accredited 
facility. Mr. Speaker. The document that we tabled in the House 
today goes on to say that, as a province, we are unable to 
monitor for cryptosporidia among other impurities in our water 
system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re unable to deal with the problem that has 
contaminated the water of one of our major cities, the city of 
North Battleford. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the document goes on in an indictment of this 

government and says that the database that they use to handle 
the dealing of . . . the handling of information with regards to 
water quality is outdated. We have a database system that isn’t 
doing the job, isn’t providing adequate service to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, and something that again became 
obvious because of the North Battleford crisis, the document 
back in September of last year indicates that there is no good 
way to communicate between SERM and Sask Health. You 
imagine the two departments that the people of Saskatchewan 
have to trust — have to trust their very lives with, Mr. Speaker, 
that that water that they’re drinking out of their taps is safe — 
don’t even know how to communicate, don’t even know how to 
pass data back and forth between them. 
 
And the document points out that there could be a real time lag 
after a problem occurs before it’s identified and dealt with 
properly. Mr. Speaker, the government itself has a deficit in 
infrastructure when it comes to the treatment of water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need this issue raised amongst first ministers 
in light of the irresponsible actions of the NDP government 
across the way. 
 
The cabinet document item presented . . . was presented by 
several people, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure the people of 
Saskatchewan will hold them accountable for their inaction in 
this regard of not dealing with the quality of Saskatchewan 
water and ensuring people that their water was safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister for SERM is a presenter of this 
document. No wonder he doesn’t want to discuss blame, Mr. 
Speaker. He knew, and he admits in the document that we were 
susceptible to a Walkerton type of crisis. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was in the document last September, even 
though today in question period, he denied that that was the 
case. In fact, his own document revealed that over half a year 
ago we were vulnerable, long before the North Battleford issue 
rose to the surface. 
 
Not only was the minister responsible for SERM aware of what 
was going on and responsible, Mr. Speaker, the minister 
responsible for Sask Water was also a presenter of this cabinet 
document. Mr. Speaker, he’s still the minister responsible for 
Sask Water. He knew and did not stand up and warn the people 
of Saskatchewan that we had serious problems ensuring that we 
had safe drinking water in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another person’s name who was on the document 
was the associate minister of Health — no longer in cabinet but 
in the cabinet at that time — and, Mr. Speaker, the associate 
minister of Health last year in this House assured the people of 
Saskatchewan, and I read from Hansard, May 25, 2000, that: 
 

Saskatchewan has a very good tracking system and a 
follow-up system. 

 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s in direct contradiction to the evidence 
provided in the cabinet document. And, Mr. Speaker, as she 



1054 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

goes on to say that: 
 

If the results have higher than acceptable levels of 
contamination, repeat testing is done as soon as possible 
. . . And an appropriate action is initiated immediately, such 
as a boiling water advisory to the communities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, she was asked a similar question by the member 
from Indian Head-Milestone. She kept repeating assurances that 
our drinking water was safe and that the monitoring was 
efficiently handled. And finally at the end of the questioning 
she said: 
 

What I have said is that Saskatchewan has a very good 
tracking system and follow-up. 

 
And yet, Mr. Speaker, as the cabinet document revealed, our 
own infrastructure in the provincial government, the 
departments of SERM and Health, are insufficient to allow her 
to make that kind of a commitment to the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Not only was the minister for SERM aware of this document, 
not only was the minister responsible for Sask Water aware of 
this document, not only was the associate minister of Health 
aware of this document but, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
North Battleford was a member of that cabinet. He sat at the 
cabinet table when that document was discussed. He knew that 
drinking water was not safe in Saskatchewan. He knew that 
there was 121 communities that had insufficient water treatment 
facilities and he did not raise his voice. 
 
I do not know why the member from North Battleford was 
silent for these many, many months, Mr. Speaker, but he chose 
not to raise the issue and warn the people of Saskatchewan that 
we need a national quality infrastructure program in this 
country. And, Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that his constituents in 
North Battleford will have a lot of questions for him after it’s 
revealed today that he sat at the cabinet table, saw this 
document, and did not raise the alarm bells and warn the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
Also the Minister of Education sat at that table and was aware 
of that document, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of Education is a 
medical doctor. He knew what cryptosporidia was. He knew 
what some of the problems could be if this situation was not 
dealt with. And the member for Saskatoon Northwest, the 
Minister of Education, sat silent and didn’t warn the people of 
Saskatchewan about the impending danger and the sickness that 
could result from not warning the people of Saskatchewan 
about the inability that we have as a province to ensure that our 
drinking water is safe. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I could also mention the current Minister of 
Health who was a minister in that cabinet that sat around the 
table. The former premier obviously was aware of the problem. 
And possibly, Mr. Speaker, the current Premier was aware of 
the problem because at the time he was an employee of 
Executive Council and adviser to the premier, and we believe 
very, very aware of what was going on around the cabinet table. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are many, many people that have a lot of 
answers to provide to the people of Saskatchewan about why 

our water is not safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need more, and we need better water quality 
infrastructure. Much of it is worn out. We are prone to 
Walkerton type of crisis. 
 
SERM, we understand, Mr. Speaker, is liable, is legally liable 
for any damage suits that may be brought against it because of 
its inability to ensure that our water is safe. The testing of our 
water is not meeting the requirements that SERM has set 
forward. There is not compliance to the degree that compliance 
is supposed to occur. And that means that SERM, according to 
the Saskatchewan Department of Justice, is legally liable for 
damages and harm caused by impure water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, water quality is of importance and is of prime 
concern to all Canadians, no less so here in Saskatchewan. I’m 
encouraged that our federal counterparts are concerned about 
water. And I wish, Mr. Speaker, that our government here in 
Saskatchewan, the NDP, would show the same concern and 
would show some respect for the people of Saskatchewan by 
dealing honestly with them and straightforwardly with them 
with regard to the quality of water and the lack of the ability of 
this province to ensure that our water is safe. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased that the Premier has agreed to 
second the motion today, because in seconding this motion the 
Premier has provided himself an opportunity to very 
immediately address this problem. He can come clean with the 
people of Saskatchewan. He has the opportunity to say that the 
government has made mistakes, and he has the opportunity to 
talk about how he will rectify the problem. But you can’t fix a 
problem, Mr. Speaker, until you recognize there is a problem 
and that you’re responsible for it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this cabinet . . . the leaked cabinet document 
shows without a shadow of a doubt that this government is 
responsible for the quality of water. It shows that they were 
aware of the lack of ensuring that our water quality was good. 
Without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, this government was aware, we 
know that clearly. They were aware of the entire situation. They 
recognized that Saskatchewan’s water was like a ticking bomb 
ready to explode. Well one blew up in North Battleford, Mr. 
Speaker, and others may blow up in the near future, given the 
evidence from this document. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased that the Premier has agreed to 
second this motion, and I call on him to address the concerns of 
the people of Saskatchewan, to address the concern that was 
raised in his very own cabinet document that we have discussed 
today. 
 
And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move, seconded 
by the Premier, the member from Saskatoon Riversdale: 
 

That this Assembly urge the federal government, in 
consultation with provincial governments, to develop and 
fund a national water quality infrastructure program; and 
that this initiative be added to the agenda of the Western 
Premiers’ conference, the annual Premiers’ conference, and 
the next first ministers’ meeting. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1055 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
is . . . I am grateful for the opportunity to be able to second the 
motion that has been moved by the Leader of the Opposition 
calling upon the federal government to develop — as the 
motion reads — a national water quality infrastructure program 
applicable to communities across Canada, and also that 
discussion about these issues be included on the agenda of the 
Western Premiers’ conference, the annual Premiers’ conference, 
and the next first ministers’ meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to express a word of appreciation to the 
Leader of the Opposition, and particularly to the House Leader 
who forwarded notice of this proposal to my office by way of a 
copy of a letter to the House Leader yesterday at four in the 
afternoon. That was much appreciated. It gave us a change to 
look at the motion that would be made today, an opportunity we 
did not have yesterday, Mr. Speaker. And I much appreciated to 
have the opportunity to look at the motion and therefore to be 
able to make some decision about my own view of the motion 
and what we might do as a government and a caucus in light of 
that motion. 
 
I may say also, Mr. Speaker, that I think this process has 
worked well because when the motion was initially brought to 
us it proposed reference of this issue, not to the Western 
Premiers’ conference. And I was pleased that I could suggest 
through my House Leader to the House Leader opposite and the 
members of the opposition that it seemed to me, particularly as 
I had this opportunity to chair the Western Premiers’ conference 
later this month, that this too would be an important venue for 
this discussion to occur and opposition has agreed. And we 
were able to, I think, strengthen the motion as a result of a 
conversation and a dialogue. 
 
And so I think what will come today from our legislature . . . I 
am confident will come as a motion from this legislature calling 
upon our national government to establish the infrastructure 
program that the motion proposes, and that we would seek to 
have these issues discussed at the various conferences we’ve 
talked about. 
 
I may say, Mr. Speaker, I will have some ability, I hope, as 
Chair of the Western Premiers, to bring this issue to that table. 
 
The planning for the Premier’s conference will occur in August 
when the agendas will be set and we’ll be working with my 
colleagues across country for the Premier’s conference. But if I 
may say just to inform the House that when it comes to the 
agenda of the first ministers’ meeting, that agenda is set by the 
Prime Minister. We will certainly be sure that our voice is heard 
but that is his agenda and he will set it. But hopefully, it will 
include this important issue. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the Leader of the Opposition 
and his comments to this resolution. I appreciate, of course, the 
genuine call that we’re all making for a national infrastructure 
program around water issues. Much of his remarks this 
afternoon focused on discussion of the document that was 
identified in question period and I expect there will be further 
discussion, both in the media and in this House, about this 
document. 

But let me say this just in general principle, Mr. Speaker. It 
appears to me, having not seen this document, it appears to me 
that officials in this government, at a variety of levels, were 
identifying issues and problems as early as last fall — as early 
as last fall. I would not want to lead a government that did not 
have officials who were identifying for the elected sitting in the 
cabinet room the issues that are present in the province. 
 
From those identification of issues, Mr. Speaker, whether it’s 
through the document or this draft document or whether it’s a 
document at all, but obviously through the identification of 
issues around water in our province that sets some of the 
foundation for legislative program and budget planning. 
 
And I think it’s entirely fair to say — and I’m sure even the 
Leader of the Opposition would agree with me — that in this 
current budget under debate in this legislature, there is evidence 
of this government taking steps to deal with some of the 
identified issues. 
 
Now are the steps complete? Are they totally sufficient? Likely 
not, Mr. Speaker. But surely no one can say that having had a 
problem identified, there has not been action taken. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And in regard to that action, Mr. 
Speaker, while I and members of the legislature and members 
of the public have heard almost on a daily basis since the 
Minister of Finance introduced the budget — almost on a daily 
basis — particularly the member from Saltcoats stand in his 
seat and tell us, and tell us, that we should not be putting in 
place new public servants in the province of Saskatchewan; that 
we should not be putting in place the new social workers called 
for by the member from Humboldt; that we should not be 
putting in place the new Highways workers called for by the 
member from Cypress Hills; and not putting in place therefore 
the new lab people to deal with water quality. 
 
So I ask members of the opposition, is it your view today — the 
view that you’ve held all through the budget debate — that we 
should in fact not put these people in place to deal with water 
quality in the province? I think that question deserves an answer 
from members of the opposition who at least until today have 
taken the position they should not be put in place. 
 
Now that said, Mr. Speaker, I had opportunity this week to 
spend a short period of time with the mayor, council, city 
administration, and other citizens — both formally and 
informally — in the community of North Battleford. 
 
I want to say to the member from Battleford who stood in his 
place today and picked up on the misinformation that is in the 
press today. I want to make it very clear, in our conversations 
with the mayor and city council of North Battleford, we had 
discussed a wide number of issues including if I may say, Mr. 
Speaker, the mayor and the city council’s appreciation that we 
have put in place a judicial inquiry to discover the facts of the 
matter here. I’m told not supported by the member from 
Battleford but clearly supported by the mayor and the city 
council. 
 
In that discussion, in that discussion, Mr. Speaker, the mayor 



1056 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

and city council . . . we talked about a number of potential, 
potential solutions to the infrastructure problem in North 
Battleford. The mayor and council asked a very, very specific 
question of our minister of Municipal Government. The 
question being very specific: could the community of North 
Battleford receive benefit under the provincial disaster 
assistance program? A very narrowly focused but existing 
program. 
 
It was a fair question. The minister said he would, with his 
officials, check the program and see if this was an opportunity 
that could help. In fact, the provisions of that specific program 
does not apply in this circumstance and the minister of 
Municipal Government reported that yesterday. 
 
This has been misinterpreted by the press and I fear by the 
member from Battleford today in the House. That he said, Mr. 
Speaker, as the member chirps from his seat . . . Didn’t say a 
word about this problem, I notice, for a week in this House, not 
a week, didn’t say a word. Now he wants to speak from his seat. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is under that specific 
program, funding cannot be available for this purpose. And that 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well he can speak all he wants. 
It’s about time. 
 
Does that mean that no funding is available? Not at all, Mr. 
Speaker. And even as we speak, our officials, officials in the 
city of North Battleford, our minister, the mayor and council are 
in conversation about potential opportunities that we might 
have. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Now it is a circumstance like North Battleford that raises 
attention, not just provincially, but nationally. And this morning 
I think many of us heard reports on the radio about the number 
of boiled-water advisories in the province of Newfoundland. 
I’m told well over 200 in the province of Newfoundland. It is 
not just a problem for Saskatchewan communities, as the 
Leader of the Opposition has pointed out, it is a problem for 
communities across the nation. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, therefore it is, I believe, appropriate that we 
from this legislature call upon our national government to put in 
place a national infrastructure program to assist communities 
across the nation in dealing with this circumstance. 
 
I think we all realize, Mr. Speaker, that water is not confined by 
our human boundaries in this land. That those particularly of us 
who draw our water from surface waters, know that that water 
crosses borders and boundaries — flows interprovincially. And 
therefore, I think, another good argument for a national 
infrastructure program to deal with water quality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased that in many ways Saskatchewan has 
led the way. The first, I am told, the first province to commit to 
infrastructure through the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program. The first province to commit to infrastructure to our 
communities to deal with water quality issues. And we’re going 
to hear more about that later this week. The minister has talked 
about it. I’m pleased that we’ve taken some leadership here. 
 

I am pleased today to be joining with the Leader of the 
Opposition in seconding this motion and would be pleased to 
vote for it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to join 
into this debate. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, with leave for the introduction of 
guests please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you to the 
member for North Battleford for yielding. 
 
I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, and to all 
members of the Assembly three gentlemen that are seated in the 
Speaker’s gallery: Mr. Glen Burns, Mr. Bill Woods, and Mr. 
Rob Lobdell. 
 
These gentlemen represent the West Central Road & Rail group 
out of the west central area of Saskatchewan where myself and 
the Hon. Leader of the Official Opposition reside. And they 
have done a great deal to assist in the whole difficult question 
of grain transportation in that area. 
 
And I would want all members of the Assembly to welcome 
them here this afternoon. And also to pay a little bit of tribute to 
the ongoing work, unpaid work, that they have been doing on 
behalf of producers in west central Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much. With leave to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Ms. Atkinson: — I want to join with my colleague, the 
member from Kindersley, in welcoming our guests to the 
legislature. I know that the Premier and myself will be meeting 
with them later this afternoon and we’re looking forward to a 
very productive meeting. 
 
So I join with my colleague, on behalf of the government, in 
welcoming our guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

National Water Quality Infrastructure Program 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank you to 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1057 

 

members who have kindly allowed me to participate early in 
this debate. As I think most members are aware, there is a 
public meeting in North Battleford this evening that I’m 
anxious to attend. 
 
I also want to say that I appreciate the fact that the Premier and 
some of the ministers have visited North Battleford this week. 
And it was appreciated. But I have to say that it is not a good 
mark for this province that the federal government and the 
federal parliament, the Parliament of Canada, was so much 
quicker to respond than was this legislature. 
 
I’m pleased that this debate is proceeding today. But in Ottawa 
the federal government set an example for us by allowing an 
emergency debate sponsored by the opposition to proceed, and 
what’s more, the government voted for that emergency motion. 
 
Now it’s taken us four days longer than the federal government 
to catch up. I don’t think that speaks well for us, but 
nonetheless, I am pleased that we now too recognize as a body 
— not as political parties, but as elected representatives — the 
seriousness of this issue and the importance we deal with it for 
all the people of Saskatchewan and all the people of Canada. 
And certainly although I represent a community particularly 
under the spotlight now and having particular needs, I think we 
all know that the entire of Canada is going to be facing similar 
issues and we need to deal with our infrastructure now. 
 
It is an irony that Canada has more fresh water than any other 
nation in the world. We have over 20 per cent of the world’s 
fresh water. One of the defining characteristics and qualities of 
our great nation are the mighty rivers and the huge lakes that 
dot our entire landscape. 
 
Yet in spite of that fact, we now find that we are increasingly 
unable to guarantee to Canadians, especially those who do not 
live in the larger cities, the birthright of a safe, clean, water 
system supply. 
 
Well I am pleased that this debate is proceeding today, and I am 
pleased that we are endorsing the concept of national standards. 
Mr. Speaker, one-half of the communities in Canada which are 
facing boil-water orders are in the province of Newfoundland. I 
point out that fact because I think it makes it clear that without 
national standards the smaller, poorer provinces will inevitably 
be left behind. Safe, clean water should be a birthright of all 
Canadians and should not be dependent on the wealth of the 
province in which we happen to live. 
 
So we in Saskatchewan should be very anxious to have the 
federal government come in. Members of the government have 
mentioned the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. 
Now that is some $187 million over the next five years. Most of 
it is going to go to water and waste-water programs. I was 
pleased to be a signatory of that program. Certainly it’s 
important. But I think we know that that program alone is 
simply not going to be able to address the full magnitude of the 
problem. 
 
For example, Mr. Speaker, replacement of the sewage treatment 
plant in North Battleford alone is $13 million. Now that’s just 
the sewage treatment plant. That isn’t the water treatment plant. 
And of course North Battleford is just one smaller city in this 

country so that gives us some idea of the magnitude that is 
going to be required if we’re going to address this for the whole 
of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we in North Battleford have been through a lot 
and from all reports I’m receiving we are probably going to be 
boiling water and buying water for at least another month. We 
appreciate the support we have received from other 
communities and from corporations which have brought water 
to North Battleford. And we don’t want any other community in 
this province to have to face both the difficulties and the 
negative publicity with which we are now having to deal with. 
We hope that no other community in this province will have to 
face the crisis that we have faced. 
 
One of the things I would like to see instituted immediately is 
cryptosporidium testing, mandatory and regular, throughout the 
province. The government has announced a judicial inquiry. 
That is appropriate as I said in this House on Monday. But we 
do not need a judicial inquiry to tell us that there is a gap in our 
testing because we are not testing for cryptosporidium. We 
know that it is now necessary that all public water systems be 
tested for crypto. 
 
And I asked the Department of the Environment to immediately 
add crypto testing as mandatory and regular throughout the 
province of Saskatchewan. I call on the provincial government 
to put that into place immediately. 
 
And I think that is one thing that will be essential if we are to 
avoid other problems in this province similar to the one my 
community is now facing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the issue was raised by the Premier about special 
grants for North Battleford. The Minister of Municipal Affairs 
was asked today if there was any funding for North Battleford, 
and he said no. Today, in the House, he said well that was only 
referring to one program, disaster assistance; and that the 
provincial government will look at other possible areas in which 
they can provide assistance for North Battleford. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I take the minister at his word and we in 
North Battleford will be looking for positive response. I was 
trying to get hold of the Minister of Municipal Affairs this 
morning for some clarification of his words. When they came 
over the radio, I wanted some clarification. I wasn’t able to get 
through to him. And I appreciate him now saying that it’s only 
disaster assistance funding that has been denied, that he will 
look elsewhere for funding. 
 
I hold him at his word. I hold the Premier at his word. And we 
will expect positive response for funding for North Battleford 
upgrades to water treatment and sewage treatment. 
 
Some members here have been wondering why I have not been 
louder about the North Battleford water issue. Some people 
have gone so far as to suggest the fact I have not spoken more 
about it is out of character for me. I must say that in North 
Battleford there has not been the same surprise. 
 
In my community, Mr. Speaker, the residents of North 
Battleford are dealing with two separate issues. One, they are 
dealing with the water and the problems of gastroenteritis which 



1058 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

come from the water; they’re dealing with the fact that so many 
of us had family from home for the Easter holiday and then 
went back and, to our embarrassment, were sick. So we’re 
dealing with the issues of contaminated water. 
 
But quite frankly, Mr. Speaker, we are also dealing with the 
negative publicity which is also a source of upset to our 
community. 
 
You will be aware, Mr. Speaker, that on almost every news 
report on the water issue the name of North Battleford has been 
linked to that of Walkerton. In point of fact, Mr. Speaker, there 
is no comparison. 
 
In the case of Walkerton it was an outbreak of E. coli which is 
potentially, and was in the case of Walkerton, fatal in some 
cases. We have been dealing with cryptosporidium which I can 
personally say is uncomfortable, but it is not fatal. And now I 
am very pleased that the authorities have confirmed there have 
been no deaths in North Battleford from the water situation. 
 
So it’s distressing to us though that media reports have linked 
North Battleford with Walkerton. And we are aware that long 
after the all-clear signal has been given on our water, we will 
still have to deal with the negative publicity attached to the 
name of North Battleford. And we want to assure the people of 
Saskatchewan, the people of Canada, our American friends who 
travel on the Yellowhead to Alaska, that the Battlefords is a 
great place to visit and a safe place to visit. 
 
Frankly, Mr. Speaker, many of my constituents believe that 
hysteria has been fomented in some of the media reports. And I 
know that they would not want to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the frustrations of life that North Battleford 
residents now deal with is that to line up at a water depot to get 
water also involves being asked to conduct a media interview 
and having a microphone and a TV camera shoved in one’s 
face. 
 
Now I’m in public life. Doing media interviews is part of the 
career I have chosen. But most of my constituents are private 
people dealing with a crisis and quite frankly, they find it 
upsetting when they go to get water for their families that being 
asked questions about the water, being potentially on the 
national news and their frustration laid out there for all the 
world to see. This is not the life they have chosen. They simply 
want our community back. They want the safe, quiet, happy 
community they chose to live in when they settled in the 
Battlefords. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So I say to all members of this House, I appreciate the support 
you are giving the Battlefords today. I also say to all members 
of this House, we must recognize that the best guarantee of safe, 
clean water for the people of Saskatchewan is if the federal 
government does acknowledge this is a birthright of all 
Canadians. 
 
And I also assure the people of this House that while we deeply 
appreciate the support we have received from people across this 
province and this nation, it is not our wish that the residents of 

any other community in Saskatchewan or Canada will have to 
deal with what we are presently dealing with. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I too 
welcome the opportunity to enter into this debate. And the hon. 
member from North Battleford said he was talking about his 
community; he’s also talking about my community. It’s our 
community that has caused the reason for us to come to this 
debate and has created a great deal of concern. 
 
It’s also an opportunity, in getting into a debate, to clarify. And 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this does happen. Why would I, 
coming from a community that I have deep concern for, where 
some of my roots still are, to say that no, unequivocally I refuse 
to do anything to help that community. I would not say that. 
 
And as we all know, Mr. Speaker, there are words that are 
spoken by members opposite who might take advantage of a 
situation to create a situation making it appear much worse than 
it is, or try to destroy credibility when there is a question of 
credibility perhaps, throughout other areas as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there have been programs in place to address these 
situations. This province two years ago . . . and these are some 
of the facts that people opposite and some people will refuse to 
accept the fact that there has been a proactive approach taken. 
 
Can I . . . would you like me to . . . You know, in 1999-2000, in 
1999-2000, it was the province that put up $20 million for 
infrastructure programs, not the federal government. The 
federal government didn’t do it. The province had already 
recognized the need for infrastructure program. This happened. 
 
Guess what, Mr. Speaker. That was the funding that primed the 
pump to attract the federal government to enter into perhaps a 
larger program which we now have today and that people from 
all over this province have access to and have accessed for 
green programs, for programs where there have been concerns 
raised about their infrastructure, their water. Mr. Speaker, this 
has been in place, and communities have taken advantage of it. 
 
Tomorrow there will be an announcement with the federal 
minister on the massive projects that have been underway in 
this province and will continue to occur, monies that have 
already been invested, those communities throughout the 
province — and I have lists of those communities — that have 
applied for those programs and were given high priority if in 
fact they fell into the boil-water advisory or precautionary 
measure program. 
 
I mean those are facts. And I know that there are people there 
that have benefited from those programs and that have accessed 
that funding, that appreciate it and recognize that there has been 
an effort by the province. 
 
This program was successfully negotiated with the federal 
government to have this in place — that’s a proactive move. 
Provincial support for this particular program, Mr. Speaker, 
over the next five years, will be $56.7 million. That’s not small 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1059 

 

change. So that’s something that will help work, will help assist 
these green infrastructure, including water and waster water. 
And that is the first priority of this total program. They will 
receive at least, at a minimum, 50 per cent available funding 
under that particular program, Mr. Speaker. 
 
North Battleford had applied for and had received approval to 
enhance its water supply with two wells. That project being 
approved, North Battleford now has the option of changing its 
application to upgrade the sewage treatment plant. And that 
would be considered and any future applications under this 
program would be supported. 
 
There are four more years of this program, Mr. Speaker, that are 
still available. And North Battleford would have access to 
funding under that particular program. 
 
As I mentioned just a little earlier, tomorrow the province and 
the federal government will announce projects. To date, under 
that particular CSIP (Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program) program, and without scooping that particular 
announcement, Mr. Speaker, I can say that 75 per cent of the 
federal and provincial funding approved to date will support 
water and waste water projects throughout Saskatchewan and a 
number of communities. 
 
People forget as well, Mr. Speaker, that in 2000-2001 the 
province also committed the municipal component of the 
Centenary Fund, Mr. Speaker, which provides $5 million per 
year over a four-year period, once again to support municipal 
infrastructure programs. 
 
Between 1994, Mr. Speaker, and 1998, the federal government 
and the provincial governments, in total, in a tri-part 
infrastructure program, invested $167 million over the life of 
that particular program. 
 
In the recent budget, there was an announcement of over a 
million dollars of new spending to improve the laboratory 
facilities at Sask Health. That will offer more comprehensive 
sampling for municipalities and increase the resources for 
SERM’s drinking water program so they can increase 
inspections, more effectively monitor the compliance results of 
municipalities, and respond to drinking water problems. 
Something that the opposition, for reasons I cannot understand, 
did not support. 
 
Sask Water, in co-operation with Saskatchewan Environment 
and Resource Management and Health, is continuing to consult 
with municipalities. This will result in a cost estimate to 
improve the ability of more than 500 municipal water treatment 
systems in the province to produce safe drinking water. Sask 
Water, as well, is working very closely with Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities and the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities in undertaking this assessment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been talking primarily about the 
commitment of monies to these various programs. Well money 
is only a part of it. It’s the resource people. It’s people that need 
to be present to undertake these programs, to react and respond 
and assist communities where they need assistance. 
 
As part of the responsibilities for Sask Water, they sent a 

detailed survey, Mr. Speaker, to all municipalities that operate 
drinking water to learn about what kind of systems they do have 
in place, how it is operated and maintained, and what kinds of 
problems they encounter. This is a proactive measure, Mr. 
Speaker, that has already been implemented. 
 
Sask Water is also very active, Mr. Speaker, with helping rural 
residents with understanding the quality of their drinking water 
and what they can do about it. Sask Water has, for the past three 
years, offered a program where, for a fee of $100, private 
residents can have a water technician come to the site, take a 
water sample, and have it analyzed on their behalf for private 
wells. 
 
When the results of the analysis are known, Sask Water writes a 
letter to the client describing the quality of their water and 
provides them with . . . and advises them on how they can treat 
it to meet provincial drinking water guidelines. They also 
provide comments about how their source can be protected 
from surface water contamination. This is all part of a proactive 
program that has been in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We have new initiatives in place for testing municipal water 
systems and we have programs in place to provide advice to 
rural residents and Saskatchewan communities on their water 
needs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We now have a new Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure 
Program that places emphasis on water and waste water 
treatment projects. And you will learn more about these 
approved projects that were approved under this program, and 
that will be tomorrow, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We are already working with the federal government; we are 
already funding high priority water and waste water projects in 
Saskatchewan. The quality of water and health of the 
Saskatchewan public is an extremely high priority. And I 
support, Mr. Speaker, an active approach to ensure that it 
remains so. 
 
Mr. Speaker, earlier there was an additional expenditure of 
$720,000 committed, including the 10.5 full-time people to 
work in this area of determining quality and ensuring that our 
citizens had safe drinking water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, programs of that nature and others, on a proactive 
— and I say proactive — action that has been taken by the 
province to work with all the communities that have a concern 
has been recognized by the federal government in this province. 
The federal government recognized that money was needed for 
infrastructure; they signed an agreement with Saskatchewan. 
 
Now they recognize that the quality of water is an issue that 
needs to be addressed nationally — not only in Saskatchewan, 
not only in North Battleford, not only in Ituna, not only in 
Hubbard, or Grayson, or Neudorf or Killaly, but throughout the 
country and other provinces as well, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
something that the federal government is recognizing and we’re 
going to work with them. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I support the motion that’s been brought 
before this House, and I will be supporting it. 
 



1060 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before I recognize the member for Arm 
River, why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Speaker, I’m asking leave to introduce 
a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I thank the 
member opposite for graciously delaying his speech for a few 
seconds. 
 
In the west gallery, Mr. Speaker, is a friend of ours, a young 
lady, Kaitlyn Stocks, who graces this Assembly with her 
presence from time to time when she’s not in school. I’m 
delighted to introduce her today, and to share that she has a 
keen interest in governance issues of the province. And is 
always watching and learning, and even offering up suggestions 
for how we can do things better. I ask all hon. members to join 
me in welcoming Kaitlyn Stocks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

National Water Quality Infrastructure Program 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today as a Sask Water critic to address one of the most serious 
situations that has occurred in Saskatchewan in recent memory. 
 
The affected water in North Battleford represents a serious 
threat throughout being a resident in that city and around the 
province. So I strongly support the motion made by the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar, and seconded by the Premier, and 
believe that the federal government with support from the 
provincial government develop a national water quality 
infrastructure program. 
 
Residents of Saskatchewan deserve the utmost attention in light 
of this serious situation. This infected water situation is not 
isolated. There are other communities in Saskatchewan which 
also have boil-water advisories as a result of contaminated 
drinking water, and as we’re informed now, that there is 121 
communities that have unsafe drinking water. 
 
We now have to look at the entire province and its water 
treatment infrastructure. There are scores of communities 
around the province whose water treatment plants are 
inaccurate, are aging, and will require replacement very soon. 
And we will need help from all aspects. We will need help from 
the federal government, from the provincial government, to 
begin the process of replacing these old systems. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this will clearly run into tens of millions of dollars. 
 
Clearly the time has run out for mere dialogue to begin to 
address this issue. Ask the residents in North Battleford if 
discussion will solve their current crisis, would offer . . . these 

residents simply demand action by their elected officials, 
whether it be the local, provincial, or federal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the residents of Walkerton, Ontario know full well 
the worry that the residents in this present situation are feeling. 
I quote the Saskatoon StarPhoenix from the issue of Saturday, 
May 5, the caption: 
 

‘What lessons have we learned?’ 
 
‘News of a Sask. tragedy sends chills through the residents 
of Walkerton.’ 

 
This article goes on to quote people from Walkerton who are 
clearly upset by this latest water situation. You know: 
 

“(Walkerton) was a big wake-up call but nobody seems to 
have done a lot about it,” (quotes) Bruce Davidson, who 
speaks for the group Concerned Walkerton Citizens. 
 
“Are people still viewing (Walkerton) as an isolated 
incident, a tragic one-time event?” 
 
“It was almost exactly a year ago that seven people died 
and 2,300 fell ill in this mid-western Ontario town.” 

 
I asked them what has been done since that tragedy to safeguard 
the drinking water across this province. The federal government 
seems to think it’s provincial responsibility, while the 
provincial government indicates it’s a municipal government 
responsibility. 
 
Indeed the infected water problem in North Battleford has 
raised so many questions as to who is responsible. The rumours 
have flourished over who knew what, when, and what was done 
about it. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Yesterday a radio report suggested some residents in this case 
have begun the legal process against both the local and 
provincial levels of government. This is an indicator of the level 
of frustration the people in this city are feeling presently. 
 
Currently it is a small step in the right direction that the federal 
government passed a resolution a couple of days ago calling for 
national water quality standards. But this does little to address 
the concern of the cost of renewing a water treatment plant 
infrastructure across Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to even suggest for a moment that local 
municipalities be completely responsible for the cost and 
maintenance of new water treatment facilities is absurd. This 
provincial government has been off-loading to local 
government for so long that there is simply no money left. 
Funding since 1991 has been cut by over 56 per cent to 
municipal funding. 
 
This government would rather spend millions of dollars to 
create government jobs rather than help municipal governments 
save lives. You might remember that we made a motion to 
cancel 570 new positions and give the municipalities this 
money to assist them. But no, Mr. Speaker, this motion was 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1061 

 

defeated by the government. And ask the residents of North 
Battleford which is more important to them, more government 
jobs or good water quality? 
 
Municipalities are even further under pressure as the result of 
the rising energy costs for which there seems to be no relief 
from this provincial government. It is possible that due to lack 
of funding from the provincial government, local governments 
have little money left in which to train staff in this very 
important duty of maintaining existing water treatment plants. 
 
In the case of small villages, local volunteers . . . in many cases 
of small villages, local volunteers such as village councillors or 
mayors have to look after these very important duties, despite 
the fact that they lack the proper qualifications. Local 
governments simply cannot afford to always hire a fully trained 
technician for the most important residential safety concern, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
It is with all this in mind, the local governments cannot begin to 
entertain the thought of spending thousands and thousands of 
dollars to spend . . . to improve or replace their important water 
treatment facilities. Because, Mr. Speaker, the money is simply 
not there. 
 
I must speculate that this issue is much larger than it could 
appear to be. Many of the residents in my constituency have 
been discussing this situation among themselves. Some are 
beginning to say that what has previously been assumed to be a 
simple case of flu virus passing through a community could 
possibly be at times a drop in water quality due to changing 
circumstances in the water treatment plant. How many times 
did we hear all over Saskatchewan, people are saying, I hear 
there’s a vicious flu bug going around? Mr. Speaker, that could 
be, is it really the flu or the beginning of a time bomb ready to 
go off? 
 
In my capacity as Sask Water critic, I must carefully look that 
the taxpayers’ dollars are spent in the critical area of water 
quality, water management, and overall water concerns. When 
we look at this issue, such as serious as contaminated drinking 
water, we must also look at how Sask Water has spent millions 
of dollars in the past. 
 
I would suggest to this House that millions and millions of 
dollars, which could have gone in towards rebuilding our water 
treatment facilities, have been spent on foolish investments and 
completely failed business ventures such as SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company) — 
millions of dollars lost. And now with the Sask Valley Potato 
Corp., more money being spent on new equipment, rented land, 
and the list goes on, of which of course is taxpayer money. 
 
It’s something I would like to mention, what the mandate . . . 
when Sask Water was first brought in, in 1984, the mandate of 
the corporation is to ensure adequate, reliable, and safe water 
resources for the benefit of the people of Saskatchewan now 
and in the future. 
 
So I suggest that Sask Water has their hands full just filling that 
mandate and not going into side ventures. And if this 
government insists on going into potato ventures, they should 
hand it over to CIC or Agriculture, and just do what their 

mandate is — and that is ensure that the people have safe, 
reliable drinking water. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, water is the very essence of life. 
Indeed without it, life cannot exist, you know. And the 
government seems, unfortunately . . . and I can also mention 
other things like IQ&A, and Clickabid, and all the other 
countless ventures this government seems so intent on 
investing. We must focus this money on issues such as water 
quality immediately. 
 
People across Saskatchewan are scared. My constituents are 
talking about these days, they will, you know, it’s being asked 
now: will my town be next? This is where the government 
should be taking its first priority. 
 
You know the citizens of North Battleford are bravely, bravely 
weathering this current serious situation. The community has 
pulled together and is helping one another to get through this 
crisis. I honour the citizens and applaud the efforts of various 
businesses in bringing in bottled water to assist the many people 
who need it so desperately. 
 
These people need all the help that we can give them as their 
elected officials. In addition to the obvious serious health 
concerns here, this tragedy is also impacting on the economy of 
this community in a big way. Highway traffic and tourists are 
going straight through the city and not stopping to spend their 
money on meals and other activities which support the 
economy. 
 
I urge this government to take the steps that are necessary to 
pressure the federal government on the many serious issues that 
have risen out of this serious situation. I would ask that the 
Premier himself should be going to Ottawa immediately to 
discuss this important issue with the Prime Minister. Anything 
less than this would indicate to the people of Saskatchewan this 
government does not rate drinking water quality as number one 
priority, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Going across many of the stuff I keep as Sask Water critic, I 
came across something that over two centuries ago Benjamin 
Franklin made a quote. He said: 
 

We do not know the true value of water until the well runs 
dry. 

 
Well he could almost change that quote as to we do not know 
the true value of water until it is unsafe to drink, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I also would like to comment on Monday I was not in the 
House, as some members might have noticed. I was in 
Saskatoon at a safe drinking water production in rural areas. 
And there was a couple of speakers there that were very 
interesting. One was a Susan Watson from Environment 
Canada, and another one was a Dr. Shay Fout from the US 
Environmental Protection Agency. 
 
They were talking about toxic compounds in water and plus 
viruses in surface and groundwater, Mr. Speaker, and they were 
raising quite a few issues and concerns, especially Dr. Shay. 
And all we have to do is think back to, I think it was, 
Milwaukee when there was hundreds of lives lost there in a 



1062 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

breakout there. 
 
But talking about some of the testing that’s being done and out 
in rural Saskatchewan, even though there is not very much 
testing being done, they feel that 40 per cent, 40 per cent of 
water being used is groundwater and possibly 20 per cent of the 
wells out there right now are unsafe to drink, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, when a person looks at the water —and we have 
abundance of good, clear water as the member for North 
Battleford mentions — you look at it and you think it’s clear 
and clean. But right now even in this water that has gone 
through the Regina treatment plant, the doctors have said that 
there’s virus and toxins in this water, although most of them do 
not affect humans. But it is a little scary when you don’t know 
exactly what’s in the water out there. 
 
There’s one other issue. When the Premier had mentioned there 
about the document we had, if we . . . he seemed to indicate that 
these officials shouldn’t be doing what they were doing. And I 
applaud them for what they were doing. My concern is though, 
when they presented this to cabinet, did the cabinet look at this? 
This is what we’re questioning, this document on it. Did they 
act on it? 
 
One of the recommendations in it was Sask Water was 
supposed to evaluate the current state of infrastructure for all 
municipalities and communal private systems to determine 
upgrade requirements to meet safe drinking water objectives. 
Sask Water Corporation provide leadership in this and will 
report back to the government. Now I ask the Premier, did he 
. . . (inaudible) . . . one of the things Sask Water is doing? 
That’s one of the things I think we need to be looking at out 
there right now, to find out how much money is needed to 
upgrade these facilities in each of these communities so they 
meet safe drinking water standards. That is a very important 
issue and it’s an issue that’s going to keep coming up. 
 
And I hope Sask Water will follow this recommendation in this 
report. With that, Mr. Speaker, I will support the motion. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 
certainly is a pleasure for me to enter into the debate with 
regard to how we can form partnerships between municipal, 
provincial, and federal governments in providing safe quality 
water to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
When we look at the issues of water quality and the history of 
water quality and how municipalities and indeed civilizations 
have developed safe sources of water for their communities, I 
like to look back to one of my professors in epidemiology when 
he related the story of the classic, the classic example of how 
they discovered the source of contaminated water, which almost 
was the highlight in terms in creating some of the epidemiology 
used by public health systems today. 
 
And he talked about a certain well in a particular area, a 
borough of London at the time. We’re talking several hundred 
years ago. And what they found was that a community, that part 
of London, became contaminated with an infection. That 
infection produced diarrhea, multiple deaths, and what it was 
related to was cholera, Mr. Speaker. 
 

And what they found was that when they started putting little 
dots on a map to see where the incident and index cases were 
located, they found that all of those people shared one thing in 
common — they all got their water from the same well in 
London. And this, Mr. Speaker, was the beginning of 
epidemiology in public health that we see today. It created the 
ingredients that we look at. And it’s not much different than 
how we look at situations today in determining where and what 
the causes are for particular illnesses in the public health sector. 
 
Now when we look at the particular case of North Battleford 
with the initial incident of some diarrhea in the community, a 
case of crypto analyzed, diagnosed by a laboratory, and then 
subsequent cases to show that perhaps there was a 
contamination of the water source. And then all of the things 
that pointed to that — the timing of the advisories on boiling 
water, the timing of the alerts on making sure that it was a 
requirement to boil your water and all of that information that 
was subsequently provided, show how some of the checks and 
balances, though not perfect, were working to a certain extent 
within North Battleford. 
 
When we look at the situation in Saskatchewan today, Mr. 
Speaker, we have multiple sources of water used by 
communities throughout this great province. We have water that 
comes from rivers, from lakes, from well waters. We’re looking 
at sources where there can be contamination from surface water. 
There can be contamination from animals that carry many 
different parasites and bacteria in their bowels, and potential 
contamination for lots of people in the province who potentially 
could drink this contaminated water. 
 
So municipalities in this province have been charged with the 
task of making sure that they do provide safe quality water to 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
And we have a diverse, diverse municipal structure. If we look 
at our large municipalities like Saskatoon and Regina, they have 
really state-of-the-art municipal waterworks. In fact I can 
remember not that long ago where people like to criticize 
Regina water, and they actually had a situation where they were 
doing water quality testing and tasting in a North American 
environment with water sources provided from municipal 
waterworks and others throughout North America. 
 
And I seem to recall that Regina placed in the top 10 in that 
competition in terms of the quality and taste of its water. And 
this was surprising to many people in Saskatchewan, but it 
wasn’t surprising to the people who work at the municipal 
waterworks in Regina. 
 
Saskatoon has excellent water quality as well. And for most 
parts, our large municipalities are well served by the 
waterworks that provide safe quality water. 
 
So when we look at how this water comes into the system, the 
processes that are involved with settling tanks, with the 
agglutination, with chemicals that coagulate smaller particles 
into large particles so that it can settle out, the chlorination and 
the oxidation that is required to kill bacteria — when we look at 
the multiple pathogens that could potentially produce disease 
like cholera, like typhoid, that are there in third countries — we 
don’t have these problems here in Saskatchewan. 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1063 

 

We do have problems though in terms of some of these areas 
where we do get some contamination at times. And it is 
imperative that the water, that is going into the pipe that is 
going into that household, is tested on a regular basis. And that 
is where the provincial government responsibility comes in. 
 
Municipalities provide those samples; they’re tested by the 
provincial government; and as soon as there’s an alert or there’s 
an indication that there might be a problem, then those 
municipalities are notified, Mr. Speaker. So in general the 
system works quite well. 
 
We do have aging infrastructure in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
We recognize that that infrastructure needs to be replaced and 
needs to be upgraded on an ongoing basis. And I’ll talk about 
some of the things this provincial government is doing in just a 
minute. 
 
But what I want to talk about now, Mr. Speaker, is what the 
Saskatchewan Party, the official opposition, said in its platform 
leading up to the last election. And you know what they 
highlighted, Mr. Speaker? You know what they highlighted, 
Mr. Speaker, in their Way Up program? 
 
They talked about easing the tax burden. They talked about 
decreasing the provincial income tax. They talked about cutting 
PST (provincial sales tax). 
 
They talked about some increased funding for roads and 
highways. They talked about an environment for creating jobs. 
They made demands on the federal Liberal government in terms 
of money they would like to see with regard to health care. 
They talked about a value-for-money audit of the health care 
system. And they talked about the welfare system and a 
work-first plan. 
 
They talked about an independent utility rate watchdog. And 
they talked about patronage. And they talked about courts and 
police groups. 
 
But in this 20-page document, Mr. Speaker, they did not 
mention once the word water — not once they did not talk 
about water quality. And when they had an opportunity, when 
they had an opportunity, when they had an opportunity to vote 
for adding 10 full-time equivalents to test water quality, they 
voted against it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So again, we look at their program and they did not talk once 
about enhancing water quality in the province of Saskatchewan. 
And in fact, they’ve recently argued that this provincial 
government should have been providing better standards and 
more intervention in terms of making sure municipalities were 
providing quality water. And what did they say? They said, and 
I quote: 
 

Amending legislation and regulations to give municipalities 
the freedom to deliver local services with a minimum of 
provincial government interference. 

 
So they called our testing of water government interference of 
municipalities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now when we talk about their program and we talk about the 

program that we have on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
well let me tell you what we’re doing over here. 
 
This year alone, this year alone the provincial government has 
increased its contribution to the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program by 115 per cent, Mr. Speaker. Our 
program increasing money for infrastructure, 115 per cent. 
 
And let me just highlight what this provincial government has 
done from 1994 and will do into the future. 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure works program 1994 to 
1998, the federal contribution was $69 million; the provincial 
contribution was $98 million; total for those years of 167 
million. 
 
In the provincial municipal infrastructure program 1999-2001, 
provincial contribution, $20 million. 
 
Our Centenary Capital Fund 2001 to 2004, provincial 
infrastructure contribution, another $20 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, 2001 to 
2006: federal contribution, 56,710,000; provincial contribution, 
56,710,000, for a total of 113 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the grand total in terms of municipal infrastructure for those 
years, Mr. Speaker: provincial contribution, 195 million; federal 
contribution, 125 million, for over $320 million going 
specifically for municipal infrastructure. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have challenges facing water quality. 
These are challenges that have been highlighted by recent 
events across Canada. And this provincial government and our 
Department of SERM and our Department of Health has 
recognized these challenges and are working in partnership with 
municipalities and the federal government to provide the 
solutions for safe quality drinking water for the people of 
Saskatchewan for now and long into the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
glad to have the opportunity to rise today in support of the 
motion by the member for Rosetown and the Premier seconding 
it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think one of the main causes of what we see 
happening in North Battleford and what we may see in a 
number of communities in this province comes down to one 
thing, plain and simple: dollars. You can’t for a minute think 
that North Battleford would have had this problem there had we 
of been helping them out with revenue sharing dollars to the 
degree we should have been in this province rather that the 
priorities this government has put in place and forgot to replace 
any of the money they’ve cut. 
 
I’d like to go over for a minute and express my concern what’s 
happened to the community of North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to talk about the revenue sharing that’s gone on 
from 1991 compared to what happened in 2001. 
 



1064 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

The revenue-sharing dollars, Mr. Speaker, in 1991 for the city 
of North Battleford was $1.199 million, just about $1.2 million 
for the city of North Battleford. 
 
The numbers slowly start to drop off after the NDP were 
elected, Mr. Speaker. 1992 we’re already under a million 
dollars, 999 million some-odd dollars. Then we go on to ’93, 
we drop again $930 million. 1994, another drop. In fact a whole 
drop of a hundred million dollars . . . a million dollars, 833. 
Then we go down $856,000; 1996 holds at 856,000. Whoops, 
1997 we go down to $453,000. And then, Mr. Speaker, what we 
see is that amount is froze — no increase — is froze at that 
level. 
 
So we’ve gone, Mr. Speaker, from 1991, at 1.2 million, down to 
2001 to 453,000. How are communities like North Battleford 
supposed to keep their infrastructure up to speed with funding 
cuts from this government like that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we would have thought that Walkerton would 
have been a wake-up call for both the federal and provincial 
governments — the Saskatchewan government in this case — 
and it doesn’t seem to have hit home at all. 
 
We find out today that they actually knew since September that 
problems were out there. And instead of addressing it, they 
were out busy with the leadership convention and the whole 
process of government in this province, Mr. Speaker, came to a 
standstill. 
 
And from what we see, and what we saw happen in North 
Battleford, and what may happen in other communities, we’ve 
saw problems arise that could hurt the safety of Saskatchewan 
people, and have actually, at this point, made Saskatchewan 
people sick. 
 
I’d like to touch on, for a minute, Mr. Speaker, our lone MP 
(Member of Parliament) in the federal government, Mr. 
Goodale. We never hear a thing out of Mr. Goodale when 
something like this happens, we only hear of him when he 
comes out to announce some program from the federal 
government. But when we need action in this province, whether 
it’s health care, whether it’s agriculture, or whether it’s a 
situation like we have in North Battleford, Mr. Goodale is no 
where to be found. 
 
And when you look at the money, Mr. Speaker, that the federal 
government takes out of the province of Saskatchewan, whether 
it be income tax, gas tax, GST (goods and services tax), fees, 
permits, whatever it is, and the pittance that they put back into 
this province when it comes down to our infrastructures such as 
roads, and water, and sewer. 
 
And I know the member for Melville was bragging about how 
much infrastructure money goes in, Mr. Speaker, but it’s a 
small amount when you look at the volume of dollars they drain 
out of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to touch on the priorities of the provincial 
government once again and we’ve talked about this before. 
Think about what the city of North Battleford could have done 
with the amount of money that is going to be used to hire the 
570 new government employees. And I know the Minister for 

SERM, the minister for Municipal Government has been trying 
to ridicule the opposition for saying we shouldn’t be hiring 
these people, we should be putting the money towards 
municipal government. 
 
Well right now, I’ll bet you to the people of North Battleford, 
those dollars that it’s going to take to hire those 570 people 
would look awfully good to the water system in North 
Battleford right now if they had their share of those dollars to 
spend, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why can’t this government get it through their 
head that instead of going out and hiring people every time they 
need some people in a new area, why don’t they do like 
business does in this province? They find a way to restructure. 
They even have to downsize at times to pay the high taxes in 
this province, but they find a way to take people from one area, 
move them to another area, Mr. Speaker. An example that this 
province could take a lesson from is business in this province 
and they don’t seem to get it. 
 
The Environment department alone. We had the digging up of 
gas tanks in this province, Mr. Speaker. That went on for two or 
three years here. They must have had within the Environment 
department a large number of bureaucrats working in that area. 
 
Well now that’s calmed down. Why can’t we take people from 
that area, put them under another division of SERM, without 
hiring a hundred and some new people — especially again, the 
10 that they’re talking about? I’m not saying we don’t need 
those 10 people. In fact, from what we see happening, we 
certainly probably do need those people. 
 
Why can’t we downsize, restructure, become more efficient and 
find people in another area that could have gone into that area 
and alleviated the dollars that they’re spending on all those new 
government workers and put that money into where were really 
need it — into infrastructure and roads for municipalities all 
over this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we’re talking about today is the safety of 
Saskatchewan people. And by the priorities of the government, 
we’re putting that safety at risk. And the reason I believe, Mr. 
Speaker, why we’re seeing this is because what do we have on 
that side of the House right now? Well, Mr. Speaker, we have a 
tired, incompetent, arrogant leaderless, out-of-touch, 
on-the-way-out government, Mr. Speaker. I rest my case. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I’m very pleased today to join this debate with my 
colleagues in the Legislative Assembly. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, I do very much appreciate the co-operation of the 
member from Rosthern today as we tried to put an agreement 
together with respect to the wording of this motion and with 
respect to the support for allowing this legislature, the people of 
this province through their legislature, the opportunity to 
forward our desire to see the federal government involved in 
infrastructure funding that would help governments across this 
country work towards safer and cleaner water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think over the past few months it’s become very 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1065 

 

clear that we in this country have the opportunity to review the 
way we manage our drinking water and the way we manage our 
community sewage systems. 
 
And I think it’s fair to say that, although we’re very 
disappointed that this unfortunate circumstance has happened in 
North Battleford, that it will allow us to review the way we’ve 
been doing things, to improve on the deficiencies that we may 
find as the result of the judicial inquiry that the Premier has 
announced just a few hours ago. And so I think we should view 
this, and we on this side of the House do very much view this, 
as an opportunity to do things better. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to make, before I conclude my remarks 
which will be very brief, I want to speak to a couple of issues 
that were raised by the member opposite in his recent speech. 
And I think the people of Saskatchewan do know and I think 
they have the right to know and we all need to be reminded that 
this government has recently announced $720,000 of 
incremental expenditure including ten and a half full-time 
employees to be working on quality drinking water. 
 
Now as I said, Mr. Speaker, I think that there is no doubt that 
we will find that we can do things better as a result of this 
process. And we always need to take lessons and learn from our 
mistakes, but I want to say, Mr. Speaker, we should not 
overplay really what is happening here. 
 
This government is very serious — very serious — and wants to 
respond to the circumstance in North Battleford, and we have. 
Our Premier has attended that community. A number of 
ministers have been there. We’ve had officials from the 
different departments who were involved in water quality there 
and we, I think, are really trying to support the municipal 
government in that community go through some very difficult 
and trying times. 
 
The employees of the city of North Battleford, I’m sure, have in 
the past done their utmost, done their level best to ensure that 
the job that they have is done to the best of their abilities. And I 
really believe that. I have no reason to believe other than that. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m quite confident that the inquiry will put 
a lot of people’s minds to rest with respect to this issue. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member opposite, in his last remarks, was 
indicating that revenue sharing was a difficult circumstance for 
that community. And he was in essence laying blame for the 
fact that revenue-sharing grants have changed since the 1980s, 
since the early 1990s. And I think it’s fair to say that he’s right. 
 
There has been a fairly dramatic change in the amount of 
revenue-sharing grants that have gone to municipal 
governments. And I don’t think anyone on this side of the 
House would not want to see more, but we have to deal with the 
realities of our fiscal circumstance here in Saskatchewan. And 
we will do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one wants to see deficit budgeting and we 
know that we have limited revenues. We’ve seen our economy 
grow in some areas: oil, gas, potash. These are all areas that 
have treated this province very well in the last few years in 

terms of that activity. We’ve seen a growth in manufacturing 
and processing. 
 
But in spite of that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve had a fairly difficult 
time, a difficult circumstance with respect to our agricultural 
community, and that has created some weight on what we’re 
able to do in terms of revenue-sharing grants and other 
initiatives. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, one wouldn’t want to go back too far in 
history . . . one wouldn’t have to go back too far in history to be 
reminded of the years when expenditures far exceeded what we 
were able to generate in revenues from resources and from 
taxes. And I think, Mr. Speaker, to be fair, the revenue-sharing 
grants have changed and they’ve come down considerably. 
 
But what that member didn’t indicate and doesn’t talk about is 
that there are other areas of funding that go to those 
communities. There’s grants in lieu of taxes. There’s transit for 
the disabled. There is money that comes from the Centenary 
Fund. And there’s the CSIP program. And all of these are 
benefits for the communities, and they shouldn’t be denied and 
they shouldn’t be ignored. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to make those few brief remarks 
because I think it was important that people understand that the 
member opposite wasn’t telling the whole picture when he was 
talking about transfer payments to communities, including the 
city of North Battleford. 
 
And so I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that I will be supporting the 
resolution that was jointly agreed to by the member from 
Rosthern and his caucus and myself this morning. 
 
I must say in closing that I’m somewhat disappointed that the 
Opposition House Leader didn’t take the opportunity to have us 
join with them yesterday in supporting the motion that we 
ultimately supported today, because that would have been our 
wish, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that I’m very much hopeful that we can 
return to a civil way of doing business, such as we did today 
with the member from Rosthern. And I again want to say to him 
that I very much appreciated the way he responded to my 
request that we work on this motion jointly, and that we jointly 
forward this to the House of Commons so that our counterparts 
in the national seat of government can understand our concern. 
 
So I want to conclude by saying, Mr. Speaker, I will be 
supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to nemine contradicente. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’d ask for leave to 
move a motion to have this transcript sent on to the federal 
government, and seconded by the member for Indian 
Head-Milestone. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 



1066 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

member from Indian Head-Milestone: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly, the Speaker, on behalf of the 
Legislative Assembly, transmit copies and verbatim 
transcripts of the rule 46 motion and debate concerning the 
emergency debate regarding the development of a national 
water quality infrastructure program to Prime Minister 
Chrétien, to Minister Goodale, to Minister Anderson, and to 
all opposition party leaders. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
table the response to question 157. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 157 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to table a 
response to question no. 158. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 158 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Question no. 159 has been converted to orders 
for return (debatable). 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — Convert. 
 
Mr. Yates: — I’m pleased to table the response to question 
161. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 161 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — 162 is converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Convert. 
 
The Speaker: — 163 is converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand and table the answers from 164 to 170 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has tabled responses 
for questions 164 to 170 inclusive. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
(Subvote LA01) 

Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure again to re-introduce officials who were here last on 
April 30 when we did this previously. To my left is Deputy 
Minister Sandra Morgan. Directly behind me is the associate 
deputy minister, Cheryl Hanson. 
 
Behind Cheryl is Dawn McKibben, who is the director of 
human resources and administration in the Department of 
Labour. Behind Ms. Morgan is John Boyd, the executive 
director of planning and policy in the Department of Labour. 
 
Seated at the back is Dr. Fayek Kelada, who is the director of 
occupational health and safety services; Eric Greene, the acting 
executive director of labour services. Joining them is Peter 
Federko, the chief executive officer of the Workers’ 
Compensation Board; and Gail Kruger, the vice-president, 
budget and finance over at the Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, [CORRECT] 
and I’d like to welcome the minister and your officials here 
today. I’m going to start, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by asking the 
minister some questions which we did cover last time we met, 
and I’m hoping that some decisions have been made by cabinet, 
by the government caucus concerning these issues. 
 
The first one I’d like to ask the minister concerning bringing 
intensive livestock operations under The Labour Standards Act. 
Has any decision been made on that particular area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I can report to the 
members opposite, nothing has changed since the last time we 
spoke. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Also on another topic we 
discussed, I’d like to ask, Mr. Minister, do you have any plans 
or has cabinet made any plans concerning proclaiming the most 
available hours provisions in this session? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, nothing has changed 
in this issue either. I believe that I shared that it’s not on agenda 
this session. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Another area which 
of course you’re very aware of is the Dorsey report. I’ve had 
many people since our last session together, a week ago 
Monday, contact my office and my constituency office and the 
caucus office, and they’re very, very concerned about the delay 
in the Dorsey report being made public. And I was wondering if 
the minister at this time could give us a date when the Dorsey 
report will be released. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m delighted to say 
it’s going to be very soon. No, I cannot give you a date at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to go on to 
another issue that I have been dealing with for quite some time 
and I’m sure the minister has been aware of. 
 
It’s concerning the disenfranchised widows of Saskatchewan, 
and I understand that they accepted a one-time lump sum 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1067 

 

payment of $80,000 to compensate for the loss of their 
husbands in work-related accidents prior to 1985. It seems that 
these widows received less than half of what their counterparts 
in BC (British Columbia) and Ontario did, and they were 
assured that this payment was tax-free. And they were surprised 
when they filed a 1999 income tax that the federal government 
took a clawback of nearly $5,000 plus their supplement which 
leaves them with $75,000. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, has he done, has he 
contacted the federal government to try to rectify this situation? 
 
My understanding is that these widows were not informed fully 
of the implications of receiving this money, that it was going to 
affect their OAS (old age security), and it appears, Mr. 
Minister, that other provinces did notify their widows of the 
implications of receiving this money. 
 
And I understand the minister will be meeting with 
representatives of the disenfranchised widows. And I was 
wondering if you could tell the legislature today, what are you 
doing concerning this issue. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, thank you. 
Respecting the issue of disenfranchised widows, I want to make 
one thing perfectly clear. The $80,000 that was paid to these 
disenfranchised widows was tax-free. It has never been taxed, 
never has been taxed. I want to be perfectly, perfectly clear 
about that. 
 
What happened is that the federal government considered it as 
income, and then it triggered a clawback of the old age security. 
That’s most regrettable. That was something that, when our 
officials contacted the feds in advance, they did not share that 
unfortunate happening. 
 
We have, on a number of occasions, but twice ministers of 
Labour have contacted federal government asking for a 
remission order. The federal government . . . be perfectly clear 
on this, when we asked we said we wanted a lump sum, 
one-time $80,000 tax-free payment to the disenfranchised 
widows, recognizing there was extreme hardship in some cases, 
less hardship in others, but we wanted to get some immediate 
cash in the hands of some Workers’ Compensation 
disenfranchised widows. 
 
For compassionate reasons, a decision was made that we were 
going to get $80,000 tax-free in their hands. We did that — we 
did that. The federal government let those very same widows 
down, by implementing the clawback according to their rules. 
 
What they could have done, and have admitted as much to us — 
although let me share, there’s probably things that, if we could 
do it all over again, there’s probably things that would have 
been done different all the way around — but the federal 
government has admitted to us that they had several occasions, 
several opportunities, where they could have informed us of the 
clawback, and that would of course have generated some 
different discussion. 
 
Perhaps we could have structured the payments differently. 
Perhaps there was other options. I don’t know. What I know is 
we’re dealing with this situation, and we’re doing everything 

we can to get the federal government to issue a remission order. 
We’re active on this file, but unable to report that we’ve been 
able to achieve any success with the federal government as yet. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It seems that 
someone in the provincial government at that time didn’t do 
their homework. I agree that the $80,000 was not taxed. 
 
But at any point did the Department of Labour discuss this issue 
with the Department of Finance about the total implications of 
receiving this money in one lump sum? Because if the money 
could have been paid out over a two- or three-year period, it 
would have helped these disenfranchised widows considerably 
concerning their old age security. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer is yes, 
officials did speak, and our Department of Finance was the 
contact with the federal government. Officials continue to speak 
back and forth. We’re actively trying to seek the proper solution 
to this file. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I accept that answer. 
The problem is that every other jurisdiction in Canada, the 
provincial government notify their widows of the implications 
of receiving the money, and all the other provinces told their 
disenfranchised widows that their old age security would be 
clawed back. It’s only Saskatchewan that they were not 
informed. 
 
And I’d like to know what the government is going to do about 
that issue, considering that they did not fully inform the widows 
of the implications of the clawback and, I might add, were 
given a very short time to sign a release where they could not 
sue or could not carry on any other concerns with the 
government once they accepted the money. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I should add 
something to the last answer . . . previous answer. My officials 
have just shared with me that the advice that we provided to the 
disenfranchised widows was that they should seek some 
financial counselling and advice independent of Workers’ 
Comp, or government, if you like. So that was done at the time 
that we were dealing with them. 
 
The member for Redberry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, says that all 
other jurisdictions have treated disenfranchised widows well. 
Let me assure everybody, everybody, that widows in 
Saskatchewan, though there are some problems around this 
federal government clawback in an amount that we estimate is 
about $5,000 for up to close to a hundred of them — $5,000 
each, that’s what we understand the problem is — but let me 
share, widows in Saskatchewan got $80,000 tax-free. Widows, 
disenfranchised widows in Nova Scotia in exactly the same 
position as widows in Saskatchewan were, got nickel zero — 
nickel zero. 
 
And in fact what happened, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is there was a 
court case in Nova Scotia. The courts ruled that there was no 
legal obligation to pay Nova Scotia disenfranchised widows any 
money because the law had been followed. So in Nova Scotia, 
zero; Saskatchewan, $80,000 tax-free. 
 
And now we’re dealing with an unfortunate circumstance that is 



1068 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

estimated to be roughly $5,000 per disenfranchised widow, up 
to close to 100 of them, that the federal government has clawed 
back. That’s the circumstance we’re dealing with right now. 
 
We’re in agreement. I think the hon. member for Redberry is 
saying gee, we should find a way of making that right. We’re in 
agreement. We’re active on the file. We’re working on it. If we 
could just get the federal government to honour their 
commitment right up front, if we can get that, we’re home free. 
That’s what we’re working for actively. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
I agree that widows were given the advice to get legal advice 
concerning this whole issue. 
 
But I think the point has to be made that these widows who are 
65 years and older . . . many of them are in their 80’s, I believe 
even some are in their 90’s. And considering the release form 
that they had to sign in order to get this lump sum, it was not a 
long time. Not everyone is up to date on the legal matters in this 
world. And especially the elderly aren’t quite aware of all their 
rights and they were relying on the government, the provincial 
government, to look after them in this case. 
 
And I believe it’s the provincial government’s responsibility 
concerning this clawback and they just didn’t have the time or 
maybe the wherewithal to get legal advice or proper legal 
advice concerning this issue. And it’s really a tax matter that 
they had to deal with and they just accepted the minister at the 
time, her word, that it was not taxable. And even though the 
$80,000 was not taxable, the effect it had on their old age 
security. 
 
And I’m just wondering, if the federal government does not 
rectify this situation, what is the provincial government going to 
do for the widows? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, first and foremost 
again, this is not an income tax issue. The hon. member comes 
back to it’s an income tax issue in his question. This is not an 
income tax issue. The disenfranchised widows received $80,000 
tax-free. Not taxable. The issue is it has been clawed back by 
the federal government through the old age security system. 
That’s why we want and need a remission order from the 
federal government. 
 
If we do as the member were to suggest and pay it again — pay 
some further monies again — well guess what? We still have a 
clawback issue with the federal government. How many times 
must we pay it? We have to get a remission order from the 
federal government. We have to get a remission order from the 
federal government so that we can end this and get that money 
to those disenfranchised widows as quickly as we possibly can. 
That’s what we have to do. 
 
With respect to the other issue you raised earlier in your 
question. You said, well some of these widows are in their 70’s, 
some in their 80’s, some in their 90’s. And you said that the 
time limit they were given from the time they found out about it 
until they had to sign off to get the $80,000 was very short. 
 
Well these widows, these disenfranchised widows, particularly 
those in their 80’s and 90’s, we tried to get them cash quickly 

— $80,000 tax-free as quickly as we could. So there was some 
urgency to that. As quickly as we got their signed waiver — 
very, very quickly after that they got the cash. That’s point one. 
 
Point two is that they had two years — not two months or two 
weeks or two days — they had two years to seek whatever 
independent legal advice, financial advice, whatever they 
wanted. Two years. And that’s not long enough? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to ask one more 
question to the minister concerning this issue. My sources say 
that the federal government sent a letter to all the provinces 
concerning this clawback of old age security. I understand your 
government and your department received this letter. Is it 
possible that you could make that letter public? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Perhaps I missed the first part of that 
question, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Can the member repeat this 
again? I’m not sure what letter he’s referring to. That’s the 
question. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well I’ve been told that all the provincial 
governments received a letter from the federal Finance 
department or the Revenue department concerning this issue 
around this clawback and effect on the widows over 65. And 
I’m wondering if you’re aware of this letter, and if you could 
make that public. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve not . . . I have no 
knowledge of the letter you’re referring to. I have not . . . I have 
not seen the letter, nor have my department officials, I’m told. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to move on 
to another issue concerning pay equity. The Saskatchewan 
Federation of Labour has called upon your government to pass 
pay equity legislation that would apply to not only the public 
sector but also to the private sector. Is this something that the 
government is contemplating this spring? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with respect to the 
issue of pay equity, I’m going to preface my remarks and I’ll try 
and answer the question. But I want to preface my remarks by 
sharing this is not in the purview of the Department of Labour. 
This issue falls under the Women’s Secretariat, and the hon. 
member for Regina Wascana Plains is the minister . . . the 
appropriate minister responsible. 
 
Now to try and address briefly the hon. member’s question 
about pay equity. We have long held the view that what we 
have to do, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to do everything we can to 
make sure that our own house is in order, to which we have 
been systematically going through government contracts if I can 
describe it that way, different . . . department by department, as 
negotiations take place. We’ve been advancing the cause of pay 
equity; we’ve been putting money into it. We went that route. 
We went through the Crown corporations, and we have . . . I 
don’t know whether to describe it as starting or well into the 
non-government organizations — probably I could say well into 
it fairly safely, although there is much work to be done until we 
finally achieve the final pay equity that we all desire in 
Saskatchewan. 



May 10, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1069 

 

We’re moving, and we’re determined that the steps we take are 
going to be long lasting as opposed to if we were to simply 
introduce a piece of legislation that the next . . . some 
subsequent government might simply reverse. So we want to 
build a solid, real pay-equity system throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I was wondering if I’d like to . . . I 
would like to ask a few more questions around this issue. If 
your department has been looking into that area, I was 
wondering if you’d give a kind of a outline of how much this 
would cost and what effect pay equity would have on overall 
employment in this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I sincerely thank the hon. member for 
Redberry for his interest in this, and I can assure you it’s an 
interest I share. The problem is it’s totally inappropriate for me 
to answer questions that are the responsibility of another 
ministry in terms of costs and that sort of thing. So I simply 
would ask that the hon. member ask those in the appropriate 
estimates. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Minister, is your 
government contemplating bringing in either additional paid or 
unpaid family leave? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, if the question is 
around maternity leave, paternity leave, or parental leave, the 
answer is yes. If the question is around family leave in general, 
the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Even though you’ve said you’re 
not contemplating bringing in unpaid family leave, has your 
department done any studies into the cost of business extending 
such unscheduled additional leaves whether it be paid or 
unpaid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, no. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like to move on to another 
topic. The issue of employer rate deductions at Workers’ 
Compensation Board. For obvious reasons it makes good 
business sense to keep these rates as low as possible. Last fall I 
understand that WCB (Workers’ Compensation Board) 
proposed lower average rates for its next fiscal year to $1.70 per 
100 in payroll, down from $1.73 per $100 in payroll. 
 
Could you confirm that this has in fact been implemented, and 
if so when did it come into effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer is yes, 
January 1, 2001. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. What was 
the WCB’s operating surplus in fiscal year 2000-2001? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, that annual report has 
yet to be tabled, and as quickly as it’s tabled the answer will be 
in the report. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Does the department have a 
prediction of the operating surplus for those years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s inappropriate for 

me to comment on any financial statements in a report that’s yet 
to be tabled in the House. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there has been employer 
rebates in the past. Are there any plans to rebate a portion of 
any operating surplus back to the Saskatchewan employers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this might be helpful. 
I’m assured that before this department comes before this 
committee again we will have the annual report tabled. The 
answer to that question is in the annual report yet to be tabled, 
and I’d just ask the member to wait until the tabling of the 
document. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, has the WCB done any 
testing to improve its assessment or billing system? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m pleased to report 
that the answer is yes, the Compensation Board has run a pilot 
project, and that several employers have signed up for this 
alternate method of payment. And they’re always looking for 
ways to be ever more efficient and in tune with not only 
business but of course the other part of the operation, which is 
looking after injured workers. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — My question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to those 
. . . to the pilot project. When was this testing done, what kinds 
of tests were conducted, what were the results of these tests, and 
what recommendations were made? And have any of these 
recommendations been implemented? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Yes, the 
pilot started January 1, 2001 as I reported in a previous answer. 
It’s going to run for the full 12 months, is the plan. There are 
approximately 50 employers that signed up to be part of this 
pilot project. 
 
The plan is that about September there will be an evaluation 
done of how well it’s working and how it might be improved, 
and then the decisions that will flow from that will take place 
presumably October, November, and possibly December. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There have been 
some concerns brought up regarding an increase in 
administration expenses at WCB, the fact that salaries and 
employee benefits were up nearly 13 per cent last year. Last 
fall’s rate-setting meeting, your former chairman, Mr. Stan 
Cameron, assured stakeholders that the WCB was committed to 
holding the line on its administrative budgets in the next fiscal 
year. 
 
Could you please confirm for us today that the number of 
employees at WCB has not changed from the last fiscal year? If 
there has been any increase, which departments were affected 
and why were more staff people required? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the administration 
costs will be in the annual report. With respect to the number of 
employees, though I suspect it might be in the annual report, 
I’m going to share — about 420 employees; it’s very, very 
close. We think no change from last year. 
 
I will undertake to share if there is change, with the member 



1070 Saskatchewan Hansard May 10, 2001 

 

opposite. I’m offering up 420, trying to be helpful, but 
appreciate you may want some finer detail on that. We’ll make 
sure that you get that. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
there has been some concern expressed by small-business 
owners that the WCB has been planning a half a million dollar 
public relations campaign this next fiscal year. Are there still 
plans for this campaign to go ahead? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, there certainly was 
plans that were cancelled a year ago. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — So it was cancelled. So are there any plans for 
future years as far as a campaign? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, who can predict 
future years. There’s no current plans. That’s the best I can 
offer up. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Fifty-eight per cent of employers 
felt that WCB was not being run efficiently. That’s not exactly 
a crowning endorsement of the board’s success. Mr. Minister, 
what steps are you planning to take to improve in this area? 
Have you met with key stakeholders for discussion in this area, 
and what were some of the recommendations? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I report to the 
member opposite that the Dorsey report was to deal . . . is to 
deal with administration at the Workers’ Compensation Board 
some of the issues that the member was just raising. 
 
And as I’ve said earlier this day, the Dorsey report is going to 
be released very shortly and that will make it fairly apparent, I 
think, some of the direction that . . . some of the steps that we’re 
going to take to improve some of the administration concerns at 
the board. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Minister, 
and to your staff. Mr. Minister, last week I had an opportunity 
to introduce you to someone who had been a constituent, and I 
was very grateful that you took the opportunity to meet with 
her. 
 
Her concern was regarding the widows’ pension and the fact 
that after five years someone who had children whose spouse 
was killed, had their widows either cut off depending on how 
much money they made, or there’d be a rollback or an actual 
subtraction of the amount of money that they made, was taken 
away from their pension that they received as a result of their 
spousal benefit. 
 
Mr. Minister, maybe you could give us an update on what 
WCB’s policy is to date, telling me what happens when 
someone loses their spouse and widows receive a pension. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — I thank the hon. member for the question. 
The way the system works is for, in the case of a death at work 
covered by the Compensation Board, there is five years of wage 
loss unconditional. If there are children involved, there is a 
dependant’s allowance, again unconditional. 

After five years, if the surviving spouse is employed, the 
employment income is deducted from the wage loss of the 
deceased person but it would be topped up assuming that the 
surviving spouse is earning less. So there would be wage 
top-up, but there’s an expectation that after five years the 
spouse would be working. 
 
With respect to the dependant’s allowance, that continues until 
the youngest child attains the age of 16 or — or — that extends 
if the child is attending a post-secondary education institute, 
university, SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science 
and Technology), that sort of thing. In a nutshell, that’s the way 
it’s worked . . . it works. 
 
I suspect you may have some other questions and I welcome 
them. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To the 
minister: how was the number of years, five years, picked? It 
seems like it’s an arbitrary number. Why would that . . . that 
would be the number that would be determined that the spouse 
would no longer receive any benefits or partial benefits from 
WCB? 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the answer to the 
question is this is provided for in the Workers’ Compensation 
legislation. It’s provided in the legislation. 
 
And this is a year of a Committee of Review, as a further 
supplementary answer. This is a year of Committee of Review, 
and the member opposite or anyone is certainly entitled to raise 
that matter with the Committee of Review and I would 
encourage you or widows to raise that issue. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I understand that it’s part of the 
legislation. My question was how was this arrived at, because 
any number could have been picked as part of the legislation. 
 
And also wondering, Saskatchewan is one of, I believe, only 
three provinces that still keeps this five years in their 
legislation. A lot of provinces continue it to the age 65. Is there 
any thoughts about changing this legislation before this 
Committee of Review? 
 
And just so you know, I’ll have questions on the Committee of 
Review as well. 
 
Hon. Mr. Trew: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member for 
Wadena raises some interesting and good points, and certainly 
that should be considered by the Committee of Review. And it’s 
my hope that the Committee of Review can consider it and 
make a recommendation on that area. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:56. 
 
 


