















































Hansard: May 29, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1393 
 May 29, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition to present again 
today from people who are concerned about the Wadena health 
care centre. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health care 
centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services for our users 
in our district and beyond. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena, 
Hendon, Rose Valley, and Fosston. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the ever-increasing energy 
costs. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 

Signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from my home 
community of Melfort and also from Kinistino, Weldon, and 
Cut Knife. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present on behalf of those who are concerned about the effects 
of smoking. And this comes from the citizens of Weyburn, 
Midale, and Moose Jaw. And the petition reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present a petition 
this afternoon. The prayer of relief reads as follows: 
 

That your Hon. Assembly may be pleased to call on the 
provincial and federal governments to provide immediate 
financial assistance to the city of North Battleford in order 
to facilitate necessary improvements to the North 

Battleford water treatment plant. 
 
Your petitioners come from Battleford and North Battleford. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition signed 
by citizens concerned with the deplorable condition of Highway 
339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Moose Jaw, Briercrest, Drinkwater, and Hearne. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Wadena. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Wadena health centre 
be maintained at its current level of service at minimum, 
with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and doctoral services 
available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, and long-term care services available to 
users from this district and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by the good folks at Wadena and Quill Lake. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to present a petition today signed by Saskatchewan 
citizens who have expressed interest in maintaining and 
upgrading the Saskatchewan road network. And the prayer goes 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to ask the Government of 
Saskatchewan to continue with its foresight and vision of 
increasing the funding to $900 million over the next three 
years to maintain and upgrade our thoroughfares of 
commerce. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks from 
Stenen and Hyas, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
petitioners concerned about the hospital in Swift Current. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer, the petition reads as follows: 
 

A request that the Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause 



1394 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

the provincial government to carefully consider Swift 
Current’s request for a new hospital. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as in duty bound, your petitioners will 
ever pray. 

 
This particular petition is signed by residents of Swift Current, 
Webb, Neville, Pennant, Frontier, Eastend, Orkney, Val Marie, 
and Climax, and 36 residents of the Waldeck Hutterite Colony. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about proposals put forward in the Fyke report that 
would be judgmental and devastating to health care in the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to take the necessary steps to 
ensure that services are maintained at least at their current 
levels at Weyburn General Hospital, Bengough Health 
Centre, Radville Marian Health Centre, and Pangman 
Health Centre in order that accessible health care services 
are available to residents of the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency and beyond. 

 
And this is signed by residents of Weyburn, Yellow Grass, 
Tribune, and Glasnevin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I do have a 
petition to present on behalf of the citizens of the province 
regarding the EMS (emergency medical service) service. The 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intention to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people in the Redvers 
and Alida areas. 
 
I so present. 
 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise 
today to present a petition signed by citizens of Saskatchewan 
who are concerned about the use of tobacco, the effects of 
tobacco smoke, and especially as this pertains to younger 
children. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 
 
These citizens, Mr. Speaker, are from Weyburn, Radville, and 
Melville. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present on behalf of the people of the Redvers 
area. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency and doctoral 
services available, as well as laboratory, physiotherapy, 
public health, home care, long-term care services available 
to the users from our district, southeast Saskatchewan, 
southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions come from the Redvers and Bellegarde areas. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I rise again today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about their cellular 
telephone coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone services in the districts of Rabbit 
Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, Borden, 
Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 
 
And as in duty bound your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Marcelin and Leask. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Mr. Speaker, I rise to present a petition in 
support of comprehensive tobacco control legislation. And this 
petition contains over 500 names collected by an individual in 
Weyburn concerned about the human and financial cost to the 
people of Saskatchewan. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 
provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
And these are petitions signed by people from Weyburn, Bison, 
Midale, Halbrite, and there’s approximately 500 names on these 
petitions. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1395 

 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
opposed to the possible reduction of health services in 
Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency 
and doctoral services available. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Kamsack and Togo. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here of citizens 
concerned with the rate increases that have occurred while the 
government is enjoying hundreds of millions of dollars in 
windfall oil and gas revenues. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Chamberlain, Estevan, 
Lashburn, Fort Qu’Appelle, Saskatoon, Regina, Craik, and 
Mossbank. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise in the 
Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by citizens of 
Saskatchewan, in regards to improved cellular telephone 
coverage. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are signed 
from Spiritwood, Mildred, and Chitek Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 
behalf of Saskatchewan residents that are in support of 
comprehensive tobacco control legislation, Mr. Speaker. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to pass comprehensive 

provincial legislation to prevent children from starting to 
smoke, to protect all citizens from second-hand smoke in 
public places and workplaces, and to control youth access 
to tobacco products. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker. And the petitioners are from the city of Weyburn, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition signed by folks 
from the province concerned about the high energy costs. And 
the prayer reads as follows. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rebate to the province’s customers. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Unity, 
Duck Lake, and Didsbury, Alberta. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition to improve cellular telephone 
coverage in the Wood River constituency. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular coverage service to all 
communities throughout the Wood River Constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Rockglen. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 

Of citizens of the province asking that the Davidson and 
Craik health centres be maintained at their current level of 
service. 

 
And 12 other petitions that are tabled as addendums to 
previously tabled petitions. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce to you and to the Assembly, seated in the west 
gallery, 62 students from Silverwood Heights School in my 
constituency. 
 
And accompanying these students are also nine students from 
Nunavut who are here on an exchange. And 10 students from 



1396 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

Silverwood Heights had gone up to Nunavut earlier, and I’m 
sure they will describe an enjoyable experience. But I would 
ask all members to welcome the students from Silverwood 
Heights and the visitors from Nunavut. 
 
And accompanying the group today are teachers Jeremy 
Hozian, Russ Sheppard, Becky Harding, and Andrew Miller. 
 
So I’d ask all members to welcome them to the Assembly 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly, I’d like to introduce 
some students from Limerick that are sitting in the east gallery. 
Mr. Speaker, six grade 10 students — small numbers again 
because it’s rural Saskatchewan. And their teacher, Mr. Jeff 
Feeley, is with them. 
 
I had the opportunity to meet with these folks before session, 
and I must say we had a good discussion on the political 
spectrum. So I’m sure they’re going to enjoy question period 
this afternoon. 
 
So would you please join me in welcoming these students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, sitting in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, 27 grade 5 
students from the Pilot Butte School. They are accompanied 
today by their teacher, Angela Downs. 
 
And I’ve been squinting a bit — there’s some senior-looking 
students up in the back row but I wasn’t given the names of the 
chaperones, but I certainly do welcome them to the Assembly 
as well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve had the privilege of being able to go to Pilot 
Butte School on many occasions. They have a wonderful 
developmental centre there, and I’ve watched as these students 
and others make their fellow colleagues and students feel very 
welcome at Pilot Butte School. 
 
And I’ve been there for musicals. I’ve looked at the wonderful 
art work. And I know I’m going to have a great visit with the 
students. We’ll be meeting after question period so they’ll have 
a lot to ask me. We’ll come together, I’ll try and answer their 
questions and provide a refreshment. 
 
I ask all members to join with me to welcome Pilot Butte 
School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Mining Week 
 

Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is 
Saskatchewan Mining Week, and as all members know — I 

think there are some 30 of us tonight going over to meet with 
the COGEMA Board of Directors who are in town to help 
celebrate this event — mining is an extremely important 
industry here in this province. It’s an industry which employs 
20,000 people. It’s an industry which pays more than 2 billion 
annually in wages, goods, and services. An industry that 
generates about 2.5 billion in sales annually and about 200 
million in royalties for this province. This is a major sector of 
our economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an industry that we are pleased on this side 
of the Assembly to work closely with, and I would encourage 
the members opposite to wake up, wake up, and hear what the 
mining industry has to say. 
 
Mining Association President Josef Spross says the province is 
serious about keeping pace with the incentives offered in 
surrounding jurisdictions. Saskatchewan has opened the door to 
welcome investors, says Mr. Spross. 
 
The executive director of the Mining Association, Mr. Speaker, 
says that he is: 
 

. . . especially heartened by the positive response from the 
provincial government, which has stepped up with a $1 
million geoscience initiative and flow-through investment 
tax credits. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Neil McMillan of the Mining Association says, 
quote: 
 

You have to give the provincial government credit (you 
have to give the provincial government credit) for the 
measures they have come up with. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these high-ranking officials in the Mining 
Association recognize the support of this government. I hope 
the members opposite will do so, and join with us in celebrating 
mining in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Business Excellence Awards 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m grateful for the 
opportunity to be able to congratulate the 17 Swift Current 
businesses who were competing for seven very prestigious 
Swift Current Business Excellence Awards sponsored by the 
Swift Current Chamber of Commerce last Wednesday evening 
in Swift Current. 
 
Congratulations to Mcelheran and Woodworks Manufacturing 
who won the young entrepreneur award. Joe and Barb Arling 
and the entire team they have with them at the Best Western Inn 
were worthy winners of the customer service award. Boston 
Pizza took home the award for new business of the year. 
Etcetera Etcetera won for property appearance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for the better part of this century, Standard Motors 
in Swift Current has been employing people and contributing to 
the local economy. This 90-year-young business received the 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1397 

 

Swift Current business excellence heritage Award. 
 
Congratulations as well to the team at Wheatland Machine Shop 
and their achievement in winning a major new award unveiled 
called the business choice award. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, a special acknowledgement to the third 
annual Swift Current Business Excellence business of the year 
award winner, Pharmasave. Ron Heeg started this business in 
1964, later joined by his partner Al Chilton, and they still 
operate a very excellent retail outlet recently renovated. 
 
Congratulations to Pharmasave and all the winners and those 
who were nominated, Mr. Speaker. And a special thanks to the 
Swift Current Chamber of Commerce whose efforts on the 
business excellence awards are exemplary of the dedication 
they have to making Swift Current a great place to do business. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Weyerhaeuser’s Saskatchewan Forestland 
Achieve ISO 14001 Certification 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The maintaining and 
preserving of our environment continues to be an important 
issue here in Saskatchewan as well as around the globe. And 
many groups, both business and non-governmental 
organizations, strive to become more cognizant of their impact 
on the environment. 
 
One such corporation is Weyerhaeuser, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure on behalf of all members of the Assembly to 
congratulate Weyerhaeuser Saskatchewan for achieving ISO 
(International Organization for Standardization) 14001 
Certification for 4.9 million hectares of Saskatchewan 
Forestlands. 
 
The ISO 14001 Certification was established by the 
International Organization for Standardization which is 
headquartered in Switzerland. The International Organization 
for Standardization provides a framework for a company to 
identify areas where its activities, products, and services have 
an environmental impact, and requires the company to make a 
commitment to continual improvement. So far, 8.28 million 
hectares of forest managed by Weyerhaeuser in Canada, United 
States, and New Zealand, have been ISO 14001 certified. 
 
I want to congratulate the entire Forestlands staff and all of the 
forestry contractors and their employees who helped to prepared 
for the ISO 14001 standard. As Weyerhaeuser Saskatchewan 
environmental management system coordinator, John Doucette 
said, this achievement will help Weyerhaeuser deliver in its 
commitments to sustainable forestry and environment 
excellence. 
 
I ask all members of the Assembly to join me in congratulating 
Weyerhaeuser Saskatchewan on achieving ISO 14001 
Certification. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Old Tyme Fiddle Jamboree Held in Battleford 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Toes were tapping at 
the 5th annual Old Tyme Fiddle Jamboree in Battleford this 
past weekend. Sponsored by the Royal Canadian Legion, the 
jamboree shows off a great array of Saskatchewan talent for all 
ages. 
 
The jamboree provided good, clean, family fun with a weekend 
of fiddle music and fellowship for the 750 people in attendance. 
From the toe-tapping music to the step-dancing to pancake 
breakfast to the special church service, the weekend was a 
lively affair. 
 
My wife, Shirley, and I and our three granddaughters enjoyed 
ourselves immensely. The jamboree is another example of the 
great things that take place in my constituency. 
 
We are again looking forward to next year’s jamboree, on May 
25, 2002 and we invite you all to mark your calendars and come 
to the Battlefords for a weekend of fun and fiddle music. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yanke Trucking Wins Award 
 
Ms. Jones: — Behold Mr. Speaker, I bring you glad tidings of 
great joy from Saskatchewan. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, another private Saskatchewan-based 
company thriving under this coalition government, Yanke 
Group of Companies from Saskatoon, was one of five firms to 
receive an employment equity award from the Conference 
Board of Canada in Toronto. 
 
To receive such an award, Mr. Speaker, companies must show 
progress in implementing equity for four designated groups: 
women, visible minorities, Aboriginal peoples, and people with 
disabilities. 
 
Yanke Group of Companies has long ago developed a work 
plan that addressed these issues, said Deborah Salter, the 
company’s human resource manager. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Yanke Group of Companies is also a key player in 
the international transportation industry and is committed to 
being a community and industry leader, providing 
transportation solutions in partnership with their customers. 
 
Under the company’s collective vision, along with strong 
leadership from CEO (chief executive officer) Russel Maroux, 
the Yanke Group of Companies has grown from a mere 2 trucks 
to a fleet of over 400 and boomed from 33 employees in 1986 
to over 650 in 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to take this opportunity to formally 
congratulate Yanke Group of Companies on their excellent 
achievement and their continued success in the future. It is 
people and companies like this that make Saskatchewan the best 
place in Canada to call home. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1398 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

Central Saskatchewan Music Festival 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On April 27 the 
Central Saskatchewan Music Festival held their grand finale 
performance. These extremely talented performers included the 
winners, the entries in the five-day music festival. 
 
There were a total of 217 entries in this year’s festival. These 
talented performers came from many communities around 
Davidson including Imperial, Liberty, Loreburn, Strongfield, 
Bladworth, Girvin, and Saskatoon. The entries included speech 
arts, vocal, piano, as well as other musical instruments. 
 
The highlight of the evening was a special award that was 
presented to Mrs. Fran Stone of Davidson. Mrs. Stone is a past 
president of Central Saskatchewan Music Festival Committee to 
receive the volunteer award from the provincial Music Festival 
Association. 
 
The award recognizes Mrs. Stone’s 15-year involvement with 
the music festival. She was honoured for her effort and 
dedication she gives to the festival. It has been commented that 
Mrs. Stone gives selflessly of her time and does a wonderful job 
of any task she undertakes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask the members to join me in congratulating 
Mrs. Stone on her well-deserved award, and the Central 
Saskatchewan Music Festival Committee for another successful 
event. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Rielisms 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to encourage all 
members to go and see an exhibit currently being shown at the 
Dunlop Art Gallery in the Regina Public Library. The exhibit, 
entitled Rielisms, seeks to challenge Canadians’ perception and 
ownership of Louis Riel. This exhibit asks the viewer to 
consider just whose hero Louis Riel was. 
 
Rielisms was organized by the Winnipeg Art Gallery, and 
Catherine Mattes is the guest curator. The exhibit is an 
extension of her master’s thesis, which demonstrates how 
widely, the identity of Riel varies in the public imagination. 
What results is a presentation of contrasting artistic depictions 
of Riel. These images, made during the ’70s, ’80s, and ’90s, 
demonstrate how complex Riel’s role in history was and still is. 
 
I must mention that a former constituent of mine, now a 
constituent of Regina Centre, contributed to the exhibition. 
Sherry Farrell Racette’s paper, “Metis Man or Canadian Icon: 
Who Owns Louis Riel,” is included in the exhibition’s 
catalogue, and two pieces of her artwork appear in the 
exhibition. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all of those involved for 
presenting such a thought-provoking exhibit. This exhibit 
demonstrates that through art, we can engage in a cross-cultural 
dialogue to examine complex issues. 
 
I want to close by reading a phrase authored by Louis Riel that 
attests to the ability of art to challenge: 

My people will sleep for a hundred years, and when they 
awake it will be the artists who give them back their spirit. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Allegations of Impropriety Regarding Ministerial Trip 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, isn’t it amazing, everyday we seem to get a 
confirmation of another one of these so-called unfounded 
allegations. Today’s catch of the day is the member from 
Meadow Lake. It seems Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
spent over $1,100 to send its former minister on a fishing trip. 
 
Does the Premier think this is an appropriate use of taxpayers’ 
dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, ministers of the Crown, 
members of government, and if I may say, members of the 
opposition will on a continual basis be meeting with members 
of the public, with members of industry and science who may 
want to invest or work in this province. 
 
That a minister of the Crown is meeting with an individual or 
individuals involved in trade in this province, I do not find at all 
unusual nor do I believe would members of the opposition who 
in their capacity as members of this legislature, on a daily and 
weekly basis, are utilizing tax money to do their work. I think 
we all have work to do here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Isn’t it interesting the Premier thinks that 
three men in a tub on Waskesiu Lake is the right place to go 
ahead and carry out government business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning, this morning the Premier said he 
wants the Western premiers to focus on social issues. Well 
here’s a social issue for the Premier. 
 
There is still a lot of people in this province, Mr. Speaker, who 
don’t make $1,100 a month. Yet the Premier thinks it’s okay for 
his minister to take $1,100 of taxpayers’ money and go on a 
fishing trip. If the minister wants to go on a fishing trip, the 
minister should pay for it himself . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — . . . not the taxpayer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Premier. How can the Premier possibly 
justify — justify — using taxpayers’ dollars for his minister to 
go on a fishing trip? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1399 

 

(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the minister has responded 
quite publicly to some of the detail around his time in La 
Ronge, Mr. Speaker, where he was staying with . . . using a 
relative’s cottage, using a relative’s boat and so on. It is 
appropriate that a minister of the Crown, that a member of 
government, and if I may say in my view, members of the 
opposition, should be in contact and in the company of those 
who work. 
 
If you disagree, if you disagree, my friends, then why is it that I 
see members of the opposition attending to functions, as that 
function we’ll be attending to tonight — many of us — to meet 
members of industry in the COGEMA field, where there will, I 
believe, be food and drink. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if it is inappropriate, if it is inappropriate to travel 
and to meet people, how is it then that members of the 
opposition are signing up for the CPA (Commonwealth 
Parliamentary Association) trips all over the world, Mr. 
Speaker, at taxpayer expense? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is appropriate, in my view, it is 
appropriate that members of government should meet with 
people. It is appropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the Premier 
wants to compare this, wants to compare this trip . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order! Order. I ask 
members on both sides to come to order. Order. Member for 
Rosthern will start over. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the Premier 
wants to compare this little junket to a CPA trip, he’s got 
something else than line on his reel. I can assure you of that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister says the president of Bacardi wanted 
to discuss the mark-up rate, the mark-up rate. Of course they 
couldn’t do that over the phone; saying I want 10 per cent, you 
want 15 per cent can’t be done over the phone, Mr. Speaker. 
They couldn’t that in the minister’s office. They couldn’t do it 
downstairs in room 10. The only place they could possibly carry 
this out is in a boat in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming should not be 
spending $1,100 of taxpayers’ money to pay for that minister’s 
summer vacation. What action is the Premier going to take 
against the minister for this blatant abuse of taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I have not kept a strict 
record myself, but I can’t remember the last time in this House 
when a member of that opposition got up and asked about the 
situation facing farm families in western Saskatchewan when 
. . . (inaudible) . . . I can’t remember an occasion when that 
happened. 
 
I can’t remember an occasion in this legislature during this 

session when a member of the opposition got asked about 
children who may be hungry in the downtown of this city. I 
can’t remember that. But we have a focus on the activity of a 
minister doing the business of the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, these are important issues 
the opposition raises — fair enough. But I tell you, doing the 
work of government, doing the work of an opposition means 
meeting with people. And if it is suggested by the opposition 
that the tax funding should not exist for travel or for meeting 
with individuals, then they should accept the same rule for 
themselves as they travel around the province claiming mileage 
to meet with people, using caucus funds to put on functions, 
Mr. Speaker. Travelling, if I may say, around the world on their 
taxpayer-funded trips. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — If the Premier wants to talk about farming the 
least he could do, Mr. Speaker, is to put his name on CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program). If he’s concerned about 
poor, hungry people in Regina he should take care of it. It’s his 
budget; it’s his cabinet that has messed it up. He should take 
some responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The utter hypocrisy of that is unbelievable, 
Mr. Speaker. Hypocrisy is what that is. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Apparently the minister and president of the 
party went to check out the Waskesiu Liquor Store. A lot of 
people go on a tour of a liquor store before their fishing trip but 
the difference is usually people pay the liquor board, not the 
other way around. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister’s explanation doesn’t pass the test. 
The bottom line is he spent $1,100 of taxpayers’ money on a 
fishing trip. Mr. Speaker, what action is the Premier going to 
take to discipline his member for misusing taxpayers’ dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member has raised this 
question in the House. It has become a matter of some press 
coverage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I entertained the thought earlier this morning of 
including the minister’s involvement in this trip with the review 
of this whole matter that’s being conducted by Justice 
Wakeling. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m not going to do that but what I am going to do 
is ask our Conflict of Interest Commissioner, our Conflict of 
Interest Commissioner, to review this circumstance and then 
report back to this independent level of the officer. Now maybe 
there are other expenditures of members opposite that I should 
also review or refer to the Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 
Or perhaps the Leader of the Opposition should refer to the 



1400 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

Conflict of Interest Commissioner. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — I suggest, Mr. Speaker, before the Premier 
starts making threats, he should take any information he has, 
take it to the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police), as his 
House minister is so fond of jumping up and down and saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Bonnie Swan calls it an old boys’ club. Excellent 
description. Bacardi takes the boys from SLGA (Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Authority) down to the Bahamas for a 
vacation and the minister takes the boys from Bacardi down to a 
fishing trip. Meanwhile, the woman who threatens to break up 
this old boys’ club, she gets fired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, doesn’t this bother the Premier? What kind of 
government is he running, where people who break the rules 
keep their jobs and people who report it get fired? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the matter of the 
termination to which the member refers was dealt with 
yesterday by the minister in this House and dealt with 
extensively in front of the press. 
 
And he will know, if he chose to listen to any of the answers, 
Mr. Speaker, that process here was entirely followed; that the 
services of the Department of Justice were utilized. And if the 
member is interested, or members of the media are interested, 
Department of Justice officials will be available to answer 
questions about the process involved, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Due process was followed, as opposed to the practice that 
occurs in this House now almost on a daily basis where 
members of the opposition will stand up wanting the politicians, 
if you can believe it, to insert themselves directly into the 
process of personnel matters in government. 
 
Well I know, Mr. Speaker, I know from sitting over there 
watching this group in government that was their practice — to 
involve themselves directly in the personnel matters of 
government. 
 
I tell you, Mr. Speaker, under this regime that’s not going to be 
happening. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Wouldn’t it be nice, Mr. Speaker, if the 
Premier involved himself in the business of government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). While he was 
minister of Liquor and Gaming, did the minister ever take any 
other trips of this nature? Did the minister take any other trips 
paid for by SLGA or by a liquor company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — To the best of my recollection, Mr. 
Speaker, I am aware that we represented Saskatchewan in 

Norfolk, Virginia, where we were requested to make a 
presentation with respect to the regulations here in 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan, in North America, is viewed to 
be having one of the strongest set of regulations around liquor 
and gaming. 
 
We were asked to make a representation and presentation there. 
And to the best of my recollection I believe that Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming would have paid for that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ministerial Involvement in Saskatchewan 
Liquor and Gaming Personnel Matter 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Slightly better 
recollection than the minister for Liquor and Gaming’s had 
recently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday we saw a new level of incompetence 
from an NDP (New Democratic Party) minister. The minister of 
Liquor and Gaming repeatedly denied she had anything to do 
with the investigation of Bonnie Swan until I read to her a letter 
that named her as one of the two investigators. Even then she 
wasn’t too sure. Eventually she threw the whole mess back in 
the Premier’s lap saying the investigation was done by the 
Premier’s office — that’s what she said. And she is just along 
for the ride, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how long will this Premier tolerate this level of 
incompetence by his ministers? How long can you put up with a 
minister that doesn’t even know her own responsibilities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the challenge before me is 
how long can I tolerate this line of questioning from this 
opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the minister spoke very 
clearly yesterday about . . . well I’m glad the member from 
Saltcoats says he gives up because maybe what we can do is 
move on to some other important public issues. 
 
The minister yesterday spoke clearly of her role in this matter, 
how process was followed. I have no doubt in my mind that the 
proper processes were followed. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say this. I want to say this, Mr. 
Speaker. There are significant and important issues facing the 
people and the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. We 
await an opposition who will begin to deal with the significant 
public policy issues that face our people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, public accountability is one of 
the biggest issues this province is concerned about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1401 

 

Mr. Heppner: — The Premier wants to wonder how long he 
can tolerate this — we don’t care. We’ll ask the questions as 
long as we wish. It will be his job to worry about the answers 
— not the questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the Premier has sent a clear 
message to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — The Premier sent a clear message to the 
public service — if you see wrongdoing in your department, 
don’t say anything or you’ll be fired. Joe Dosenberger took 
evidence of illegal activity to the RCMP — he was fired. 
Bonnie Swan took illegal activity to the Premier’s office and 
she was fired, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In Bonnie Swan’s case it was the Premier’s office itself that did 
the investigation that resulted in her firing. And now many of 
these allegations are proving true. Yet the people involved still 
have their jobs and she’s fired. 
 
To the Premier, why are you firing your own government 
employees who report illegal activities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I nor any of my ministers 
hire or fire employees in the civil service. We will engage . . . I 
will engage the most senior of officials. We will engage those 
in our own office staff, but beyond we have process that the 
member is aware of — process which was followed in this case. 
 
Yesterday the minister and my deputy made that process very 
clear. Today if members of the media or members of the 
opposition have further question, we’ll have officials from the 
Department of Justice available to answer the questions about 
the process. 
 
Now this, Mr. Speaker, varies entirely from the way it used to 
work around here when these people occupied the government 
benches. I mean in those days, Mr. Speaker, it seemed you 
couldn’t get a job with the government unless you had a . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. The Premier. The 
Premier . . . 10 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now, Mr. Speaker, that is not going to 
be the practice under my government. We are not going to 
insert political decision making into the civil service. We are 
not going to do that. As much as they would want to see it done 
so that the precedent would be set if forever . . . if on any 
occasion they should form government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also recall process 
in this government. I recall when we had a Premier and his 
cabinet when we asked questions, they had answers. And the 
fact is if the member who’s sitting behind him had become 
leader, I’m sure we’d have some better answers than we have 

now too. 
 
It’s an effort by this Premier and his cabinet . . . their process is 
to hide absolutely everything that they possibly can, provide no 
answers, take no responsibility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming is responsible 
for hundreds of millions of taxpayers’ dollars. That gives the 
opportunity for misuse. We’re now learning of some of the 
misuse that takes place. Mr. Dosenberger, Bonnie Swan know 
what happens; they were fired. Everyday, Mr. Speaker, we hear 
from Liquor and Gaming officials who have serious concerns of 
other activities. 
 
When will the Premier lift this gag order he’s put in place? 
When will the Premier broaden the scope of Justice Wakeling’s 
investigation and allow these employees to report improper 
activity to Justice Wakeling without fear of retaliation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, this very day in this House, 
this government caucus will introduce an amendment which 
reads: 
 

That no member of the Legislative Assembly or employee 
of the government is above the law; and that no member or 
an employee of the government shall interfere with a police 
investigation; that no member or employee of government 
shall be punished for co-operating with a police 
investigation; and finally, should any employee of the 
government believe that she/he has been punished for 
co-operating with a legitimate police investigation that 
she/he has the right to take the matter to the director of 
labour standards for an investigation pursuant to section 74 
of The Labours Standards Act and any/all other remedies 
that may be available by law. 

 
Will you vote for that? Will you vote? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would remind all members — order — I 
would remind all members in questions and in their answers to 
direct all of their remarks through the Chair please. 
 

Conversion of Government Management 
Positions to Union Positions 

 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 
responsible for the Public Service Commission. 
 
On April 5, 2001 the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government’s Labour Relations Board ruled that 673 
management level government employees would be forced to 
join the Saskatchewan Government Employees’ Union by May 
1. 
 
Hundreds of these employees protested the government’s 
decision to force them into the union against their will. 
 



1402 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP is forcing 673 management employees to 
join the union without their permission and without a vote. The 
deadline for this forced unionization was May 1. How many 
employees have signed SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and 
General Employees’ Union) union cards as of today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, there’s three options 
regarding how people may be able to resolve this dispute. Part 
of the difficulty is there is no precedent for employees who are 
in the employ of the government after the time that the initial 
unionization happened but are not new hires. And those 
employees that fall in the grey middle are the question. 
 
At this point it appears as though the union and the Public 
Service Commission would have the option of going jointly to 
the Labour Relations Board for a ruling on how it affects those 
employees that fall in the grey area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Unfortunately, the 
minister didn’t answer the question. I wanted to know how 
many SGEU union cards were signed? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has unilaterally decided to take 673 
government managers, and force them to join the union against 
their will and without any kind of vote. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party has obtained an e-mail from Dave 
Atkinson. Mr. Atkinson is the director of labour relations for 
the Public Service Commission. The e-mail was titled, union 
security, union cards, union membership. 
 
According to the e-mail, which was sent on May 25 to all 
management staff affected by the NDP’s latest forced 
unionization initiative, a large number of managers are refusing 
to sign union cards. And they are also refusing to turn over 1.5 
per cent of their salary in forced union dues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does the NDP government intend to do to 
out-of-scope government managers who refuse to co-operate 
with the NDP’s latest forced unionization campaign? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Contrary to the views of the opposition, 
which is that a government makes up, laws . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The floor goes to the minister 
for the Public Service Commission. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — The floor goes to the Public Service 
Commission minister. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Contrary to the members opposite who 
think that ministers make up the laws as they go along, there are 
laws in this province. There is a Trade Union Act, there’s a 

Labour Relations Board to interpret that Trade Union Act. 
 
And what we have is a situation where if people were there the 
day the card was signed and the union is entered into in the 
workplace, they would then have to become members of that 
union but would have the option, if they were there on day one, 
of not signing the card but paying dues. 
 
For employees that were hired after that time, there’s a question 
mark about whether or not they have to sign the cards or 
whether they merely have to pay dues. And that’s the issue that 
has to be resolved because there isn’t clarity. 
 
And certainly the members opposite are not of the interest that 
people who are part of unionized workplaces would be union 
members. But teachers who become teachers are part of a 
unionized workplace, nurses are part of a unionized workplace, 
and so are public servants who become part of the unionized 
workplace. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker. According to Dave Atkinson, 
director of labour relations for the Public Service Commission, 
government managers who fight the NDP’s forced unionization 
initiative by refusing to join the union have two choices: either 
send the union 1.5 per cent of their salary, or the NDP will fire 
them immediately. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that the NDP has 
threatened to fire hundreds of government managers because 
they are refusing to go along with the NDP’s plan of forced 
unionization? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I don’t know what the member 
opposite doesn’t understand, Mr. Speaker. Because these people 
became part of a union member . . . a union-membered 
organization after they were already hired changes the 
circumstance somewhat. 
 
The Labour Relations Board will likely have to rule on how it 
changes the circumstance. Once they have ruled, the rules will 
be clear and people would be expected to follow them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, a memo sent to government 
managers affected by the NDP’s latest attempt at forced 
unionization clearly states that managers have three options: 
number one, join the union immediately; number two, don’t 
join the union but submit 1.5 per cent of their monthly 
management salary to the union, starting immediately; or 
number three, get fired by the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many of the 673 government managers that 
are being forced to join the union have refused to sign a union 
card? And will the minister confirm that the NDP is going to 
fire any of these 673 government management staff who refuse 
to either join the union or send the union 1.5 per cent of the 
salaries immediately. 
 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1403 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I’m glad to hear this 
eleventh hour concern about the public service. 
 
But I do mention that this is the same opposition that has said 
we know where the skunks are and we plan to get rid of them 
all. This is the same opposition that has consistently throughout 
the budget debate and the estimates process talked about the 
lack of respect they have for the people who have been added to 
the public service in corrections, in forest fire protection, in 
water safety. 
 
And I’m very touched by their concern but I can tell them one 
thing, Mr. Speaker — we will follow the laws of the province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Métis Act 
 

The Speaker: — Order, order. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order, order. 
 
Would the . . . Would the Assembly . . . Would the . . . Order, 
order. If the members . . . Order. If the members would like a 
recess, they should ask for it. Order. 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — And now that quiet and calm prevails, Mr. 
Speaker, thank you. I move that Bill No. 42, The Métis Act be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 43 — The Police Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 43, The Police Amendment Act, 2001 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 44 — The Prairie and Forest Fires 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 44, The Prairie and Forest Fires Amendment Act, 2001 
be introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 45 — The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 45, 
The Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation Amendment Act, 2001 
be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am very pleased to 
stand on behalf of the government today and table a response to 
question no. 205. 
 
The Speaker: — The response to 205 is tabled. 
 
Mr. Yates: — We’ll convert that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Item 2 is converted. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely pleased 
today to stand and respond on behalf of the government; table a 
response to question no. 207. 
 
The Speaker: — The answer to 207 is tabled. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6 — Cabinet Impartiality 
During Police Investigations 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
probably a bit of a sad day that we actually have to start dealing 
with these sorts of issues in this legislature. When we have 
looked at what we’ve tried to accomplish in the last week or 
two, the information that we’ve tried to receive from 
government, and what we’ve found out what happened over 
there, it’s those sorts of things, Mr. Speaker, that bring us to this 
particular motion. 
 
And I will read part of the motion later on. I will present it in a 
formal way, Mr. Speaker. But the motion will read as follows, 
and here’s the first part of it. 
 

That this Assembly formally recognize the principles: (and 
the motion, Mr. Speaker, will have two principles. The first 
one is) that cabinet is not above the law; that cabinet must 
refrain from any interference in police investigations . . . 

 
What have we seen happen in the last week or two, Mr. 
Speaker? We’ve found out that when people have some 
concerns about government and one, one of those, Mr. Speaker, 
was one of their employees, the other one was another 
employee but with a history, I believe, of 26 or 28 years of 
RCMP service. Service that was so exemplary, Mr. Speaker, 
that when we looked at his what could be called a report card, it 
had S’s on there. Not, Mr. Speaker, as you and I remember 
from another life that meant satisfactory. In this case, S’s meant 
superior service. The highest mark that could be received, and 
I’m referring to Mr. Dosenberger. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Dosenberger came and he started working for government 
and he found that something incorrect was going on. And as an 
RCMP officer with decades of experience, he knew what he had 
to do. He had to present this information to the RCMP. And so 
that’s what Mr. Dosenberger did. He gave that information to 
the RCMP. 



1404 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

Now the question . . . And remember, he was a special 
constable, Mr. Speaker. The first part of this motion that I will 
be making soon . . . and, as I said, it reads: 
 

Cabinet must refrain from any interference in police 
investigations. 

 
What in the world did cabinet do? It did two or three things. 
First off, they fired him. So the investigation was cut short — 
cut short. 
 
Then they didn’t just leave the issue there. Somehow one of our 
media people picked up some information. And then the cabinet 
minister stood in her place over there, Mr. Speaker, and said I 
think that leak came from the RCMP. She accused the RCMP 
who’s in its third century of service to this country. Accused the 
RCMP of leaking documents to a media person from whom 
they had absolutely nothing to gain. 
 
And I’m sure the member from Melville will understand how 
serious that is. And I’m surprised, Mr. Speaker, that that 
member hasn’t already moved out of that particular caucus 
because he’s ashamed of what they’ve done to the RCMP. 
 
But anyways, they did those two things. 
 
Now it says that it shouldn’t interfere in police investigation. 
Then this cabinet did something else which really, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s only one word for it — it stinks. Then they went down 
and found that folder in somebody else’s hands at that particular 
time where it had been sent and one of their employees went 
there and pulls pages out of that folder of information. 
 
And I see a member from Moose Jaw looking like she’s 
amazed. I suggest she reads the report. I suggest, Mr. Speaker, 
she reads the report. 
 
That cabinet sent someone down the road to pull information 
out of a police document. Now, Mr. Speaker, if you or I went 
down to the police office and pulled information out of their 
filing cabinet, I’m sure we would be very suspect of something 
going far amiss. But that’s what this cabinet has done and done 
very recently. 
 
Mr. Speaker, cabinet must refrain from any interference in 
police investigations. This cabinet has done anything but that. 
They’ve become involved in it. They have interfered with their 
own constables, with the RCMP. The story, Mr. Speaker, 
doesn’t end there. The story gets worse. 
 
Then they hire another investigator. And the investigator sets 
about his due diligence. He’s going to do his work. This is an 
individual that has a good record of police service coming out 
of the police service in Saskatoon. And he starts to do the 
investigation. And so he gets a little bit of information and as 
any police officer then will have to do, they’ll have to dig 
around, talk to people, interview them, find out what they 
know, and where the information is hidden. 
 
As soon as he starts that, Mr. Speaker, as soon as he starts that 
what does this cabinet do? And I’m underlining the word 
cabinet as I speak because that’s the crux of this whole debate 
this afternoon, Mr. Speaker. This cabinet tells him, hold it but 

you can’t interview anyone. Well they might as well of tied him 
to a tree in northern Saskatchewan for all the good he’s going to 
do at that point. 
 
Can you imagine an investigator that said, now go find out what 
happened but don’t talk to anyone, don’t talk to anyone. Don’t 
ask anyone where the files are. Don’t ask anyone who they 
interviewed. Don’t ask anyone about any phone calls they 
made; you can’t do that. 
 
And so what did the second investigator do, Mr. Speaker? He 
quit. And I can’t blame him. It was probably about the only 
honourable thing he could do. He could have sat around for half 
a year or two probably drawing a salary of some sort. But with 
the honour of his force he said, that’s not the honourable thing 
to do, I’m out of here. And that’s what he did because of this 
cabinet interference, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we had first of all the first investigator that I mentioned 
where there were three definite things this cabinet did. Second 
investigator, they shut him down as well. Then what else 
happens? We have some of their own employees who see some 
wrongdoing. 
 
And we discussed that this afternoon already, Mr. Speaker, 
when we discussed this three-man fishing trip doing business. 
And the irony of that was unbelievable. That actually when 
you’re going to discuss whether you’re going to have a markup 
of 12 or 13 per cent, you have to sit in a boat somewheres in the 
Waskesiu area to carry this out. 
 
First of all that discussion at best would have been a 10- to 
20-minute discussion. It wasn’t like it took days of negotiating. 
This was not Camp David, Mr. Speaker. This was not Camp 
David. This was the then minister of Liquor and Gaming on a 
fishing trip discussing two different numbers, two different 
versions of the markup — this or this, what is it? And that takes 
days on a fishing trip. That, Mr. Speaker, makes us question 
what this cabinet is all about. 
 
The second part, the second part of this particular motion that 
I’ll soon be making, Mr. Speaker, reads as follows: 
 

. . . and that government employees should not be punished 
for co-operating with police investigations and for 
providing documents and other evidence pertinent to a 
police investigation . . . 

 
Now this government is a retaliatory regime, Mr. Speaker. They 
retaliate every chance they get. What happened? They had one 
of their employees who passed this information on and what did 
they do with her? They fired her. 
 
The government’s own, basically, code of conduct, when it 
talks about harassment says very specifically, Mr. Speaker, it 
says very specifically that one of the things that can’t happen is 
retaliation. 
 
Now what stronger form of retaliation than when someone 
brings up a concern, government says you’re fired. Just that 
quick. Just that quick they fire them. 
 
Let’s look at another example. Let’s backtrack a little bit into 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1405 

 

history. This NDP government likes to go back in time. Let’s go 
back in time just a little, a year or three — Channel Lake, 
Channel Lake. That, Mr. Speaker, should have gone to the 
police for a police investigation, for a forensic audit of where 
that money all went. 
 
But they stuck it into their cabinet ideas. The cabinet over there 
went ahead and created a committee. They investigated it and 
what happened, Mr. Speaker? Millions of dollars missing — 
millions. Not one or two thousand. Not a couple of hundred. 
But millions of dollars missing were never discovered where 
they went. Never discovered where they went. 
 
They had a cabinet minister who chaired that particular 
committee, should have taken . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Members of the 
Assembly, there seems to be two simultaneous debates going on 
when there should be only one. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — To introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, a constituent of 
mine, someone who has been very active in the farm income 
and farm policy area, Mr. Ray . . . he’s seated in your gallery, 
Mr. Ray Bashutsky of Wynyard. Mr. Bashutsky has taken time 
out of his busy schedule and operation to get involved in farm 
policy. 
 
And I would ask all members of the Assembly to welcome him 
here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 6 — Cabinet Impartiality 
During Police Investigations 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’re talking about 
cabinet and how they work and how they don’t function. I’m 
sure the guest that was just introduced would be interested in 
knowing that this particular cabinet hasn’t signed CFIP yet. 
 
The Speaker: — I would just remind the member that we’re 
not to involve any guests or anybody else in the Assembly in 
the debate. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was discussing 
Channel Lake, the millions of dollars that went missing. That 
was a cover-up by that cabinet — by that cabinet — and this 
Premier needs to take some responsibility for that. 
 
Had that gone to the RCMP and they’d allowed a forensic audit, 
we’d have found that $5 million. But no, the cabinet got 

involved; they set up that committee; they hid it. It’s there 
somewheres; we don’t know where it is yet. But at the rate 
we’re turning over stones and finding names, I’m sure it will 
pop up very shortly. 
 
Channel Lake was an ideal example of government 
interference, of cabinet interference in what should have been a 
forensic police investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a shame to punish people as these people do; 
to punish people in the workplace; to make them afraid to come 
to work because they have no idea when they pass information 
on to their superiors whether they’re going to lose their jobs or 
what’s going to happen to them. That’s the kind of attitude of 
fear and suspicion that this cabinet has created in its 
bureaucracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of those difficulties, as I said at the start, 
this is a sad day that here in Saskatchewan we have to go ahead 
and put forward a motion such as this. So therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I put forth the following motion, and it will be 
seconded by the MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
from Humboldt: 
 

That this Assembly formally recognize these principles: 
that cabinet is not above the law; that cabinet must refrain 
from any interference in police investigations; and that 
government employees should not be punished for 
co-operating with police investigations and for providing 
documents and other evidence pertinent to a police 
investigation to the police. 

 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased today to second the motion put forward by the member 
from Rosthern and, Mr. Speaker, I think this motion is so 
important to the people of Saskatchewan and to justice that we, 
in fact, should read the motion one more time: 
 

That this Assembly formally recognize the principles: that 
Cabinet is not above the law; that Cabinet must refrain 
from any interference in police investigations; and that 
government employees should not be punished for 
cooperating with police investigations and for providing 
documents and other evidence pertinent to a police 
investigation to the police. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in respect to the kind of activity that has 
taken place by the government in response to people like Joe 
Dosenberger and Bonnie Swan who have done the right thing 
— have brought forward information about wrongdoing, the 
wrong spending of taxpayers’ money, the wrong way to use it 
— in respect to the fact that those people got treated very 
shabbily by government, I think what is really incumbent right 
now, Mr. Speaker, is that government realize the very 
seriousness of their actions and that in fact those ministers 
responsible realize the implications for them in regards to their 
action in interfering with the law. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read a section of the Criminal 



1406 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

Code. According to the Criminal Code, section 139(2), it reads: 
 

Everyone who will wilfully attempt in any manner to 
obstruct, pervert or defeat the course of justice is guilty of 
an indictable offence and liable to imprisonment for a term 
not exceeding 10 years. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, that may seem like a bit of a stretch to the 
people opposite here. But in fact, Mr. Speaker, if this situation 
was taken and forwarded and gone through the full extent of the 
law, I think the ministers would recognize that they may be up 
for some very serious judgment by the people of Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is it that people in this province who feel that 
they can entrust a certain government, a certain number of 
elected MLAs (Member of Legislative Assembly), entrust them 
with the workings of the province, entrust them not only with 
the well-being of the province but entrust them with 
accountability and responsibility — why is it that these people 
are let down time and time again by this NDP government? 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen and we have heard as official 
opposition from many, many people throughout the province 
about their fear of bringing forward information about 
government and government interference. 
 
We have heard in fact — possibly not about direct money 
matters — but we heard from employees of health boards in the 
past, we’ve heard from health board members in the past, how 
they have received gag orders. They’re afraid to bring forward 
information for fear of being punished, for fear of losing their 
jobs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, having to deal with government covering up for 
the wrongful use of taxpayers’ money is very, very 
disappointing to the people of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have here before the Assembly in the last few 
days, evidence being brought forward, the minister denying that 
evidence, and we have had letters that certainly qualifies the 
evidence. We have put this forward to the minister and still 
there is a denial. What the people of the province expect, and in 
due respect should get, is honesty from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it might come as a surprise to those members 
opposite that the official opposition does take the bull by the 
horns, that they feel very compelled to move a motion like this 
to reaffirm the Assembly’s opinion that politicians are not 
above the law. It’s a shame that we should have to do this, but 
in fact, Mr. Speaker, it is necessary. Recent comments by both 
ministers in that government and senior bureaucrats in the 
government make it necessary, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in response to Mr. Dosenberger’s firing, both the 
minister and Kathy Langlois stated that cabinet materials cannot 
go to aid police investigations unless cabinet says they can. 
They imply that there is no big deal about government 
investigating government’s own activity. They feel that it is 
okay if government decides what is and what is not evidence. Is 
this right, Mr. Speaker? Anyone with any common sense in our 
province knows it is not right. 

Kathy Langlois told the media that it was her opinion that the 
cabinet document that went to the police from Mr. Dosenberger 
had no value to the RCMP investigation. Now, Mr. Speaker, 
one has to ask, who is she to make that decision over the 
opinion of two police officers with nearly six decades of 
experience between them? 
 
Mr. Dosenberger has sworn an oath under The Police Act to 
co-operate in all investigations. The government fired him for 
that. When Mr. Dosenberger was fired, the government 
purposely left everyone with the impression that he was fired 
for leaking the document to the media. 
 
Now that was not the case, Mr. Speaker. This was another case, 
by the NDP, of character assassination. 
 
The minister then mused publicly that the police themselves 
may well have leaked the document to the media — another 
case of attempted character assassination against a veteran 
police officer. How very shameful. 
 
One can wonder . . . Or one really does wonder, Mr. Speaker, 
how the member from Melville, who now sits with a 
government who feels they are above the law, thinks of being 
part of that government which has such an obvious and low 
opinion of the work that police men and women do, when he so 
proudly holds up his own contribution to the force for 25 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, throughout the last week the minister of SLGA 
and the Minister of Justice have talked about due processes. 
Tell me, where was the due process for Bonnie Swan and Joe 
Dosenberger? There was none. They pointed out wrongdoing 
and they were fired for it. 
 
Every day the government tries to explain this whole mess 
away, and every day they just dig themselves deeper on both 
fronts. 
 
On the matter involving SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority), the minister has claimed all along that the first time 
the government learned of these questions about SIGA was in 
June of 2000. Now we find out it was in 1997. 
 
Instead of doing something though, that minister and those 
members opposite and that government chose to do nothing. 
And instead they were worrying about protecting the members 
of the opposite politically. 
 
Part of this involved firing Joe Dosenberger. And for this kind 
of immoral conduct, the taxpayers of this province are 
providing remuneration to those members opposite. 
 
In terms of the problems of SLGA officials illegally accepting 
freebies from liquor companies, it appears now that at least 
some of those allegations could very well be true. But what 
happened to the person who raised them with her superiors? 
She was fired. 
 
An investigator hired to look into problems surrounding SLGA 
was not allowed to interview any witnesses. That’s another 
example of government tampering with an investigation. This is 
an obstruction of justice. This is a serious matter. 
 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1407 

 

The minister is so out of touch that all the while she claimed 
that the process used to investigate problems raised by Bonnie 
Swan was an independent one, it turns out the investigation was 
conducted by a two-member board consisting of the deputy 
minister to the Premier, and the minister herself. 
 
When there is wrongdoing committed or possibly committed, it 
is up to a responsible government to do everything to ensure 
that the wrong is righted. But what do we see instead, Mr. 
Speaker? We see this government’s main priority being to hide 
the wrongdoing and make it quietly disappear. 
 
The Speaker: — I would just ask the member to assume in her 
statements that all members are honourable and not to impugn, 
either directly or indirectly, on the motives of government 
members. And I’d just ask her to keep this in mind in her 
remarks. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, it is really quite interesting that this 
same government who claims time and time again and who has 
claimed over the years to protect employees, to make sure that 
employees are protected from wrongful dismissal, should be in 
fact the government that wrongfully dismisses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has proposed and has 
tabled whistle-blowers’ legislation. That legislation would 
protect government employees from dismissal if they took 
evidence or suspicions of illegal activity to their superiors or to 
a public body such as the police. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have tabled this legislation a number of times. 
We have it again on the Table. This is an important piece of 
legislation and in fact would have protected people like Bonnie 
Swan had this been passed in this legislature and given Royal 
Assent. 
 
This Sask Party Bill would not protect those who take material 
such as an internal cabinet or government documents to the 
media. There should be procedures in place to co-operate with 
the police or to go to superiors with these suspicions, and 
employees should be encouraged to follow that process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it is only with this type of protection, such 
as the whistle-blowers’ legislation, The Whistleblower 
Protection Act, that we can be sure most questionable and 
possibly illegal activity of government is brought to the 
attention of superiors of the police. 
 
One wonders how many other people want to come forward but 
are afraid, are afraid to Mr. Speaker, because of the 
heavy-handedness that this government has arrogantly shown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we have mentioned, there are many other 
people who have contacted the official opposition. There are 
many people from that very government department who have 
contacted us. They are so afraid that they are going to lose their 
jobs; they are afraid of repercussions and retaliation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have had brought to my attention in the past 
many social workers out in the province who have presented to 
me some of the great difficulties they have had in relaying their 
concerns to the Minister of Social Services in respect to 
children, too many children in foster homes. Those same social 

workers, along with foster home workers, are saying they’re 
afraid to open their mouths for fear that they may be fired. 
 
Now it’s time to put this kind of thing to an end, Mr. Speaker, 
and we can put it to an end by protecting government 
employees from dismissal, wrongful dismissal, through The 
Whistleblower Protection Act. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party, on behalf of Her 
Majesty’s Loyal Opposition and Her Majesty herself, and 
behalf of the people of this province, would like to move at this 
time: 
 

That this Assembly do now proceed to item 13 under 
second readings for private members’ public Bills and 
orders, Bill No. 203 — The Whistleblower Protection Act. 

 
(15:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I wish to advise 
the Assembly, upon perusing the rules of the Assembly and 
looking at the motion, it is out of order for a motion to be 
moved by the seconder of the original motion. Therefore we 
will have to proceed with the debate on the original motion. So 
the debate before the motion is to continue. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am extremely happy 
to enter into this debate, although calling it a debate is not quite 
accurate, Mr. Speaker, because there is nothing in the motion 
that we disagree with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we agree that no member of cabinet is above the 
law. We agree that cabinet must not interfere with police 
investigations. And we agree that government employees 
should not be punished for co-operating with police 
investigations. What is there to disagree with, Mr. Speaker? 
 
I would like to repeat. We agree that no member of cabinet is 
above the law. And we agree that cabinet must not interfere 
with police investigations. And we agree that government 
employees should not be punished for co-operating with police 
investigations. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — We do, however, have one small reservation, 
and that is that the member’s motion does not go far enough. 
Consequently, Mr. Speaker, in a moment I will be offering an 
amendment to correct this oversight by the member from 
Rosthern — an unintentional oversight, I am sure. 
 
The member’s motion says that cabinet is not above the law. 
And we agree. We also believe that members of the Legislative 
Assembly are not above the law. Mr. Speaker, I am not above 
the law; my colleagues are not above the law. Furthermore, we 
believe that members of all political parties, be they 
government or opposition members, are not beyond the law. 
 
Finally, we believe that employees of the government are 
subject to the rule of law, Mr. Speaker. Union employees, 
Executive Council appointees, ministerial staff, caucus office 
staff, everyone, Mr. Speaker, is subject to the rule of law. This 
is hardly a radical motion, Mr. Speaker, so we see no reason to 



1408 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

single out a particular wing of government. Actually we see no 
reason to formally belabour the obvious. But since we had the 
motion, let’s make it comprehensive, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Therefore I move, seconded by the member from Regina South, 
that we remove all words after “principles” and replace with the 
following: 
 

That no member of the Legislative Assembly or employee 
of government is above the law; that no member or 
employee of that government shall interfere with a police 
investigation; that no member or employee of the 
government shall be punished for co-operating with a 
police investigation; and finally, should any employee of 
the government believe that he or she has been punished for 
co-operating with a legitimate police investigation, that he 
or she has the right to take the matter to the director of the 
labour standards for an investigation pursuant to section 74 
of The Labour Standards Act and any and all other 
remedies that may be available to them under the law. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, this is a very comprehensive amendment. I 
am sure that members opposite will have no difficulty with this 
amendment, which is actually more clarification than 
amendment. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, what is section 24 of The Labour Standards 
Act? It reads: 
 

Discrimination by employer prohibited. 
 
No employer (it says) shall discharge or threaten to 
discharge or in any manner discriminate against an 
employee because the employee: 
 
(a) has reported or proposed to report to a lawful authority 
any activity that is or is likely to result in an offence 
pursuant to an Act or an Act of the Parliament of Canada; 
or 
 

that a person: 
 

(b) has testified or may be called to testify in an 
investigation or proceeding pursuant to an Act or an Act of 
the Parliament of Canada. 
 

Mr. Speaker, and: 
 

(2) Subsection (1) does not apply where the actions of 
employee are vexatious. 
 

By the way, Mr. Speaker, this section 74 was added to The 
Labour Standards Act by this government in 1994 to deal with 
the concerns of employees bringing forward issues within 
government, Mr. Speaker. I point this out as a reminder of who 
protects workers and who does not. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I read all of section 74 into the record 
because it, in black and white, defines the right of government 
employees to the rule of law and to due process when the rule 
of law is violated, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This government believes in due process. We believe that 

everyone is subject to the law regardless of subject or title and 
must bear the consequences when the law is broken, Mr. 
Speaker. We are all responsible to the law. 
 
By the way, Mr. Speaker, the obligation to follow due process 
in the pursuit of the law falls on the police as well as the rest of 
us, Mr. Speaker. There are procedures they must follow in an 
investigation: subpoenas, search warrants, and so on. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosthern has spoken at length 
about two particular cases through his motion, though his 
motion is general rather than specific. We will not comment on 
any specific case because, one, that is not relevant to the motion 
at hand; and, two, the cases that he mentioned are before the 
courts, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the fact that two employment disputes of 
government employees are being adjudicated in the completely 
impartial environment of the judicial system is the only 
evidence necessary to prove that this government follows due 
process. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the original motion by the member from 
Rosthern is incomplete. Our amendment is inclusive. It 
describes the limitations placed on cabinet but not on anyone 
else. 
 
One other thing we can mention is this, Mr. Speaker. Both the 
motion and the amendment talk about responsibilities. Neither 
mentions rights, and perhaps we should. For instance, cabinet 
has the right to receive information in confidence and discuss in 
private the steps leading to the decisions of government. 
Parliamentary supremacy and collective cabinet responsibility 
are key principles of our system of government and should not 
be breached lightly. 
 
Conversely employees of the government take the following 
oath when they become members of the public service, and I 
quote: 
 

I do solemnly swear that I will not, without due authority in 
that behalf, disclose or make known any matter or thing 
that comes to my knowledge by reason of my employment. 

 
They enter into a contract which requires them, as a condition 
of employment, to receive approval for their actions unless of 
course, Mr. Speaker, unless of course those actions fall under 
the protection of section 74 of The Labour Standards Act. 
 
What actions might be restricted by terms of employment, Mr. 
Speaker, and what might be covered by section 74 can be 
subject to legitimate differences of opinion, and obviously have 
been at times. It is at a point where this thin line has or has not 
been crossed that due process kicks in to protect all, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the amendment because it 
confirms that all of us are subject to the same responsibility and 
that is simply this: all members must uphold the core obligation 
of government, which is to uphold the rule of law, protect the 
basic legal rights of citizens, and ensure good and proper 
administration of justice. These functions must be effectively 
met by all public authorities if we are to have social and 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1409 

 

economic order and just relations in our society, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The rule of law means that the government itself is subject to 
the law and must operate according to its terms. The rule of law 
includes and requires equality before the law, Mr. Speaker. In 
other words, everyone is subject to the law regardless of 
position, title, and must bear the consequences when the law is 
broken. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government believes in the rule of law and 
this government follows the rule of law. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Is there a motion? 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That we remove all the words after “principles” and replace 
the following: 
 
That no member of the Legislative Assembly or employee 
of the government is above the law; and 
 
That no member or employee of the government shall 
interfere with a police investigation; 
 
That no member or employee of the government shall be 
punished for co-operating with a police investigation; 

 
And, finally: 
 

Should any employee of the government believe that he or 
she has been punished for co-operating with a legitimate 
police investigation, that he or she has the right to take the 
matter to the director of labour standards for an 
investigation, pursuant to section 74 of The Labour 
Standards Act, and any and all other remedies that may be 
available at law. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move, seconded by the member from Regina 
South. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I enter into this 
debate on this resolution today, and I want to make a couple of 
brief comments in it. 
 
I have had the good fortune during my short professional career 
of having worked in both the federal and the provincial civil 
service. I have had the privilege of working in a political 
position with the provincial cabinet also. 
 
During that time, I can tell you that I have served with many, 
many, many good, well-meaning men and women of every 
political persuasion and of no political persuasion. It’s one of 
the things in Saskatchewan we have very much to be proud of 
— is our professionalism of our civil service. 
 
That has not come easily to this province. And we have had to 
be zealous in our protection to make sure that civil servants 
understand that they have rights that go with their 

responsibilities. This government, through the amendments we 
made to The Labour Standards Act in 1994, took a major step 
forward in that regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I’ve listened to this debate so far today and as 
I’ve listened to question period over the last few days, I have to 
say that I am troubled by the way that members are using the 
parliamentary privilege that we are afforded under the traditions 
of our Constitution to make accusations, allegations, and 
innuendo to attack other members, to attack the integrity of our 
civil service, and, unfortunately, I fear to undermine the 
impartiality of our judiciary. 
 
I will give my colleagues in the House the benefit of the doubt 
that that’s not what they intend to do. But as I listened to the 
member for Humboldt cast aspersions on the character of my 
colleague the minister of Municipal Government, who has a 
fine and distinguished career in the RCMP, I’m troubled. 
 
As I listen to the member for Rosthern attack on a regular basis 
the integrity of the members of the cabinet who serve in this 
Assembly, I’m troubled. 
 
As I hear members opposite raise direct and specific questions 
about issues which are currently before the judicial system, I’m 
troubled. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we need to stand back and think about 
what it is we do here in this Assembly. We are here to protect 
the rights of citizens. We are here to ensure the government is 
held accountable. 
 
We have certain constitutional rights afford to us, including 
parliamentary privilege. Parliamentary privilege has not gone 
untested in this country, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we know from 
the comments made by the member for North Battleford, that 
were tested in the courts in Alberta. 
 
(15:15) 
 
I think all of us have to be circumspect in the approach that we 
take. All of us must be circumspect in the comments we are 
making in this Assembly about the public service, about the 
judiciary, and about the issues in front of us. 
 
I dare say that many of the comments that I’ve heard today, I 
think would put the members who have made them at risk of 
defamation, were they said outside of this Assembly. We are 
afforded parliamentary privilege to be able to raise allegations 
and raise important high matters, but we also have on us the 
onus to follow due process. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will not be commenting specifically on 
any of the matters which may be in front of our courts. We 
can’t do that as members, because we have the potential to bias 
any one of the sides of these cases. What we say in here is 
afforded parliamentary privilege for a reason, but we should not 
use it to undermine the independence of the judiciary who have 
to have a clear and simple, agreed upon set of facts in front of 
them when they look at these cases. That’s not for us to 
comment on. 
 
One of the things that distinguishes us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 



1410 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

from other places, is we don’t run show trials. The provincial 
Assembly should not be used to run a show trial. We no longer 
act as a Star Chamber. That’s not one of our functions. Yes, 
under the Constitution we have that ability, but that’s not what 
we do. 
 
We deal with legislative matters, we set out our intent, we set 
out our protections, and we have a different arm of government 
that handles police investigations, and a different branch of 
government that adjudicates those. 
 
It’s important that we all recognize the role at these three levels. 
It is not our role, not my role, not the role of other members in 
this Assembly to either take the role of the police, which falls 
under the executive, or to take the role of the judiciary, which is 
separate and constitutionally independent. 
 
We have to be very careful of what we’re doing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I support the amendment to the resolution because I 
believe it strengthens the intent of the initial resolution brought 
forward by the member for Rosthern. And I do not feel 
particularly defensive in saying that I support the resolution, 
although the amendment itself does make it much stronger and 
as such should be put in place. 
 
I am however concerned about the approach that is taken on the 
floor of this Assembly in this debate; that we are involving 
ourselves in specific matters that we ought not to; and that in 
the process, that we are undermining the independence of the 
judiciary. 
 
I believe therefore, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that in order to give 
members a chance to step back, think about the impact of their 
actions and their comments, that we should adjourn debate. And 
I would so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 15:19 until 15:29. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 30 
 
Calvert Addley Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Wartman Thomson Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 
Harper Jones Higgins 
Kasperski Trew Osika 
Lorjé Yates McCall 
 

Nays — 27 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken McMorris D’Autremont 
Weekes Bjornerud Kwiatkowski 

Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert Hillson 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Motion No. 7 — Increased Support for Education 
 

Mr. McCall: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand today in this 
Assembly to speak on education. At the end of my comments, I 
will be moving the following motion. Therefore be it resolved: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to carry through 
with its long-term plan for education as announced in the 
budget, a plan which includes expanded community 
schools, enhanced operating grants, improved teacher 
training, greater access to the Internet, and early learning 
programs and specialists. 

 
Mr. Speaker, education is one of the great levellers in our 
society. As a social democrat, as a progressive, and as a proud 
member of this government, I believe that access to good 
education is critical if we are going to secure something of 
equality of opportunity for our people. 
 
Opportunity should not just be a matter of chance nor should it 
be a matter of being lucky enough to be born into the right 
family. Securing opportunity is something that must be worked 
on. 
 
So working to ensure access to a good education is a critical 
task for this government. It is critical if we are going to enable 
our people to make a better life for themselves and their 
families. It is critical if we are going to equip our people with 
the skills and the knowledge to get and keep or create 
employment that pays well and which is challenging and 
engaging and fulfilling. 
 
For myself, my belief in the importance of education is not just 
a matter of principle. It is also a matter of experience. I know 
from my own life the difference that education can make. I went 
to Kitchener community school for kindergarten to grade 8; to 
Scott and Thom collegiates for high school. My brothers and 
my sister and I grew up in a single-income family that was blue 
collar and frugal. We didn’t want for much, certainly not in 
terms of love and encouragement and support, but we weren’t 
wealthy by any stretch of the imagination. And if access to 
education was decided solely by the cash in my parents’ bank 
account, then I’m not certain that the McCall kids would have 
gotten the good education that we did receive. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Julé: — With leave, Mr. Speaker, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to thank the existing speaker for giving me a moment to 
take this opportunity on behalf of Her Majesty’s Loyal 
Opposition to welcome to our Legislative Assembly today, 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1411 

 

Chief Ron Crowe who is sitting in the Speaker’s gallery. Chief 
Ron Crowe is with the tribal council . . . File Hills Tribal 
Council, pardon me. And we welcome you today, Chief Crowe, 
and we hope that you’ll enjoy the proceedings of the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I would like to welcome guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 
to extend a welcome to Chief Crowe, my good friend and 
neighbour from Fort Qu’Appelle who’s well and highly 
respected in the First Nations community, and sitting next to my 
seatmate. So I would also like to also extend a very warm 
welcome here today, Ron. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 7 — Increased Support for Education 
(continued) 

 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In Canada and 
throughout the western world, it is generally regarded as 
progress if a family moves from blue collar to white collar 
between generations, or that the standard of living increases 
from one generation to the next. 
 
This kind of progress has certainly been the experience in my 
family. There was certainly many other factors at play in 
bringing this transition about but getting a good, solid primary 
and secondary public school education from teachers like Mrs. 
Martin and Mr. McIllrick and Mr. Ast — who was here the 
other day — and Mr. Kehler and Ms. Lewis and Mr. Davies and 
Mr. Tomchuk definitely made a difference in my life. 
 
These teachers and the education that I received cultivated in 
me a love for learning and gave me the sound educational 
foundation that has served me well thus far. And that’s why I’m 
extremely proud to be part of a government that places such a 
big emphasis on the importance of education. 
 
Before we go too much further into this debate, I would like to 
clarify that when I talk about education, I’m referring in the 
main to the primary and secondary levels of education. This is 
not to detract from the importance of post-secondary education; 
far from it. I’m sure that PSE (post-secondary education) will 
warrant a debate some day in this House on its own merits, but 
for now let us focus on the motion at hand and on this 
government’s solid commitment to primary and secondary 
education in Saskatchewan. 
 
The true measure of a government’s commitment, of a 
government’s resolve on any given issue, can be measured by 
the dollars involved. In the Throne Speech the importance of 
education to this government was clearly spelled out, but it was 
in the budget that this priority was solidly backed up with the 
necessary funding — where the walk met the talk. This 
government’s budget was about connecting to the future. It was 

about making investments right here and now that will benefit 
our people both today and tomorrow. 
 
When this government went about the hard task of 
reconstructing this province’s fiscal well-being in the 1990s 
after the carnage and corruption of the ’80s, it was to make 
possible budgets like the one for Education that we are 
discussing here today. Balanced budgets were a means to an 
end. 
 
In the budget speech, the Minister of Finance touched on this 
very thing when he said the following about education funding. 
And I quote: 
 

Think of it, Mr. Speaker. It was not that long ago that we 
spent more on interest payments than on education. In 
1993-94, we spent $865 million on education. That same 
year, interest on the debt was our second-highest 
expenditure . . . (at) $873 million . . . Think of it, Mr. 
Speaker, $8 million more spent on interest than on 
education. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I am happy to report that this year we 
will spend almost twice as much on education as we will 
(on) interest . . . 

 
And that’s progress, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — And that certainly is progress, Mr. Speaker. 
Now to the matter of education funding itself. So that the hon. 
members here today and the folks watching at home might gain 
a more exact appreciation of the extent of this government’s 
financial commitment to education, I’d like to take this 
opportunity to go over some of the main details of what this 
year’s budget meant for education. 
 
To begin with, the basic per pupil rate again increased by 
another $396 per student. This is a 50 per cent larger increase 
than the year before when it was increased by $262 per student 
— to 262, pardon me. 
 
Operating grants to school districts were increased by $33.7 
million — a 7.9 increase, Mr. Speaker — bringing the grant 
amount to $460.1 million this year. 
 
We further increased per pupil funding for high-cost, special 
needs students as follows: level 1, to $6,000 from 5,000; and 
level 2, to 12,000 from 10,000. 
 
This budget also included 100 per cent coverage of the 
negotiated $9.3 million health care package recently negotiated 
with teachers. 
 
Also in keeping with Connecting to the Future the Department 
of Education is highlighting our move to the information age. 
This year alone school districts will be saving $1.5 million in 
Internet access fees because we are investing $3.7 million into 
CommunityNet, along with $2.0 million from the Centenary 
Fund to improve in-school connectivity, and $3 million for 
digital learning resources. 
 



1412 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

Increased funding for pre-kindergarten to over $3.8 million with 
this budget. This brings the number of spaces, pre-kindergarten 
spaces to 1,264 — an 80 per cent from the year before, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And we will see an 87 per cent increase in shared services 
bringing the total funding recognition to $9.7 million. 
 
To address the localized teacher shortages in rural and northern 
Saskatchewan, $1 million in new dollars has been committed; a 
continuation of the $25 million education property tax rebate 
for farmers is also part of this plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this budget has also included . . . has also continued to 
support school capital, with a projected . . . with 90 per cent of 
the total amount provided this year — $29.2 million — going 
directly to capital projects rather than to debt servicing. A 
tremendous advance over the experience in years past. 
 
I would now like to turn to this government’s commitment to 
Saskatchewan’s innovative and award-winning Community 
Schools Program. Community Schools, as you may well know, 
Mr. Speaker, in 1997 won a national award from the institute 
for community education for best . . . from the Association for 
Community Education in Canada, for the best institution. 
 
Community schools have long been recognized as an effective 
model for meeting the complex educational needs for at-risk 
students. Since 1990 . . . They were first introduced in 1980 
under the then Allen Blakeney government and then Education 
minister, Doug McArthur. Since 1995 we have doubled the 
number of community schools. 
 
The recent report by the task force on the role of the school lent 
its voice to the chorus of others in praise of the Community 
Schools Program. They said, and I quote: 
 

The “Community School” Program is one of the most 
helpful and hopeful changes to be initiated in recent times. 
Given its remarkable success and evident benefits, not only 
for children but for parents and the whole community, the 
Task Force is of the view that the time has come for a 
major “community school” initiative in our province. 
 

In its final report the task force recommended an increase of 26 
schools over the next three years. 
 
In fact in this coming year, Mr. Speaker, we are more than 
doubling the number of community schools. We are enhancing 
the successful program by increasing the number of new 
community schools to more than . . . by more than 40, 
expanding into rural and northern communities, and into 
secondary schools as well. That’s 44 urban elementary schools, 
eight rural elementary schools, three rural K-12s, 10 northern 
schools, and 18 secondary schools, Mr. Speaker. A wonderful 
advancement. 
 
(15:45) 
 
And as a graduate of Kitchener community school, this is . . . I 
think this is great news for the children of this province. And 
I’m not alone. I would like to quote from an article that 
appeared in the Shellbrook Chronicle on May 7, 2001. It’s 

entitled “Community Schools Seen as Vision for Future.” It’s 
written by Debra Kuzbik, superintendent of instructional and 
student services for Parkland School Division: 
 

In . . . (the) spring budget (she writes), the provincial 
government announced a $7 million increase in grant 
recognitions for Community Education in Saskatchewan. 
(The) Parkland School Division was delighted to be 
selected as one of the recipients . . . (for) Community 
School designation (under this budget). 
 
Saskatchewan Community Schools are centers of learning 
for their communities and incorporate a comprehensive 
range of best educational practices for meeting the diverse 
learning needs of all students. They provide a responsive, 
inclusive, culturally affirming, and academically 
challenging learning program and environment and are 
effective in addressing the challenges of the communities 
they serve. As well, Community Schools use collaborative 
approach to foster the development and well-being of the 
entire community. 
 
As the Community Schools Program has grown in 
Saskatchewan, it has evolved to meet the changing needs of 
students. Originally designed to meet the needs of urban 
at-risk First Nations and Metis youth, the program has 
evolved to affirm and celebrate cultural diversity in our 
schools, both urban and rural, elementary and high school. 
 
The first Community Schools were similar in program 
delivery. Now (they) reflect the diversity, uniqueness and 
needs of each community. However, the guiding principles 
and foundational components . . . of Community Schools 
have remained constant. 
 
(First), the student is the heart of the school and the centre 
of all activity. All aspects of a Community School focus on 
(the need to) respond to the needs of students. (Second), the 
student is supported by the Learning Program, Integrated 
Services, Parent and Community Involvement, and 
Community Development. 
 
Our work on community schools sees us once again leading 
the nation and . . . 

 
That’s all the quote for now from that particular article. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker, on that. 
 
Our work in this government on community schools sees us 
once again leading the nation with an exciting social policy 
innovation. I was at the launch of the report by the task force on 
the Role of the School and to hear the Chair of that report, Dr. 
Michael Tymchak, talk about the vision of SchoolPLUS and the 
great promise of the community schools for this nation, and that 
in Saskatchewan we’ve always had this proud, pioneering 
tradition when it comes to social policy. And Dr. Tymchak held 
that up and said, this is an area where we can once again lead 
the nation. And we should be very excited about it. And I 
couldn’t agree more. 
 
So community education — it’s not just about community 
schools. It’s just . . . community schools are just one part of the 
community education strategy. 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1413 

 

In 2001-2002, an additional $7 million in recognized 
expenditures has been provided to assist school divisions in 
expanding community education programs. This brings the total 
funding recognition for community education programs to 
approximately $17.5 million. Again, where you’ve got your 
money, it indicates your priorities. And we’ve got our priorities 
made clear. 
 
In 2001-2002, Saskatchewan Education has also enhanced the 
following programs: $4.5 million in funding, bringing the total 
of recognized school expenditures for community schools to 9.5 
million; there’s also the northern community school programs 
developed collaboratively with Creighton, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and 
the Northern Lights School Division to respond to the unique 
needs to students in the North. For the northern school 
divisions, this has meant an enhancement of approximately 
$360,000 in 2001-2002, for a total budget of $1.4 million. 
 
Also in this year’s budget, an additional $130,000 in recognized 
expenditures has been allocated to enhance the current nutrition 
program recognition for existing and new and K to 12 
elementary schools . . . community schools. 
 
I’d like to just briefly read from an article that appeared in the 
March 1998 edition of ON COURSE put out by Saskatchewan 
Education. It’s a newsletter updating on the activities of 
community schools. 
 
It’s a profile of Jacquie Ferguson: 
 

Kitchener Community School Nutrition Coordinator 
 
It’s 6:30 a.m. and very quiet at Kitchener Community 
School in Regina. The lights snap on in the kitchen as 
Jacquie Ferguson begins another day as nutrition 
coordinator. A fleet of toasters are lined up and ready to 
spring into action, making upwards of 70 slices of toast 
every morning. Dishes and cutlery are spread out on the 
counter as Jacquie slices fruit, pours milk and tends to the 
large pot of hot cereal on the stove. For 25 years Jacquie 
has worked at Kitchener Community School — 18 of them 
ensuring children get a hearty breakfast to start their day. 
 
Before serving breakfast, she also begins preparing 
morning snacks for all the classrooms. After breakfast has 
been served and the kitchen’s tidied, Jacquie begins the 
lunch preparation. She also uses this time to plan weekly 
meals, pour over flyers, order supplies, pick-up groceries 
and talk to teachers about classroom cooking activities and 
needs. 
 
At the end of May 1998, Jacquie plans to hang up her 
apron. She has fond memories of her time at the school 
(and she said): “I really get to know the kids and their 
families. I also enjoyed the program development during 
the pilot years. It received a very positive response from the 
community.” 
 
Jackie wishes she had more time for the educational aspect 
of the nutrition program. She knows that helping students 
learn to choose the right foods and how to cook are also an 
important part of their education. 
 

Congratulations Jacquie! Thank you for all you have done 
in your 25 years at Kitchener Community School. All the 
best wishes to you! 

 
And I would very much like to add to that, because I was one of 
those kids that was kept very well fed and happy and there 
wasn’t a stigma to feeding programs. I was one of the students 
that benefited from the good work of Jacquie Ferguson. 
 
And it thrills my heart to know that there are 83 schools now in 
Saskatchewan where we have the kind of nutrition programs put 
in place by people like Jacquie Ferguson. And we have the 
assurance . . . or we can take some comfort from the fact that 
when it comes to learning, children won’t be worrying more 
about their empty stomach then they’ll be able to focus on their 
lessons, Mr. Speaker. I think that’s a wonderful thing. 
 
Now another part of community education in the portion of this 
budget is the Indian and Metis Education Development, the 
IMED Program. It was established in 1984 to encourage school 
divisions to promote, to provide innovative, responsive, and 
culturally affirming supports to help Aboriginal students to 
succeed in school. 
 
In 2001-2002, additional new funding recognition of one-half a 
million dollars has been directed to IMED and the Aboriginal 
elder outreach programs. The Aboriginal outreach program — 
also part of this funding — encourages relationship building 
between school divisions and the Aboriginal community, and it 
encourages school divisions to bring Aboriginal resource people 
such as elders and outreach workers into schools. 
 
Now to get the best possible education, early childhood 
development also has a big role to play. This government 
strongly believes that establishing a comprehensive system of 
early childhood development services and supports is a priority 
and that it is vital. 
 
In 2001-2002, Saskatchewan Education provided approximately 
$3.8 million in funding recognition for 79 pre-kindergarten 
programs in high-needs urban, rural, and northern areas. 
 
In 2001-2002, Saskatchewan Education will also provide $1 
million in recognized expenditures to enable school divisions to 
support three- and four-year-old preschool children with 
disabilities. Again, very important work, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan Education will also work closely with the 
provincial early childhood development unit and target 
high-needs communities to support the creation of early 
learning services and programs for preschool children and their 
families who live in circumstances of high risk. This initiative 
will be facilitated using $1.4 million of the federal early 
childhood development funding. 
 
This government is committed to supporting the early 
childhood initiatives and collaborating to achieve a high quality 
of services for preschool and their families. 
 
More detail can be provided about another aspect . . . more 
detail can be provided so that other aspects of the education 
investment of this budget, such as CommunityNet . . . but I 
must leave something for my colleagues to speak about, Mr. 



1414 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

Speaker, so I’ll leave that for now. 
 
I would just like to close off by pointing out that when the Role 
of the School Task Force was presented at Kitchener School, 
there were a couple of statements made in the House, one by 
our Minister of Education. And he said the following: 
 

Mr. Speaker, this morning I publicly released the Role of 
the School Task Force final report. 
 
Chaired by Dr. Michael Tymchak, the 12-member task 
force represented a cross-section of the province . . . 
 
I want to thank Dr. Tymchak, Chair, and the Role of the 
School Task Force members for their tremendous 
dedication. 

 
Moving on down in his statement, he said: 
 

Guided by the spirit of this report and in keeping with the 
vision of the Role of the School Task Force, we are very 
excited that we will be able to respond on budget day with 
a significant expansion of the community schools program 
as indicated in the Throne Speech. 

 
Now he made that statement, Mr. Speaker, and he was 
responded to by the Education critic for the opposition, the hon. 
member from Kelvington-Wadena. And the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena had many positive things to say about the 
report of the Role of the Schools and was quite glowing in her 
comments, in fact, about what was put forward by the report. 
 
And at the end, she said . . . at the end of her comments, she 
said: 
 

This is the future of our province that we’re talking about. 
The gauntlet has been dropped at the feet of the Education 
minister. All of Saskatchewan will be waiting and watching 
to see if he takes up the challenge. 

 
Now after we took up the challenge and after we put the cash on 
the table to make good our commitment to the Role of the 
School Task Force report, we had a budget debate. And the 
members opposite had a chance to move an amendment to that 
budget debate and they had an opportunity to back up the 
expression of support that was made by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena for the good work done by the Role of the 
School Task Force report and how that was embraced by the 
budget. 
 
They didn’t do it. Mr. Speaker. They trashed it. The gauntlet 
had been thrown down, we picked it up in all good honour and 
in good faith, and made good on the good work of the Role of 
the School Task Force report. The members opposite indicated 
their support. And they had a chance to make a meaningful 
expression of that support and they chose not to. 
 
Now today in this debate we have a chance to partially rectify 
that, not in a deep way perhaps being that it’s not a budget 
debate and not a budget vote, but in a symbolic way. So I would 
urge the members opposite to take up the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena when she said things like, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The recommendations of the Role of the School Task Force 
set out a powerful plan for change. Most of the changes we 
support wholeheartedly and I expect we’ll be debating the 
few that cause concern here in the House. 

 
We’re having one of those debates, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
urge the earlier comments to be taken up and given the kind of 
support that would be warranted by the uptake by this 
government on the Role of the School Task Force. 
 
And I’ll just cite two quick examples, Mr. Speaker. The Role of 
the School Task Force recommended that an expansion of the 
pre-kindergarten program in the range of 25 per cent to 50 per 
cent would be reasonable. In this budget, Mr. Speaker, we 
substantially increased our pre-kindergarten financial support 
and increased the number of pre-kindergarten spaces by more 
than 80 per cent — exceeding the recommendations of the Role 
of the School Task Force report. 
 
And again on community schools, you could take the same 
approach. The Role of the School Task Force report 
recommended an increase of 26 schools over the next three 
years. And as I’d outlined earlier, Mr. Speaker, in this coming 
year, something that we’re all very proud of on this side of the 
House, we are doubling — more than doubling — the number 
of community schools. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McCall: — So, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a pleasure to take 
part in this debate. And I think education is crucial to this 
government. It’s crucial to the kind of quality of life that we can 
secure for our people in this province. And as I’d referenced 
earlier, we’re very excited on this side of the House that we are 
now in the fiscal position to be able to make the kind of 
investment that we’d dearly love to have been making for the 
past decade had the finances allowed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I will then close my remarks by moving the 
motion, and I repeat my earlier words: 
 

That this Assembly urge the government to carry through 
with its long-term plan for education as announced in the 
budget, a plan which includes expanded community 
schools, enhanced operating grants, improved teacher 
training, greater access to the Internet, and increased early 
learning programs and specialists. 

 
I so move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
very glad for the opportunity to get up and speak to this motion, 
to second the motion indeed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is my belief and I think the belief of most of us 
that education is the foundation upon which we will build this 
province. We look around the world and we see very clearly 
that where there is good, solid program of education, there is 
good development in that community. 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1415 

 

We’re also aware, Mr. Speaker, that it is not just simply the 
academic education which is vital to the healthy growth and 
knowledge and wisdom of our children in this world. There are 
many clichés around the fact that it takes a community to 
educate a child. It truly does, and I think this budget makes very 
clear that the commitment to community schools is a 
recognition that that community is involved in the process of 
teaching children and guiding them into the future. 
 
I’ve talked with some people who have been educated in the 
community schools, and what they learned there was far beyond 
just the academic education from kindergarten through grade 
12. There were tremendous programs that helped them learn 
more about the community that surrounded them. 
 
The particular case I am thinking of, a young man that was 
raised in an inner city school learned a lot about the Aboriginal 
community that was a large part of that school as well. There 
were elders who would come into the schools in the 
Community Schools Program and would help to teach the 
children about what their heritage was, what their hopes were. 
 
In that Community Schools Program, Mr. Speaker, they care for 
the whole child. Not only do they educate, but they bring in a 
nutritionist so that all of the children who gather there — no 
matter what their economic circumstances at home — get a 
nutritional and balanced diet. All the children in that school, not 
just a few exclusive children, all of the children get to 
participate in those meals. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also have community development workers 
in these schools who reach out beyond the boundaries of the 
schools to also broaden the base of the education. This year in 
this budget we’ve more than doubled the number of community 
schools that are going to be operating in this province. 
 
I think this is a tremendous piece of work, Mr. Speaker, and I 
look forward to the results of that in the decades ahead. That 
doubling of community schools will help nurture a whole 
generation of young people who might never have got that kind 
of broad education that they will get through this program. 
 
But community schools are just one aspect of what is being 
developed because of the increased budget that we were able to 
put into education this time. 
 
In the past, as a previous speaker mentioned, there were huge 
debts that had to be paid off. Mr. Speaker, we had . . . we were 
paying more on the interest on those debts than what we were 
able to put into the education program of this province. And 
that’s appalling. 
 
But we worked our way through that with balanced budgets, 
with a concerted effort to pay down the debt, and we’ve come 
to this place where we were now able to put more than twice as 
much into the Education budget as what we are paying on 
interest on those debts. And I’m very pleased with these actions 
of the government, of our Minister of Education in 
recommending this, and of our government in approving this 
expenditure on education. 
 
This expenditure will make a lot of difference in a variety of 
areas. The enhanced operating grants will mean that there is 

some relief for local taxpayers. I know in Regina there is some 
relief there — about 1.4 per cent in the public school system, 
1.4 in the Catholic system — and this will make a difference to 
what can happen in the community. 
 
I’m very pleased that these enhanced operating grants will 
enable more work to be done in a variety of schools throughout 
the province. 
 
Improved teacher training is also essential. If we’re going to 
have a good base of education for our children, we need to 
make sure that we have enough teachers and that those teachers 
get the best education possible. The increased funding for 
education will enable that to happen. 
 
Greater access to the Internet. What a tremendous tool for 
learning this is, and that tool is made available through 
CommunityNet to schools throughout this province. Children 
will be able to access information that is available throughout 
the world at every level of schooling that’s available, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s impressive. 
 
It’s impressive when I hear how free this information is made 
available to our students and to our teachers. I was impressed 
when I heard that MIT (Massachusetts Institute of Technology) 
last year decided that it would put its educational program out 
on the Net for anybody to access. 
 
This Internet tool allows people to grow and expand at their 
own rate. It’s a tremendous asset to our community and the 
investment that has been made into CommunityNet means that 
that asset is available throughout the province where it never 
would have been available had it just been left for private 
companies to develop or just left for individual school boards to 
try and attach to an Internet system. 
 
So this is a real opportunity to level and broaden the education 
that’s available for all of the students in this province. Part of 
having information available on the Internet, Mr. Speaker, is 
that we also have a Department of Education Web site and that 
Web site has been used many, many times. I’m told that there 
have been over 173 different countries that have gone to that 
site on the Net and they’ve downloaded millions upon millions 
of pages of information about the curriculum that has been 
developed in Saskatchewan. 
 
France has been one of the major users of that curriculum. 
Britain has also been a major user. And this is millions of pages 
of data that they’re taking from our site to be able to use in their 
education systems throughout the world. This is also available 
to those nations that do not have the facility to develop 
curriculums such as our nation has been able to develop over 
the years. 
 
So it’s a tremendous offering that has been made, not only to 
our own communities, but simply by posting the Web site made 
available throughout the world. And I think this is part of the 
nature and the sign of a very progressive government that looks 
to the social democratic needs of not only our own province, 
our nation, but of the world. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would also like to note that throughout 
the broadest community of Saskatchewan we have people who 



1416 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

have stated their support very clearly for this budget. They have 
stated it in newspapers, in a variety of documents, and I would 
like to quote a number of those for the benefit, not only of those 
of us sitting here in the House, but I would like to quote them 
for those people who are out listening and watching on the 
television. 
 
First of all from the Canadian Association for Community 
Education: 
 

Thank you for caring about our children and for expanding 
the Community Schools Program for at risk and Indian and 
Metis children and youth in our province. Next month 
Canada will be hosting the world conference in Vancouver. 
As president of the Canadian Association for Community 
Education, I am so proud to say that I come from a 
province that puts our children first. 

 
Expansion of the community school program will have a 
profoundly positive impact on the lives of so many children 
and their families. Providing services to those who are most 
in need is appreciated more than you will ever know. 

 
From the bottom of our hearts. Thank you. 

 
That was Fay Stupnikoff, councillor from Prince Albert 
Northcote. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, community schools do not just educate the 
children; they also take responsibility for educating the 
community. Parents, adults who are in the community can go 
and take part in some of the learning programs. Some of these 
community schools have night classes so that people who were 
not in their own youth able to develop and expand their 
education are now able to through the work of these community 
schools. 
 
So a tremendous progressive effort has been made here, and 
Ms. Stupnikoff notes that and notes what a tremendous gift it is 
not only to our own province, our nation, but to the world. 
 
From the Northern Lights School Division, I would like to 
quote: 
 

On behalf of the Northern Lights School Division, No. 113, 
I would like to commend the Saskatchewan education team 
for a job well done. Your newly released budget clearly 
indicates a strong commitment and support for public 
education. 
 
The provincial objectives of addressing the very real 
challenges facing our education system, providing 
leadership and support for policy and program priorities, 
and maintaining the integrity of financial support for 
education have indeed been met. 
 
Best wishes for continued success. Your excellent work is 
greatly appreciated. 

 
And I quote that from Ralph Pilz, director of education for the 
Northern Lights School Division. 
 
Sometimes in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all of the 

tremendous things that are being done, the work that is being 
done by this government is missed in the morass of mud that 
the opposition throws up and non-constructive, non-creative 
questions and criticisms. And I think it’s very, very important 
that for the people of this province, we highlight the very good 
and solid work that is being done to provide a foundation for 
our children and for the future development of this province. 
 
Education will provide a base that will move us into the decades 
beyond, into the centuries beyond. Education will provide us 
with people who know how to work in the high-tech sector, will 
provide us with skilled teachers who will be able to teach new 
generations of young people coming up. 
 
This is also recognized by the Prince Albert Catholic schools 
who write to our minister, and I quote: 
 

On behalf of the Prince Albert Catholic School Board of 
Education, I congratulate you and your officials on 
delivering a budget that better meets the needs of the 
educational community of Saskatchewan. 
 
In spite of competing demands placed upon the 
government, your leadership and increased commitment to 
various educational programs are greatly appreciated. 
 
Thank you for recognizing the challenges facing local 
school boards and your willingness to address these. Thank 
you for advocating so strongly on behalf of the children of 
our province. 
 
We appreciate the government increasing the provincial 
share of the operating costs of public education. In so 
doing, many boards of education, including Prince Albert 
Catholic, will be able to reduce the local mill rate. 
 
While we appreciate the increase in grants, however, we 
are also concerned that the funds allocated for capital 
projects may not be sufficient to meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan school divisions. 

 
Now that’s a very important point because I think in the past we 
have tried to keep those levels of funding for capital projects 
up. We’re trying to keep them up still, but we knew that it was 
absolutely essential that we put more into operating funds so 
that the education would not wane at the time that the buildings 
and the capital projects were being worked on. 
 
And that from the Prince Albert Catholic School Board. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the Regina Separate School Board, I 
would like to also quote a trustee who wrote to the paper, to The 
Leader-Post, in May. 
 

Students will benefit 
 
As a school trustee, it is my responsibility to let the public 
know when the best interests of education are not being 
met. That is why I wrote a letter to the editor concerning 
teacher salaries, special education funding and the transfer 
of education taxes from the provincial government onto 
local taxpayers. 
 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1417 

 

It is also my responsibility to recognize those who listen 
and act. That is why I congratulate Education Minister Jim 
Melenchuk and his deputy minister, Craig Dotson, for the 
recent provincial education budget. This budget has 
assisted the Regina Catholic school system to not only 
maintain its standard of excellence, but to actually improve 
the chances for our children to succeed. At the same time, 
our board is able to maintain faith with the provincial 
government by lowering local property taxes. 
 
A very special component of the Catholic school budget is 
the provision of computers in every classroom. Since every 
workplace requires some application of computer skills, 
this is important for our children. Not every family has the 
finances to afford a computer. That is why school 
computers give every child an equal chance to succeed. 
 
With this budget the Regina Catholic schools will apply 80 
per cent of its revenues toward instruction of our students. 
A heartfelt thank you to Melenchuk and Dotson for their 
caring, perseverance and hard work. I hope our students 
take time to send their thanks. They will be the 
beneficiaries. 

 
And that was Gerald Kleisinger, trustee from the Regina 
separate school board. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are so many comments that came in 
the public as a result of this budget. And I do believe that it’s 
important that we as legislators in this Chamber pay attention to 
the comments of those people. They help us to understand the 
impact of our budget decisions. 
 
From the Moosomin paper . . . or pardon me, from Moosomin, 
but recorded in The Leader-Post: “School taxes are good 
news,” is the comment from Harold Laich who is the director of 
education for the Moosomin School Division No. 9. I quote: 
 

One year ago I submitted a letter to the editor lamenting the 
lack of funding by the Government of Saskatchewan for 
public education in Saskatchewan. School boards were 
again forced to go to the public taxpayers for additional 
funding as education costs increased. Taxpayers have been 
very supportive of education spending. Nevertheless, 
increased taxes were a burden, and especially to those 
struggling in the agricultural sector. What is fair, is fair. 
Credit should be given when it is deserved. 
 
The 2001 budget, tabled by the Government of 
Saskatchewan, provided significant additional money for 
most, certainly not all, but most school divisions. This 
increased funding has allowed those boards the benefit to 
commit expenditures to areas that have been on hold for 
many years. In some cases mill rate reductions have been 
possible as a result of increased funding and some change 
in assessment. 

 
Now I read these, Mr. Deputy Speaker, acknowledging also the 
criticisms that have come from previous years. Because 
sometimes we are called, as government, we are called 
arrogant; it is said that we do not listen. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think as I listen to the discussions 

amongst my colleagues as decisions are struggled with as we 
tried to bring forward a budget that truly was responsive to the 
needs of this province, I believe that people like Mr. Laich were 
heard, were understood, and were responded to with the kind of 
vision for the future for the education of our children. And I’m 
very pleased with that action and with the budget impacts on 
those communities. 
 
The Meadow Lake School Division, according to Mandy 
Higgins of the Meadow Lake press staff, the Meadow Lake 
School Division has set the 2001 mill rate at 18 mills 
unchanged from 2000. That means property owners in the 
division will not pay more taxes than they did last year. 
 

The school division was able to keep the mill rate the same 
from 2000 to 2001 because provincial government grants 
helped cover increased costs, said Glen Winkler. 
 
“The government really helped us keep things going. We’re 
happy to not have to raise the mill rate,” said Winkler. 
 
The government’s annual foundation grant covered a 4.5 
per cent teacher salary increase, and division program 
initiatives in special education, preschool education, 
nutrition and literacy. 

 
And I would like to, for just a moment, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
also highlight the work that is being done in early childhood 
education. There we are reaching beyond even the kindergarten 
to pre-kindergarten and earlier than that to try and help every 
child in this province, whether they are economically 
disadvantaged, whether they are in, in difficult straits in terms 
of family relations, we are doing our utmost as a government, as 
a Department of Education, to reach out to all of those children 
so that we can provide them with the best possible potential for 
the future. 
 
Give them a good grounding. Make sure that their parents 
understand what is needed to help give those children a good 
grounding. And so the work and the budget that’s gone into 
early childhood education will help in that process, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is a release here from the teacher . . . 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation also commenting on our 
budget. Let me quote from this: 
 

The province’s teachers applaud education spending in the 
budget 
 
An increase of 7.9 per cent by the provincial government 
for K-12 education, $33.7 million this calendar year, is 
welcome news to the teachers of the province. 

 
Wayne Clements, president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation, said he was particularly pleased with the fact that 
the new money allocated for public education in the March 30 
budget has been done in such a way that it can be distributed 
unconditionally to school divisions. 
 
Clements indicated the budget was a step in the right direction 
in terms of addressing various equity issues the revolve around 
education in Saskatchewan. He alluded specifically to the 



1418 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

recently released Role of the School Task Force report, which 
advocated the formation of a greater number of community 
schools throughout the province. 
 
In its budget the government announced 42 new community 
schools which, for the first time, have been expanded to include 
both high schools and some rural settings, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I continue to quote: 
 

The additional funding for community schools and for 
Aboriginal education and special education reinforces the 
commitment of teachers to meet the needs of all children in 
Saskatchewan in an integrated way regardless of where 
they live. 

 
Clements also praised the government’s commitment to teacher 
recruitment and retention which included a million dollar fund 
primarily earmarked for northern and rural communities. 
 
And I’d like to editorialize there, Mr. Speaker, because very 
often the opposition tries to characterize this government as 
insensitive to rural Saskatchewan, insensitive to the needs of the 
rural communities. But here, as Mr. Clements notes, as this 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation document notes, this 
government listened to those concerns from rural Saskatchewan 
and responded with care and in a way that makes a substantial 
difference for those people. 
 
Now I’ll continue to quote here. He said: 
 

Teachers will look forward to working with government to 
determine how best to apply the money. There’s also a 
three-pronged approach intended to meet the government’s 
goal of ultimately having all the schools in the province 
connected to a high-speed communications network. 
 
This budget is a welcome reinvestment in K-2 education, 
and it allows school divisions more flexibility in order to 
meet the demands in a system that have been crying out for 
attention, Clements said. 

 
Not only were the teachers pleased, but the school trustees were 
pleased with this budget. And I’d like to quote from a media 
release from the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association. 
This media release is dated March 30: 
 

Children benefit from the budget. 
 
Students from kindergarten to Grade 12 will benefit from 
the provincial government’s budget, says the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association. 
 
An increased commitment to various education programs, 
along with increased funding to school boards announced 
in the budget Friday, will help students in the K-12 
education system. 
 
“This budget helps our students in the classroom, and that’s 
what’s most important, said Gary Shaddock, President of 
the SSTA, which represents all boards of education in 
Saskatchewan. “We hope this signals a renewed 
commitment by the province to educating our children. It’s 
a step in the right direction.” 

The government announced Friday that school divisions 
will receive an additional $33.7 million towards operating 
costs for 2001. The SSTA had asked for at least $32 million 
extra to cover various cost increases such as salaries, 
utilities and transportation. 

 
And I’ll note again, Mr. Speaker, if I can editorialize the quote, 
that 33.7 million was put into the operating cost above what 
was asked for by the SSTA. 
 
And I continue to quote: 
 

Included in that funding are increases for Aboriginal 
education, community schools, early childhood education, 
special needs, teacher recruitment, and technology. 
 
“This is a positive investment in our future — our 
children,” Shaddock said. “At first glance this is a step 
forward for our students. This definitely increases the 
government responsibility for funding education on a 
province-wide basis.” 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I want to editorialize just briefly to 
fill in the gaps there. For years, people were concerned that the 
shift had gone from the provincial government to the 
communities and had been asking us to change that shift. It had 
reached something like a 60/40 split and with this budget we 
managed to move that up to 42/58. And the response of the 
Saskatchewan School Trustees Association was very positive as 
we moved that line. 
 

Shaddock went on to say that boards of education will be 
affected differently, and it will take some time to fully 
understand those effects. Changes in student enrolment and 
reassessment will determine how much money each board 
gets. 
 
The SSTA, the province’s elected school board members 
and the voice of public education, represents all boards of 
education in Saskatchewan, serving nearly 190,000 
children in our schools. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these people were very clear on how 
positive this budget was for them and for the children of this 
province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we also received correspondence from the 
Regina Early Learning Centre, and this is addressed to the 
Minister of Education. And I quote: 
 

First, let me congratulate you on your recent launching of 
the early childhood initiative and your progressive 
partnership with the ministers of Social Services and 
Health. Even more laudable is your willingness to work 
with community organizations. What better message for 
Saskatchewan families to learn co-operation and the value 
of pooling resources than to have this modelled at 
government levels. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ll editorialize here. Just letting the 
people know that there was a tremendous amount of work that 
went on prior to this budget between the departments trying to 
coordinate this activity so that when the budget came out we 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1419 

 

would be ready to move and we would help work on this early 
childhood initiative. 
 
I continue to quote then: 
 

I have written to the ministers of Social Services and 
Health to express our support of your integrated approach 
and initiatives for children. Your commitment to support 
vulnerable children and prevent long-term negative 
outcomes in the newly announced Kids First initiative is 
welcome and timely. 
 
At the Early Learning Centre, we have been working for 23 
years with children and families who live in risk-filled 
circumstances offering education, health, and support 
services from birth to school entrance. Many children have 
gone through our doors emerging confident and competent 
and more ready to face the challenges ahead of them. Many 
of our parents have gone on to complete their own 
education and, in some cases, have completed university 
degrees. 

 
And I would like to editorialize here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
just point out again what the impact of this kind of integrated 
work is and how the community schools not only affect the 
children who are coming up, but also have a profound effect on 
the larger community providing initiative, providing the 
incentive for some of the adults to go on and broaden their 
learning and their understanding as well. And we’re very glad 
that this budget supports that kind of activity. 
 
So let me continue to quote. Before I do that, I would just like 
to editorialize again, briefly. 
 
I hear the chirping from the other side talking about this being a 
boring speech. Well it may be boring to people who don’t have 
much interest in developing education, as this side of the House 
does. But I want to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that for those 
people who are listening in to this, this channel, I think it’s very 
important that they get a very clear picture of how positive this 
is for the province; what a foundation it will provide for the 
children of this province. 
 
And I want to say that it’s a far cry from the mud-throwing 
activity that’s been going on, on the other side of the House for 
the last few days that is primarily unsubstantiated and really not 
worth getting into. 
 
So now I will come back here, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I will 
continue to quote from this letter from the Regina Early 
Learning Centre: 
 

We are aware, however, there are many families for whom 
our services are too little, too late. The addition of universal 
screening and intensive follow-up support will fill a gap in 
existing services. 
 
With the multitude of pressures facing government these 
days, we applaud your efforts to take on a children’s 
agenda and hope this will be a beginning of a broad range 
of social, health, and education supports for young children 
and their families. We are willing to offer our expertise and 
our experience in the community to move this agenda 

along. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And that’s the Regina Early Learning Centre. 
 
As pioneers in the development and delivery of holistic 
programs, the Early Learning Centre has delivered these 
programs to children and families who are most marginalized 
in our society. They note that they are eager to contribute to 
this developing vision for Saskatchewan’s children. That was 
written by Anne Luke, executive director. 
 
It’s tremendous work that that group is doing in our community 
and to have their acknowledgement and their support for this 
budget and for the actions of this budget means a lot to those of 
us in government, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The commendations come from a very wide variety of sources 
and I would like for our members to hear them as well because I 
think very often the members of government do not hear the 
commendations that come. 
 
And so I would like to quote from the Humboldt Journal by 
Keri Dalman, who is staff writer there: 
 

Rural school divisions get budget break. 
 
The 2001 provincial budget was good news for the 
Humboldt Rural School Division. 
 
The 2001 budget has improved the program side of 
education, noted Milton Kerpan, director of education for 
the school division at the annual meeting held April 11 at 
Lake Lenore, which drew over 25 people. The government 
has shifted its priorities and put more money into the 
program side of education this year, he said in his report. 
Capital funding however stayed the same as last year. 
 
The greatest change in the budget was the per pupil rate 
which went up significantly, Kerpan stated. The increase in 
the per pupil rate will benefit greatly those divisions whose 
enrolment numbers are going up, not necessarily the HRSD 
(that’s the Humboldt division) as their enrolment is slipping 
a bit but it will benefit others. 
 
Also the amount of money available for shared services 
such as social workers and core curriculum development 
almost doubled he said. 
 
The changes mean that the board will be allowed to 
consider program initiatives such as expanding computer 
use, increase social worker time and introduction of the 
renewed elementary language arts curriculum. 
 
Technology in the school division is moving ahead. 
Saskatchewan Education is paying the cost of bringing 
high-speed Internet service to rural schools, he said, and the 
board is also planning on putting libraries on a bar code 
system which would allow for better interlibrary loans. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these things mean a lot to the rural 
education programs, to be able to tap in to the best of our 



1420 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

education resources, to use the Internet to do that, to be able to 
draw from the interlibrary network, tremendous access is gained 
by the funds that were put into those divisions through this 
government’s budget and through the increase in the per pupil 
grants that are going out. 
 
Earlier on I alluded to the impact on the cities. And we had a lot 
of pressure early on from the municipal governments to do our 
best to try and to give them relief on the tax base and we heard 
from them that it was important to give some of that relief 
through the education side of our budget. 
 
And therefore we did that and the response was very clear. The 
boards in Regina were setting their budgets and the increased 
provincial fundings, as the Regina Public School Board; at 48.2 
million is 9.33 million or nearly 24 per cent more than last year. 
It is responsible for this year’s good news, according to Burnett 
and that allowed the Regina Public School system to put a 1.4 
per cent tax cut on the table. 
 
It also was good news for the Catholic School Board and the 
Catholic School Board was also able to put that same matching 
1.4 per cent cut on the table which gives relief to the citizens of 
Regina, to the citizens of all of our communities, when that 
money is put in place and their taxes do not have to increase, in 
fact, may go down. 
 
Mr. Bresciani of the Catholic School Board expressed gratitude 
to the provincial government for the increased funding but was 
wanting to be wary about how that money would be spent. 
 
I would also like to quote from our Regina Leader-Post. Murray 
Mandryk, who often makes very cutting and challenging 
commentaries on where the government is going and what the 
government is doing, but here’s what Mr. Mandryk had to say 
when he was reflecting on the budget for education: 
 

And while it likely won’t be enough to reduce our property 
taxes, an extra $43 million for education over last year’s 
total also addresses specific opposition complaints. What is 
perhaps more impressive, however, is where some of the 
big spending increases in education are going. 
 
For example (Mr. Mandryk notes) the number of 
community schools — a concept where schools are open in 
the evenings so that inner-city children in particular have a 
place to go — will increase to 83 from 41, thanks to a 
doubling of their budget to 9.5 million. Such spending is 
never a big vote getter. 

 
Hear that again: 
 

Such spending is never a big vote getter, but it is the right 
thing to do. 

 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is what this government is 
about. It is about trying our utmost to do the right thing, to 
make sure that whether it is vote getting or not, that we will 
build that foundation properly so that there will be a future. 
 
And this investment is a clear action now that will make a 
difference down the road. Not a vote getter, but a very, very 
vital action to help build this province. 

Let me quote this one more time — one more time: 
 

The number of community schools, a concept where 
schools are open in the evenings so that inner city children 
in particular have a place to go, will increase to 83 from 41, 
thanks to a doubling of their budget to $9.5 million. 

 
And I quote Mr. Mandryk in saying: 
 

Such spending is never a big vote getter, but it is the right 
thing to do. 

 
And we will continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to try and do the 
right thing, not only in education, but we will try continually to 
do the right thing in agriculture, in rural revitalization, dealing 
with our Crown corporations, in every aspect in health, in every 
aspect, including in liquor and gaming. 
 
We will do our utmost to do the right thing, to provide the best 
possible government for this province so that we can build a 
future for all our children, a future that will make this province 
rise above the others. 
 
We’ve seen it rise above the others in the last decade in terms of 
gross domestic product. We’ve seen the rest of this country 
acknowledge how this province has grown. When we look back 
at The Globe and Mail in the fall, they said “Saskatchewan 
leads” — “Saskatchewan leads the country.” 
 
And you need to hear that, my friends over in the other side, 
and you need to lock it in because . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Just to 
remind the member to address the comments to the Chair and 
through the Chair. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, I’m having difficulty hearing his 
speech. So if we could just tone it down just a few notches, I’d 
appreciate it. 
 
Order. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I want to 
make clear once again that Saskatchewan has led this country in 
economic development. The Globe and Mail made that very, 
very clear that in this past decade we have been a leader even 
over that province next to us. 
 
And I think that it’s vitally important that the members opposite 
pay attention to that fact. They have continued to push gloom 
and doom on this province for the last two years in an 
unbelievable manner. They have now just slightly started to 
shift because they’re trying to buy into the vote-getting 
schemes. 
 
But I have to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that what we are about, 
is seeking to do the right thing to build this province on a solid 
foundation — not cheap tricks, not trying to sell off, but to 
build a solid foundation upon which this province will move 
into the next decades. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to go back to the issue of the 
community’s response to this budget, because it is absolutely 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1421 

 

vital that all of us hear how moved and how impressed the 
community was — not our point of view; their point of view — 
from what was done in the Education budget. 
 
I want to quote from the SaskWest Media Monitoring Ltd., and 
there are a number of quotes here. The first comes from Gary 
Shaddock of the SSTA. Garry Shaddock, president of the 
SSTA, I quote: 
 

This year’s budget is an investment in our children, the 
future of our province. The monies that the province has 
designated will go direct to the classroom, which will be a 
huge benefit to our students. And we hope that this is an 
indication from the provincial government that they are 
planning to reinvest in education in the future. And we see 
this budget as a step in the right direction. 

 
Wayne Clements, STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 
president, and I quote: 
 

We were quite excited given the fact that the community 
school mandate has been expanded, in fact doubled. There 
are a number of initiatives there that will provide more 
equity-based education for students of our province. And 
that’s what it’s all about — providing equity for students no 
matter where they live in this province, as well as keeping 
the money here to provide the education they so rightly 
deserve. 

 
On CJME, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Regina School Board is 
quoted as giving the budget an A-plus, and I quote: 
 

The extra expenditures in the provincial budget may help 
Regina taxpayers. At least it’s looking like school taxes 
should stay the same this year. The provincial budget is 
earning an A-plus from the public school board. Chair 
Ernie Pappas, chair of the Regina School Board, says 
trustees can finally begin repairing the damage caused by 
years of cutbacks and shortfalls. 
 

And I’ll editorialize here once again to remind the public that 
those cutbacks were necessitated by a huge debt that was built 
up in this province by the last right-wing government that 
pushed its policies on the people of this province and just put us 
deeply, deeply in debt. 
 
And we have been able to build our way out of that with very, 
very careful balanced budgets over the last decade, and because 
of those careful balanced budgets, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we 
have been able to move away from the cutbacks and the 
shortfalls and invest more deeply in the education for our 
children. 
 
I quote Ernie Pappas again, and he says: 
 

It was a very generous budget for the urban schools and it 
feels like we have come out of a nightmare of the last 15 
years. This certainly is the best budget, certainly during the 
time that I have been on the board, and for many, many 
years. 

 
Pappas says he fully expects the board to hold the line on taxes 
and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we noted already that he had not only 

. . . they had not only held the line but were able to drop them 
by 1.4. 
 
“The province gets top marks,” says the Prince Albert Daily 
Herald. A trustee there says overall its probably the best budget 
we’ve seen in 15 years, said Wayne Steen, chairman of the 
Saskatchewan Rivers School Board. Chairman Steen gave the 
province an A. 
 
Cindy Gee, the chairwoman of the Prince Albert Catholic 
School Board, was also pleased with the 2001 budget giving it 
an A minus or a B plus. 
 

“All the money goes into the classroom (I quote) in one 
form or another,” said Cindy Gee. 

 
St. Mary High School will become a community school which 
will enhance the school’s existing programs and enable more 
staff to be hired including a community school coordinator and 
perhaps school associates. The division will initially receive 
$100,000. 
 

“It’s wonderful,” said Gee. “It’s one of the highlights for 
us.” 

 
From The Estevan Mercury, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “Public 
school system holding the line at budget time.” 
 
Norm Park of the Mercury writes: 
 

It’s a zero and in this case a zero is a good number. 
 
That’s the information that came from the Estevan School 
Division this past week regarding their 2001 budget mill 
rate. The public school system won’t be asking local 
property taxpayers for an increase in contributions. Their 
mill rate is standing pat at 21.3. 

 
Thanks, in large part (Mr. Deputy Speaker, I quote) to an 
increase in provincial foundation grants based on student 
enrolments, the Estevan School Division should be able to 
meet all their financial requirements without having to go 
to the Estevan property owners for any more money than 
they did last year. 

 
These are tremendous accolades from all around the province 
for a well thought-out budget — a budget that, again I repeat, 
will provide a foundation for all children, an educational 
foundation that will help them move into the future 
successfully. 
 
The Estevan Mercury also quotes the Catholic School Board 
Chair, Vince Marcotte. He said: 
 

This budget was not as difficult this time around as it has 
been in recent years thanks to an increase in grant money 
from the province. 

 
 (16:45) 
 
The Moosomin School Division No. 9, 2001 budget 
information as reported in the World Spectator of Moosomin: 
 



1422 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

The Board of Education of the Moosomin School Division 
has completed its 2001 budget deliberations and has set the 
2001 mill rate at 21.5 mills. This is a reduction of .7 mills. 
Total expenditures for the year will be $8,107,000. 

 
The reduction of the mill rate was made possible by an 
increase to the foundation operating grant by the 
Government of Saskatchewan as well as direct 
reimbursement from the government for the increase in the 
professional salaries and a small increase in the division’s 
assessment base. 

 
Provincial funding for education in the 2001 budget year 
for the Moosomin School Division will increase to 22.83 
per cent of total expenditures, up from 16.79 per cent 
funding of expenditures in 2000. The increase in funding 
will enable some significant program and maintenance 
improvements. 

 
In The Four-Town Journal, Langenburg, “The province gives 
more money to Potashville,” and I quote from the article: 
 

One bright spot in the board’s financial figures came in 
analysis of how much money the provincial government 
provides to the division compared to how much must be 
raised through local taxes. In 2001 the provincial 
government’s operating grant will increase by over 7 per 
cent to 33.9 per cent while local tax revenues will drop by 
approximately 7 per cent to 58.3 per cent. 

 
A real plus for Langenburg, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
From the Shellbrook Chronicle, “Community Schools Seen As 
Vision For Future,” the following background information was 
written by Debra Kuzbik, superintendent of instructional and 
student services for the Parkland School Division. And I quote: 
 

In its spring budget, the provincial government announced 
a $7 million increase in grant recognitions for Community 
Education in Saskatchewan. Parkland School Division was 
delighted to be selected as one of the recipients of 
Community School designation. 
 
Saskatchewan Community Schools are centers of learning 
for their communities and incorporate a comprehensive 
range of best educational practices for meeting the diverse 
learning needs of all students. They provide a responsive, 
inclusive, culturally affirming and academically 
challenging learning program and environment and are 
effective in addressing the challenges of the communities 
they serve. As well, Community Schools use collaborative 
approaches to foster the development and well-being of the 
entire community. 

 
And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would like to reference the 
fact that these community schools really do provide a broader 
opportunity for the community. Not just for the children who 
are going to those schools who get to learn not just the 
academic side but also learn about cultural traditions, who also 
gain because they are able to take part in nutritional programs; 
but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it also provides so much to the 
community because the elders of the community, the parents, 
people within the community who have special skills, are able 

to come in and meet with those children and share their gifts 
and abilities with the children, so that the education they are 
getting is not just academic but is focused on how the 
community lives, how the community grows, how the 
community works together. 
 
And I have to say from my perspective, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I 
believe that it is this kind of education, community-based 
education, that will provide the best foundation for the future of 
this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are significant comments from 
across the province, and I would like to quote from The Melfort 
Journal from Tuesday, April 3. This is by Jordie Dwyer of the 
Journal — “The division’s diversity education program hits the 
planning stage.” 
 

A program to help at-risk youth and put a focus on facing 
the challenges presented by a diverse educational system 
has been approved in principle by the Melfort School 
Division. 
 
School division trustees passed a motion at their meeting 
on Tuesday to proceed with the planning of a diversity and 
education program, and additional money provided to 
school divisions in Friday’s provincial budget will also help 
jump-start the program. 
 
The province increased funding to $460 million for the 
kindergarten-to-grade 12 system in Saskatchewan, 
including more money for Aboriginal education, 
community schools, early childhood education, and special 
needs. 
 
Crandall Hrynkiw, director of education for the division, 
said the money will help pay for a position that will assist 
in the development and implementation of the plan. 
 

Resources, Mr. Deputy Speaker, are needed in order to bring 
people on board who can help make these plans come to 
fruition. And the money that is provided in this budget also 
provides for those people who will provide the knowledge and 
the resources that will help these school divisions develop their 
programs. 
 
In Kamsack, from the Norquay North Star of Norquay, Sask, 
they say: 
 

The Kamsack School Division keeps the mill rate at last 
year’s level. 

 
This is good news all across the province that comes from this 
budget. 
 

The tax rate will raise about 46 per cent of the total budget, 
whereas last year it raised 48 per cent. 

 
So most of their funding then is going to be provided through 
the provincial school budget. 
 
From Melfort, I quote: 
 

The total operating revenue for the school division is up 



May 29, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1423 

 

nearly 7 per cent over 2000 and that jump is mainly 
attributable to an increase in the provincial government 
grant. These grants truly help develop the province’s 
education system. 
 

And by the accolades that have been given there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I think it is quite clear that the people of this province 
know that this government heard their concerns. We listened to 
the teachers when they said what their needs were. We listened 
to the boards of education when they said what their needs 
were. We listened to the communities when the communities 
said we need more support in educating our children. We 
listened, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This is not the sign, if I may say so, this is not the sign of an 
arrogant government. It is the sign of a government that is 
willing to learn to grow as we listen to the people of this 
province explain what their needs are. 
 
And I hope, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that today and in the days 
ahead we will continue to listen to the needs of the people and 
we will continue to respond as effectively as what we have 
responded in this education budget. I believe we will. I will 
work to make sure that as a government we do that. And I know 
that my colleagues feel similarly on this issue. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, education is a vital component in any 
country, in any land, in any community. I want to refer to an 
article that came from The StarPhoenix. Its source is in Ottawa 
and he writes: 
 

As former US labour secretary, Robert Reich, is telling 
politicians and thinkers on both sides of the border, 
education coupled with a healthy workforce and 
well-defined values makes the difference between success 
and failure in an age when capital ignores borders and 
companies have few national loyalties. 

 
Now I want to editorialize just briefly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because I think this is what is key. We are not interested in 
short-term little blips. What we are interested in as a 
government in this province is building a foundation that we 
will have a future for our children in this province. We do not 
— do not — want to just throw money away to make it look 
good to buy votes. What we want to do is build a solid 
foundation. 
 
And that’s what this expert says and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that’s what we say as a government. We will build that future. 
We build a solid future for our children. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — The question is asked, how will we keep our 
children in this province? Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are not 
going to throw money on some short-term thing that’ll keep 
them here for a few days. What we will do, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is we will build a solid province that has a good 
educational foundation; that has a good economic foundation; 
that has a future that will continue to grow. We will build our 
infrastructure with the Internet. We will continue to make this 
province a place where children will stay. 
 

And not only that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a province that will be 
a destiny. Where people will look from other places around the 
world. And when they’re saying, where do I want to go to build 
my company, where do I want to go to build a future for my 
children, they will come to Saskatchewan. Because they will 
know that this is the place to build a future. I am convinced that 
we can build that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — I am convinced that we can build that when 
we start with this foundation — a solid foundation in education, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Let me continue to quote, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

With considerable lucidity and insight, Reich argues in his 
new book, Future of Success. 
 

I would like you to hear this, members on the opposite side of 
the House. In his new book, Future of Success, he argues with 
lucidity and insight: 
 

That countries and individuals will only prosper when they 
have the knowledge and skills to conceive and construct 
those things the world wants. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Let me read that again: 
 

With considerable lucidity and insight, Reich argues in his 
new book, Future of Success, that countries and individuals 
will only prosper when they have the knowledge and skills 
to conceive and construct those things the world wants. 
 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, this past week I was able to attend on 
Rochdale Boulevard Days, in my constituency, a special event 
that was organized by the entrepreneurs, the young 
entrepreneurs class at Winston Knoll Collegiate. 
 
My son is a member in this class, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and he 
has said a number of times that he is interested in a future of 
business administration, of building. And I want to say that 
together that class put together a program, an entrepreneurial 
program that their teachers helped them with so that they could 
build something for the future. They had insight, they had 
knowledge, they had an educational system that would help 
them, and they put together a very successful program, Mr. 
Speaker, last weekend. 
 
Let me conclude now, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I would like to 
conclude by finishing the quotes from Mr. Reich: 
 

Prosperity depends on adding value to products and 
services, not on the profitability of companies with national 
profiles. It is no secret that the foundation for all those good 
things is a cutting-edge education system, one that is as 
strong in the humanities as it is in the sciences. Given that 
brilliance is not the preserve of the rich, that system must 
be accessible and it must be affordable. 
 

Let me say again. Let me say again: 



1424 Saskatchewan Hansard May 29, 2001 

 

Given that brilliance is not the preserve of the rich, that 
system must be accessible and it must be affordable. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, with those words, I would like 
to move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:00. 
 
 


