















































Hansard: April 19, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 593 
 April 19, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition from people within the Bruno area 
who petition for the Bruno telephone exchange to become part 
of the Humboldt telephone exchange. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to allow 
Bruno to be part of the Humboldt telephone exchange. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Humboldt, from Bruno, from St. Gregor, Lake Lenore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m able to 
present a petition regarding the two government Crown 
corporations, SaskPower and SaskEnergy, who both recently 
announced significant rate increases for residential and 
business customers. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from the 
communities of Demaine, Craik, Lucky Lake, Birsay, 
Outlook, and Beechy. Most of these are centres in my riding 
of Rosetown-Biggar, and I’m happy to make this presentation 
on their behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I also have a petition to present 
today from citizens in Rose Valley area who are concerned 
with the EMS report: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

I’m pleased to present this petition. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed weight 
restrictions to Highway No. 43. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
recognize the economic harm its plan to close Highway 43 

to heavy traffic will do to south-central Saskatchewan and 
instead to vote necessary funds to upgrade Highway 43 in 
order to preserve jobs and economic development in the 
area. 
 

And this petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Swift Current, Pambrun, and Vanguard. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people in southwest Saskatchewan concerned with the state of 
our hospital there. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from 
Humboldt, Saskatchewan, from Swift Current, from 
Hazenmore, and once again the good folks at the Rush Lake 
Hutterite Colony. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
from citizens from all over the province very concerned about 
rising energy costs. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 
 

The signatures are from Prince Albert, Estevan, Hanley, 
Davidson, Glaslyn, Allan, Craik, Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of constituents of mine. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition come from the communities of 
Wynyard, Wishart and Bankend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition in regards from 



594 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

the residents of the Assiniboia area concerned with Pioneer 
Lodge. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
at least the necessary action to ensure that at least the very 
current levels of service and care be maintained at the 
Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed from people from Regina, 
Saskatoon, Moose Jaw and Gravelbourg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
again rise on behalf of concerned citizens reference the cuts at 
the Assiniboia Pioneer Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these petitioners come from Lisieux and 
Assiniboia. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 
 

The centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Swift Current’s request for a new hospital; 
 
The level of care at Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia; 
 
Funding to upgrade Highway No. 43; 
 
Legislation to protect children from tobacco use; 
 
An energy rebate to consumers; and 
 
Ensuring the Hafford hospital remains open. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 25 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Highways and Transportation: could you 
please provide the department’s spring tendering schedule 
for the upcoming year that includes which highways and 
roads specifically will be repaired? 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 25 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health: what is the name of the 
individual that the Regina Health District has recently hired 
in order to recruit plastic surgeons and what is the salary 
that this individual is receiving? 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 25 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: what is the total budgeted cost 
for the provincial government’s public relations and 
communications campaign promoting the 2001-2002 
provincial budget in terms of planning, production, 
distribution, advertising purchases, and all other associated 
costs? 

 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 25 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Social Services: what are the names of 
the individuals on the Saskatchewan Council of Children; 
how many times has the council met to date; and what has 
the cost of the council been to date? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 25 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: how much did SaskEnergy spend 
on the advertising insert that appeared in the provincial 
newspapers on April 14, 2001, including planning costs, 
production costs, advertising costs, and all other associated 
costs? 

 
And also, while I’m on my feet: 
 

How much has SaskEnergy budgeted in total for this 
particular communications campaign? 

 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on day no. 
25 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Post-Secondary Education: how much 
has your department budgeted for the current 
communications campaign promoting the post-secondary 
student tax credit in terms of planning, production, 
distribution, advertising, purchases, and all other associated 
costs? 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on 
day no. 25 I will ask the government the following question: 
 

How much was spent on travel outside of Saskatchewan 
but inside of Canada, by officials of Crown Investments 
Corporation and its subsidiaries to investigate investments 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 595 

 

made or under consideration during the year 2000; I have 
similar questions for the years 1999 and 2001. 
 

And also a question — I intend to give notice that on day no. 25 
I will ask the government the following question: 
 

How much was spent on travel outside of Canada by 
officials of Crown Investments Corporation and its 
subsidiaries to investigate investments made or under 
consideration during the year 1999; with similar questions 
for the years 2000 and 2001. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Legislative Assembly, it’s 
my pleasure today to introduce to the House here, a 
distinguished visitor, the Hon. Kevin O’Brien, the MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) for Arviet in Nunavut, 
and Speaker of Legislative Assembly at Nunavut. Mr. O’Brien 
has served as a member of the Legislative Assembly of the 
Northwest Territories from ’95 to ’99, and he was elected 
Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Nunavut, Canada’s 
newest Territory, on March 29, 2000. 
 
Mr. O’Brien has 15 years of experience at various levels of 
government — began working in New Brunswick with the 
municipalities in 1980; he’s been a negotiator for both union 
employees and management. He was senior administrative 
officer at Tuktoyaktuk. Prior to his election to the Legislative 
Assembly, he was director of the Northwest Territory Housing 
Corporation for the Keewatin district. 
 
He lives in Arviet. Mr. Speaker O’Brien is the father of two 
children — Jaren and his daughter Kelsey, who is here today. 
 
Kelsey attends school at Moose Jaw Sunningdale School, where 
in addition to going to school, she’s also very interested in 
dance music and soccer. And with her today also, is her mother, 
Michelle O’Brien, who is a science and math teacher at 
Riverview Collegiate. 
 
I would ask all members to extend a warm welcome to Speaker 
O’Brien. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — I beg your indulgence, Mr. Speaker, thank 
you, and the indulgence of my hon. colleagues to allow me to 
welcome my good friend, the Hon. Kevin O’Brien, and his 
family to this Legislative Assembly. I look forward for a long, 
continuing friendship. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the official opposition, it’s my honour to be able to welcome 
Speaker O’Brien to the Assembly and to his daughter, Kelsey, 
and to Mrs. O’Brien. And again I’d ask the Assembly to 
welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 

to you and through you to all members of the legislature, three 
guests who are here for this afternoon including Rosalee 
Longmoore, who is the president of the Saskatchewan Union of 
Nurses; Bev Crossman, who is the executive director of SUN; 
and Donna Brunskill, who is the executive director of the 
Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association. 
 
Let’s give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the representatives from 
SUN and the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association) to, I’m sure, view the proceedings this afternoon. 
Their input and concern and commitment to the health care field 
in our province is very much appreciated and I would ask 
members to join in giving them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to 
introduce two other very distinguished visitors in the House 
today, both of them seated behind the bar and both of them 
former members of this House. 
 
I would like members to welcome back to this House, Mr. 
Walter Smishek, who served as minister of Labour and minister 
of Health in a previous time. And of course our good friend, 
Mr. Dale Flavel, who represented well the constituency of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood and served as our Deputy Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to invite all members to welcome 
these members. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with the 
Premier in welcoming Mr. Flavel to the Assembly. Mr. Flavel is 
a constituent of mine and it’s always good to see him in the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, in your gallery we have two 
special visitors. We have my niece, Sasha Goulet, as well as her 
friend, Krista Berg. They’re here visiting Regina from 
Saskatoon. They’ve done a little bit of rock climbing. They’ve 
been to the Royal Saskatchewan Museum and are poised to 
listen to what’s happening here in the legislature this afternoon. 
 
Please welcome them all. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

911 Service in Southern Saskatchewan 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is good news 
this week for southern Saskatchewan. I want to highlight major 



596 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

progress that has been made on the schedule of enhanced 911 
service — service that will soon be available all across our 
province. As of Tuesday, April 17, 911 service is now available 
for the communities and surrounding areas of Oxbow, Redvers, 
Weyburn, Carlyle, Kipling, Carnduff, Radville, Grenfell, 
Moosomin, Wolseley, Broadview, and Whitewood. 
 
In all, Mr. Speaker, this expansion covers 117 municipalities. 
As of now, 309 municipalities province-wide have access to 
enhanced 911 coverage, including practically all of southern 
Saskatchewan. By the fall of 2002 there will be complete 
coverage of all Saskatchewan, including the North. 
 
It needs to be emphasized, Mr. Speaker, that this coverage is 
laid for land lines . . . land line telephones. Cell phone messages 
go to the nearest tower, not to the nearest 911. Their location 
does not register on the 911 operator’s screen — 911 is 
designed for land line phones, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is good news for all of us who recognize the need for a 
quick response emergency system across the province — a 
system being provided with the co-operation of local 
communities and SaskTel. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Glentworth Residents to Represent Saskatchewan at 
National Bowling Championship 

 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, at 
a time when rural Saskatchewan is seeing stuff close and people 
moving out, I’m happy to say that the town of Glentworth has a 
bowling alley that’s functioning extremely well. 
 
I’m a little loath to bring that up in the House because members 
opposite might find out it’s running well and they’ll find a way 
to study it and then close it. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the bowling alley is doing very 
well. And in the 55-plus triples, I would like to comment on 
three of the individuals from Glentworth. Mr. Gaston St. 
Jacques, Elvin Mitchell, and Roy Burns participated in this 
event. And they won through the district, through Moose Jaw, 
and they won in Regina, and are now going to represent 
Saskatchewan at the national bowling championship to be held 
in Brampton, Ontario on June 22, 25. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what makes this a very outstanding achievement is 
one of the members, my good friend Mr. St. Jacques, is 
clinically blind and he still participates in the normal bowling 
league. And I’d also like to report that this is his second trip to 
the national championships, even though he has this sight 
impairment. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate these three 
individuals and wish them well on their trip to Brampton for the 
national finals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Soil Conservation Week 
 

Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 

Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture and Food has declared 
April 15 through 21 Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Week. 
 
Over the last 10 years, Mr. Speaker, many Saskatchewan 
farmers have made significant progress in preserving our 
precious soil resource, and our government is very anxious to 
support this work. 
 
This year, Saskatchewan Agriculture and Food is providing 
$200,000 to the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association to 
help that organization continue its educational programs 
throughout the province. Through this important educational 
work, our province will see benefits not only in soil 
conservation, but also in water resource protection and 
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions and in the enhancement 
of biodiversity. 
 
Our government has also announced a $26 million conservation 
cover program to advance soil conservation. This program will 
provide financial and technical support to Saskatchewan 
farmers who wish to convert areas of annual cropland to 
perennial cover as a way of encouraging soil conservation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we mark Soil Conservation Week, I would like 
to thank the Saskatchewan Soil Conservation Association for 
their hard work and for their commitment to promoting soil 
conservation in our province. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Battlefords Music Festival 
 

Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Gives me great 
pleasure today to talk to you about the Battlefords Music 
Festival which recently delighted the people of the Battlefords 
with song, choral speech, and instrumental playing. 
 
The Battlefords Music Festival has been in existence 
continually for 70 years. The first festival had about 30 entries. 
This year, the festival had close to 850 entrants in many 
categories. The overall quality of the entrants was very good 
and a number of students were recommended to go on to 
compete at the provincial level. 
 
This year, for the first time anywhere; the Battlefords Music 
Festival had a special afternoon which featured specific First 
Nations competitions in drumming, story telling, and singing. 
This reflects the special cultural makeup of the Battlefords. 
 
No mention of the significance of the music festival to the 
Battlefords would be complete without a warm word of praise 
and appreciation to the many volunteers who have made it 
possible for so many years. The festival network is a team of 
dedicated people working under the umbrella of trust, open 
communications, enthusiasm and dedication, committed to 
making each year’s festival better. 
 
So I ask you to join with me in offering appreciations to the 
Battleford Music Festival, the competitors, the teachers, the 
adjudicators, and volunteers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 597 

 

Rawlinson Gift to University of Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Those of us fortunate 
enough to receive a university education, I’m sure would like to 
be able to help our school assist future students receive the 
same benefit. Some graduates happily find themselves in the 
position to do just that. 
 
One such graduate of the University of Saskatchewan, my alma 
mater, is Gordon Rawlinson, president of Rawlco Radio, who’s 
a product of the College of Commerce. Quite obviously, Mr. 
Speaker, the good professors at the College of Commerce did 
their job well, because Mr. Rawlinson has recently donated $1 
million to the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
This generous gift is to be used to help First Nations and Metis 
students obtain the same kind of business education that 
launched Mr. Rawlinson on his career. The funds will be used 
to establish a Rawlco Resource Centre jointly run by the 
College of Commerce and the Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College School of Business. 
 
The Centre will recruit Aboriginal students to enter university 
programs in business administration. The money will also be 
used to fund a First Nations Business Library and support a 
counsellor for these commerce students. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is truism that the future of our province is 
uniquely tied to the development of the skills of First Nations 
young people and to the contribution they will continue to make 
to the province. 
 
I congratulate Mr. Rawlinson for his leadership and for 
generously returning a portion of what he’s gained to the 
province and to the institution which gave him his foundation. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Rawlinson, and thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tisdale Man Receives Medal of Bravery 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, I would like to bring to your attention about a young 
man’s heroism in our constituency, who was recently presented 
the Royal Canadian Humane Association’s Medal of Bravery 
by the Commissioner of the Royal Canadian Mounted Police. 
 
Tyler Howes, a 19-year-old Tisdale man and three travelling 
companions were trapped in a car that was upside and 
submerged in the Capeau River. He and his friend in the back 
seat were able to open their door and get our. Unfortunately 
before the two girls who were in the front seat were able to 
follow them out, the pressure of the water slammed the door 
shut and sealed the car. 
 
Mr. Howes persistently made several attempts to free his 
companions, and through his quick thinking was finally able to 
break the window and to pull the girls out just as they had lost 
the last of their air supply. 
 
Tyler does not think of himself as a hero. He said: “It’s just 
something a person does.” Tyler’s selfless reactions averted 

what has too often ended in tragic results in similar 
circumstances. 
 
It is with pride that I ask the Assembly to join me in 
recognizing Mr. Howes’ act of bravery. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Johnson Collegiate Wrestling Teams Win Provincial 
Championship 

 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. More good news for 
Saskatchewan and for Regina, Mr. Speaker. In fact there’s good 
news for my constituency of Regina Dewdney. There is good 
news from F.W. Johnson Collegiate whose men’s and women’s 
wrestling teams have just made provincial history, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First, Mr. Speaker, both teams won the city championships. Mr. 
Speaker, collegiate wrestling is a team sport and winner is 
chosen by a team’s total points based on the performance of 
individual team members in various weight categories. 
 
Having won the city championship, Johnson Collegiate then 
hosted the provincial championships. And, Mr. Speaker, both 
the men’s and women’s teams won again. This is the first time 
ever in Saskatchewan high school athletic history that the same 
school has won both championships. 
 
The women racked up 77 points to their nearest rival’s 37. A 
decisive win. The men had it a bit tougher, also amassing 77 
points to Saskatoon Mount Royal’s 75. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to congratulate all participants on both 
teams, and by name I want to congratulate coaches Lloyd 
Church and Kelly Dumont for their outstanding 
accomplishment in amateur athletics. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Dividends from Crown Investment Corporation 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation. Mr. Speaker, last year the government 
budgeted a $150 million dividend from the Crowns. But when 
the government released its 2001 budget last month, that 
dividend had suddenly disappeared. Why is that? Did the 
Crowns make less money last year so they couldn’t afford to 
pay a dividend? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister. Will the minister please explain 
why the Crowns paid no dividend to the government last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — First of all I want to say to the House, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is a question that was addressed on budget 
day. This is not something that has been hidden until that 
member gets up in the House. 
 
The reason that dividend was not taken in the last fiscal year, 



598 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

last year, Mr. Speaker, is because we did not need the dividend 
last year. We now have that money available for this year and 
next year and the year after. If we had listened to the members 
opposite we would have spent all that money last year. 
 
That money has not been spent, Mr. Speaker. That money will 
be taken. And it is not a question, Mr. Speaker, of if the people 
will receive that $150 million dividend it is a question of when. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the dividend from the CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan) to the General Revenue Fund 
this year will rise by $50 million. I anticipate that the dividend 
in the next fiscal year will rise by a significant amount of 
money, so that we will use that money, Mr. Speaker, when it is 
needed, to provide health, education, and highways in this 
province, which those members voted against, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of 
Saskatchewan people I can tell the minister through you, that 
the people of this province are concerned that the when, in 
terms of when this money will be used, is when this 
government believes it’s to its political advantage to buy favour 
with the public and try to improve its flagging election fortunes, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s the when. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s strange that the government 
decided not to take a dividend from CIC last year, especially 
with all of the huge rate hikes we’ve endured and the ones on 
the way. 
 
If CIC had paid a dividend last year, the government could have 
used at least some of that money to provide or consider 
providing a much larger energy rebate instead of the $25 pizza 
rebate we got a couple of weeks ago. That rebate’s worth only 
$10 million, Mr. Speaker. That government blew more than that 
in the potato industry last year. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister, to the minister: why 
do Crown corporations make a profit if that money isn’t used to 
the benefit of Saskatchewan people? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, this is how incredible and 
ridiculous the opposition’s line of reasoning is. What they are 
saying is, why didn’t you spend all the money last year? That’s 
what they’re saying. Why didn’t you take the $150 million and 
spend it last year? That’s what they’re saying. 
 
And we’re saying, Mr. Speaker, because we’re going to spend it 
this year and next year. And we’re going to spend it on, Mr. 
Speaker, health care, which got a big increase in the budget; 
highways, because we’re going to fix the roads; education, 
because we’re going to educate our children; and sustainable 
tax cuts. Those are things we’re going to do because we didn’t 
spend all the money last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Those are things the members opposite oppose, but that is what 
we’re going to do, Mr. Speaker, because we’re not going to 
mortgage our children’s future by spending all of our money 
last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, what we oppose, what we oppose is 
the government hoarding the money and putting it in their bank 
account while Saskatchewan families deal with increasing 
utility rates and taxes in this province. That’s what we oppose, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The minister says that Crown corporations are 
used to the benefit of Saskatchewan people, but the fact is that 
whatever profits the Crowns did make last year not one dime of 
it went to the General Revenue Fund. Not one dime of it for tax 
relief. Not one dime of it for relief from high utility rate 
increases, Mr. Speaker. It’s kind of hard to understand. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how did the Crown profits benefit Saskatchewan 
people this year — that’s the simple question — when not one 
dime of this money was returned to the General Revenue Fund? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well how, Mr. Speaker, you would benefit 
the people of the province this year by spending the money last 
year, I don’t know. And this is how ridiculous their reasoning 
is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They say — the member from Humboldt in the Humboldt 
Journal, the member from Lloydminster in this House, other 
members, check the record — say that we’re spending too much 
money and that our path of spending is not sustainable. They 
say, Mr. Speaker, we’re spending too much money on health 
care, education, and highways. That’s what they say. 
 
Now they get up and say we should spend more. And not only 
should we spend more, we should have spent it all last year, Mr. 
Speaker. Well it doesn’t make any sense, Mr. Speaker, because 
the members opposite are not very good with numbers, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s why they’re members opposite, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Facility in Melville 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from 
Melville said in this House and I quote: 
 

The Fyke report will have no bearing on the construction of 
a hospital in Melville. 

 
Yet in speaking to the media following question period, the 
same member could not guarantee that the facility now under 
construction would keep its hospital designation if the Fyke 
report is implemented. He said to the media and I quote: 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 599 

 

How can I promise that until we’ve heard and listened to 
Mr. Fyke at our committee and completed our entire review 
of the recommendations? 

 
So one minute the member scolds the opposition for asking 
tough questions about the effects of the Fyke report in 
Saskatchewan health facilities, and the next he raises his own 
alarm bells about what kind of health facility will open in 
Melville. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Municipal Affairs: can you 
stand in this House and guarantee the people of Melville and 
area . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member restate the question 
through the Chair please, 10 seconds. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Municipal 
Affairs, through the Speaker: can you stand in this House and 
guarantee the people of Melville and area that the new facility 
now being built will be opened and remain as an acute care 
facility? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as we work together in this 
province to build a better health care system, we are going to 
look and listen and hear all of the different things that people 
are saying about what we should do. 
 
As it relates to the building in Melville, the people in that 
community have worked for many years to develop a plan, 
together with the Department of Health, that builds an 
integrated facility where they will have the services that they 
need as the size of community that they are in this province. 
And that plan will include acute care. It will also include 
long-term care. It will include emergency response. 
 
What we are doing, Mr. Speaker, is building for the future of 
this province; building for our children and our grandchildren. 
We ask the members opposite, what’s your plan? What are you 
going to do? You have a zero . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the ministers in their response 
also to address all remarks through the Chair and please, the 
questioner, questions through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — We have presented a plan in this House and 
we ask, where is the NDP’s (New Democratic Party) plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, perhaps now the member from Melville will 
realize the concern that Mr. Fyke’s recommendation to close 50 
rural hospitals has caused throughout the entire province, 
because now he will hear it in his own community. People and 
health care professionals from across Saskatchewan are very 
concerned with the Fyke Commission report and the suggestion 
that acute care services will be regionalized. And they have 
questions they want answered. 
 
The people of Melville are asking what will happen to the new 
facility they have worked so hard for. It’s fine for the minister 

to say the building is going ahead, but what if it turns out to be 
just a building with no acute care beds? What if it is designated 
just a community care centre? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister of Municipal Affairs: will it be 
good enough if the new Melville hospital is deemed a 
community care centre under Fyke’s Health Care Commission? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we have an opportunity 
today to listen to Mr. Fyke, ask him questions. And we 
understand that the members opposite are going to participate in 
that. We don’t know whether they’re going to participate in a 
legislative committee and deal with some of the questions that 
are raised here. 
 
It’s very interesting that Mr. Randy Burton in The StarPhoenix 
this morning talks about what the opposition are doing. It says: 
 

If the Opposition — which claims it’s ready to form 
government — has better ideas than (Mr.) Fyke has 
proposed, then let’s hear them. 
 

Mr. Speaker, all of the people in the province want to work 
together to build a better health system. We want to hear the 
ideas from the member’s opposite — and the sooner, the better. 
Please join the committee. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that the 
government continues to ask us to do the work for them instead 
of them coming up with their own ideas . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — . . . the people of Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s interesting also that the Minister of Municipal Affairs has 
chosen to sit with the NDP. And the minister has chosen to 
support the party that closed 52 rural hospitals and the Plains 
hospital . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. The member will 
continue. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — The minister is choosing to sit with the NDP, 
who so far has expressed no opinion on the Fyke report. He is 
supporting their proposal to study the study. Yet in the next 
breath, Mr. Speaker, the member from Melville admits that the 
hospital now under construction may not actually be designated 
a hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Melville must come clean with 
his constituents. 
 
To the Minister of Municipal Affairs. Will he continue to sit 
with the NDP and support their record of hospital closures? Or 
will he fight for the people of Melville to ensure that a full and 
functional acute care hospital will occupy the new facility now 
under construction? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



600 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I have a simple question that 
I would ask through you to the members opposite. Will you 
participate in the legislative . . . or will members opposite 
participate in the legislative committee? We need to know the 
answer to that. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan are interested in knowing what 
they’re going to do about this because this is an issue that 
surpasses all of the partisan politics in this place. It relates to all 
of us individuals. It relates to our families. It relates to our 
children and our grandchildren. 
 
We need to get this right. We need to make sure that we have a 
publicly funded, accessible, health care system that provides 
services for everybody. 
 
We on this side of the House are going to work toward that goal 
with all of our vigour and with all of our might. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Grants in Lieu of Taxes 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question’s for the Minister of Municipal Affairs. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday the minister asked me how slow do I have to speak? 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the problem is he was wrong. That’s 
w-r-o-n-g, wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister said grants in lieu of taxes have 
nothing to do with assessment. The fact is, Mr. Speaker, they 
have everything to do with assessment. And the NDP has 
decided to apply a double standard when it comes to calculating 
this year’s grants in lieu. Everyone else in Saskatchewan will 
pay based on this year’s assessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why the double standard? Why does everyone else 
have to pay higher taxes based on this year’s assessment, while 
the government can pay on last year’s assessment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, thank you. I just want to 
reiterate, with all due respect, Mr. Speaker, four years ago, all 
throughout the ’80s, there was nothing paid for properties 
owned by governments. Nothing, nothing — during the ’80s 
there was nothing. 
 
Four years ago, four years ago, Mr. Speaker, listening to 
community leaders, there was an agreement by the government 
to pay grants, grants in lieu of taxes on properties that SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) owned, 
simple as that. 
 
Today, this year, Mr. Speaker — four years ago there was zero 
— this year, $13.1 million. 
 
Besides that, Mr. Speaker, the government did listen to 
community leaders —SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association), SARM (Saskatchewan Association 
of Rural Municipalities), SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 
Association) — for more funding for education. This budget — 
an increased amount for education. 

The government’s been listening to the leaders of communities 
to help them, and they have. I don’t know what they’re voting 
against. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
before the minister got around to closing the Melville hospital 
yesterday, you know what he told the media? He said the 
government couldn’t possibly pay grants based on the new 
assessment because the order in council was already being 
written. In other words, the government couldn’t handle the 
paperwork. 
 
Mr. Speaker, everyone else has to deal with the paperwork. 
Every municipality, every school board is forced to use the new 
assessment, but the government can’t handle the paperwork. 
 
In fact, the government told SUMA that it simply would not be 
able to budget for variations that will occur each year on such 
short notice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what does he think every business in this province 
has to deal with? Higher taxes due to reassessment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister answer — do grants in lieu have 
anything to do with assessment? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, in January, in January the 
presidents of three local government associations met with the 
Finance minister and they reminded the government for the 
need for education tax relief for property taxpayers in the 
upcoming provincial budget. They also asked for some 
assistance to small businesses. Well, guess what? In this budget, 
there was an increase in education funding. Guess what? There 
was a 25 per cent reduction for small businesses. 
 
I can’t believe that those members opposite voted against that 
kind of a budget. And now they’re saying that this government 
should not be giving communities $13.1 million in grants in lieu 
of. Four years ago there was zero, Mr. Speaker; today there’s 
$13.1 million. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re now starting to see the effects of the NDP’s 
decision to hire more government employees instead of holding 
the line on property taxes. 
 
The city of Melfort, Mr. Speaker, has announced a 2 per cent 
increase in property taxes. That’s $2.3 million tax hit for the 
people of Melfort. And why are they raising taxes? Well, 
council says it had little choice because there was no increase in 
revenue sharing. That’s $2.3 million tax hike for the city of 
Melfort alone, thanks to this NDP budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how did that minister let this happen? How can he 
support a budget that will raise property taxes in almost every 
municipality in this province? 
 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 601 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well the member opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
did say almost, but I want to once again remind the House and 
all hon. members and the people of this province that we are not 
dodging reassessment or shortchanging local governments. 
 
As a matter of fact, the projected amounts that were going to be 
paid were $12.3 million this year. It’s turned into $13.1 million, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s gone up. And as an example, I just want to . . . 
As an example, let’s use the city of Regina. For their grants in 
lieu of taxes which are estimated, including the city and school 
boards, is $7.48 million; Canada infrastructure money is 3.28; 
transit for disabled, .82; urban parks, $2.82 million. And, Mr. 
Speaker, besides that, the relief on the monies and the 
additional monies that the city will be getting, an estimated 
$460,000 as a result of the street light savings and increased 
municipal surcharges. 
 
I don’t know what they’re voting against or why they don’t 
want the municipalities to have that money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 

Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
Premier. Last week I asked the Minister of Agriculture if he and 
your government had received a reply from the Prime Minister 
to your strongly worded letter that you sent to the Prime 
Minister following the emergency debate on agriculture we held 
a few weeks ago. We didn’t get a specific answer to that 
question, so I’d like to ask you again, Mr. Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, have you received a response . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to continue but to 
direct his remarks through the Chair, please. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Mr. Speaker, has the Premier received a response 
from the Prime Minister to his letter that he sent a few weeks 
ago? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite and to this Assembly that we now, in Saskatchewan, 
have received a letter from the Prime Minister’s office. That 
letter has also now been circulated to all of the premiers across 
Canada. And we have now in our possession a letter from the 
Prime Minister of Canada. 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Minister, I’m sure 
the farm families of this province would be interested in what 
that response was and I’d appreciate it, on behalf of the farm 
families, if you would table that letter here in the Assembly this 
afternoon. 
 
On another issue concerning farm families, Mr. Speaker, we 
have learned that the farmland property tax rebate is now way, 
way over budget and they’ve only processed about 40 per cent 

of the applications so far. This is exactly why rural 
municipalities and farmland owners were saying, months ago, 
that the program would cost taxpayers hundreds of thousands of 
dollars in bureaucracy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RM (rural municipality) suggested they could 
handle this program themselves. They felt they could apply the 
rebates directly to property taxes at the local level, saving 
administration costs. The government could have put those 
administration budget costs back into the program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, can the Minister of Agriculture 
explain why the government didn’t use the money 
municipalities could have administered into the program and 
why the administration is now some $200,000 over budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And I 
can say to the member opposite that the administration of this 
program, we had a great deal of discussion with SARM about 
who should administer this program. And the province, the 
province said that if the municipalities were interested in 
administering this program, we would be more than pleased to 
allow that to happen. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, why this didn’t happen is because in our 
policy we said that the home quarter in our policy would have 
to be exempt. And what SARM has said to us, all along, is that 
they don’t have the capability to address the issue of exempting 
the home quarter for all municipalities that would be involved 
in this process across the province. 
 
I met with the SARM executive this winter and I said to the 
SARM executive, Mr. Speaker, that if in fact they arrive at a 
process in which they can do that, we would be happy to allow 
the SARM organization to administer the program in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Medicare Commission 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, later today we’ll have the 
privilege of having Mr. Fyke come before us. We know that 
health spending in the province is increasing by 11 to 12 per 
cent a year. The economy is growing at 2 to 3 per cent, the 
lowest in Canada according to Globe and Mail. Yet I would 
suggest that the NDP has already decided that Fyke is to be 
quietly put on the shelf and forgotten. 
 
My question to the government today: has the decision already 
been taken that Fyke is too hot to handle? Has the decision 
already been taken that we will go through the sham of 
consulting and consulting? We will have groups that have 
already appeared before Fyke come before the MLAs to repeat 
what they have already said, and we will go through this long 
enough until the whole thing is quietly forgotten and never dealt 
with. Have they ceased governing? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 



602 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

Battleford or any member over there who for a fleeting moment 
thinks that we have ceased governing is dead wrong. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, we are giving to this 
opposition and to the people of Saskatchewan and to providers 
of health care in our province and to the citizens of our 
province, the recipients of health care, an opportunity, a 
groundbreaking opportunity to participate in the formation of 
public policy, Mr. Speaker, through a process that begins in this 
House this afternoon with the appearance of Mr. Fyke, a 
process that will continue with a committee of this legislature 
being available to the people of our province to give their 
observations and impressions of Mr. Fyke’s recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, based on that work which I hope will involve all 
members of this House, based on that work, we will develop a 
plan for the future of medicare in this province and perhaps in 
the country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Mr. Speaker, if the government would give at 
least a preliminary reaction to Fyke, there would be something 
for groups such as SAHO (Saskatchewan Association of Health 
Organizations), SUN, the province’s doctors to respond to. But 
with no indication of the government’s thinking, all these 
groups can do is to come before the MLAs and repeat what 
they’ve already said — a commission into the commission, an 
inquiry into their inquiry, a report on the report. 
 
After we go through this process, after we as MLAs hear the 
same groups who’ve already come before Fyke, will the 
government, Mr. Speaker, then say, oh we’ve now got to wait 
for the national commission. We’ve got to wait for the 
Romanow commission. So we have more excuse for delay. We 
have more excuse for inaction. Have they decided they are not 
prepared to deal with the Fyke report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I understand it’s very easy 
to join the ranks of the opposition and become a critic. That’s a 
very simple thing to do. What is a little more difficult, Mr. 
Speaker, what is a little more difficult is to rise just a fraction 
perhaps, just a fraction above partisan politics for once on an 
issue of public importance — the nature of health care in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t always agree with my friend Randy Burton 
in his writings in The StarPhoenix but today, Mr. Speaker, I do 
when he observes at the conclusion of his article today, Mr. 
Burton writes: 
 

By the same token if those in the legislature (we) could lay 
down their partisan cudgels for a minute or two, maybe 
they could actually make Saskatchewan a different, even a 
better place to live. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I invite members of the opposition to do just that, 
including the member from North Battleford. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day, I have received a report from the Office of the 
Provincial Auditor. Order, order. I received a report from the 
Office of the Provincial Auditor and I hereby table the report to 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan on financial 
statements of Crown agencies for the years ending in the year, 
in the 2000 calendar year, dated April 2001. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government I am pleased to table the answers to questions nos. 
70 through 76. 
 
The Speaker: — Items 70 through 76 are hereby tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, pursuant to an order of the 
Assembly, the House will now proceed to the Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
(14:30) 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Final Report of the Commission on Medicare 
 
The Chair: — Order, please. The business before the 
Committee of the Whole today is the examination of Mr. Ken 
Fyke, Commissioner, with respect to the final report of the 
Commission on Medicare. 
 
As members are aware, this Committee of the Whole was 
established by an order of the Legislative Assembly dated April 
11, 2001, which reads in part as follows, and I quote: 
 

Ordered that a Committee of the Whole be authorized to 
question Mr. Ken Fyke, Commissioner, with respect to the 
final report of the Commission on Medicare dated April 11, 
2001; 

 
On behalf of the committee I would like to thank Mr. Fyke, 
along with Mr. Patrick Fafard, Ms. Kathryn Dotson, for making 
themselves available today to answer questions from the 
members. 
 
Members, for the clarification of the witnesses, and all members 
of the committee, I want to outline the procedures of this 
hearing today, which were agreed upon by the respective House 
leaders. 
 
If there are any objections to the procedures, then I will ask for 
a motion so that the committee can formally decide its 
procedures. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Fyke will be asked to make an opening statement of 
a maximum of 20 minutes. 
 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 603 

 

Questioning will then follow based on 20-minute intervals in 
the following order: government side, opposition, government 
again, and then opposition again. 
 
There will then be a 20-minute recess, followed by questioning 
in 20-minute intervals as follows: independent member, 
government, and opposition. 
 
The time intervals will be displayed on the countdown clocks in 
the corners of the Legislative Assembly, here in the Chamber. 
 
Finally, no member may debate with the witness. Mr. Fyke has 
been invited to answer questions from members. I thank all hon. 
members for their co-operation. 
 
I now invite the witnesses to introduce themselves to the 
committee. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I want to begin by thanking the legislature for 
this opportunity to discuss my report today. During the past 
nine months, I have had the great privilege of meeting with 
hundreds of individuals, groups, and organizations to talk about 
the future of medicare in this province. I am pleased to be able 
to discuss my recommendation with all elected members today. 
 
My report is focused around three key priorities: a health 
system that puts quality first with clear accountability for 
achieving results; a health system based on teamwork fully 
utilizing the skills of all health care providers; and a health 
system that offers security especially to rural citizens through a 
clear plan for local, regional, and provincial services. 
 
This province has some unique challenges in health care. One 
of these is to give rural citizens access to services close to home 
while ensuring quality. There is a significant challenge . . . this 
is a significant challenge but it can be done. 
 
Rural citizens do not have to fear for the future of health care. 
By redirecting resources now going into small hospitals, secure, 
high quality services can be provided close to home. And these 
services can be sustained into the future. 
 
My recommendations have been characterized as cuts to rural 
hospitals. What I have actually called for is reinvestment in 
rural health care and investment in change. 
 
Here is what I recommend. Primary health teams including 
doctors, nurses, and other skilled professionals to promote and 
maintain the health of our citizens as well as provide everyday 
health services; a strengthening of our home care and 
community services; telephone advice available 24-hours a day; 
and improved emergency medical services. 
 
This package of everyday services will lead to better health 
care, not only for rural Saskatchewan, but for all the citizens of 
this great province. 
 
My report does call for change. Change away from reliance on 
very small hospitals. Change to a new model with enriched 
emergency and primary health services. 
 
Primary health services deserve much more emphasis in the 
health system than they receive today. Family physicians, 

nurses, public health workers, social workers, addiction 
counsellors, speech therapists — these skills are the ones that 
support individuals to sustain their health and well-being day in 
and day out. 
 
Primary health services are the key to better health and the key 
to containing health care cost. Every health problem that can be 
prevented or detected and managed at an early stage is a health 
problem that will not need expensive treatment down the road. 
Putting people’s health front and centre requires a new 
organization of services based on teamwork. 
 
In today’s environment, with many skills in short supply, it is 
essential to make full use of all our health care providers. The 
current system separates doctors from other parts of the system, 
creating unnecessary barriers. Instead, I recommend bringing 
physicians into the primary health team as part of the health 
district operations. 
 
Some people have suggested that my report does not recognize 
the contribution of rural doctors. The fact is I have the greatest 
respect for the contribution of family physicians. I know that 
family doctors have unique skills and abilities that must be used 
to their fullest. And by working as part of a team, physicians 
will be able to extend the value of what they do and put their 
skills to the greatest use. As one doctor said to me, quote: “Let 
us be part of the system.” 
 
Across the country and here in Saskatchewan, many pilot 
projects and demonstration sites have been set up to offer 
primary health services through teams. Clients may see a nurse, 
a pharmacist, a physiotherapist, or a physician, depending on 
their needs. For rural and urban residents alike, primary health 
teams will improve the quality of health services. 
 
The role of small hospitals will change accordingly to primary 
health centres offering a different and wider range of services. 
 
What will happen to the services now provided in small 
hospitals? They will continue through out-patient care, home 
care, and community care centres. In some cases where 
in-patient care is needed, some people will have to travel 
further. But on balance, on balance, communities will have 
more services rather than less. 
 
Hospitals are an important symbol for rural communities. The 
hospital care that is acute in-patient care is a service people 
need infrequently. The location of a hospital is not nearly as 
important as the quality of service it provides. And when it 
comes to hospital quality, size does matter. 
 
I believe that Saskatchewan will be better served by having 
fewer, stronger hospitals. Complex diagnosis, treatments, and 
surgery take a full complement of specialist physicians and 
nurses, technicians, equipment, and facilities. And in a province 
of one million people it simply makes sense to concentrate 
these services into fewer centres. 
 
The plan that I have outlined will see specialized services for 
everyone in the province delivered in three cities: Regina, 
Saskatoon, and to a lesser degree, Prince Albert. Basic acute 
and emergency care would be provided in 10 to 14 regional 
hospitals. Regional hospitals would focus on services that are 



604 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

more commonly required such as general medicine, maternity 
care, or care that must be repeated, such as dialysis or cancer 
therapy. 
 
Each regional hospital would offer a selection of services based 
on their capabilities and a coordinated plan. Planning for 
hospital care cannot be done by each facility in isolation. 
Government must take the lead in developing an overall plan to 
meet needs and achieve standards of quality. 
 
I have also called on government to provide leadership in other 
areas. Human resource planning to train, recruit, and retain 
health providers for the future. In capital planning to ensure the 
needed facilities and equipment are in place. And hospital bed 
management to ensure beds are available when the patient 
needs it. Above all, government must take the lead in setting 
goals and measuring results — in short, achieving quality. 
 
Through the years, the success of our health care system has too 
often been measured by quantity — the number of hospitals, the 
size of budgets, the volumes of surgery. Issues of quality and 
value have been swept under the rug. And this cannot continue. 
 
Health services are too important and too expensive to go 
unmanaged. For all that is spent on health care we know 
surprisingly little about the results. Some of what we do know 
though is disturbing. 
 
Ten to 25 per cent of antibiotics are neither necessary nor 
effective. Up to 20 per cent of hospital admissions of the elderly 
are due to adverse drug reactions. Hospital admissions in 
Saskatchewan are 41 per cent higher than the national average. 
To change these things require a focus on quality. 
 
Quality concerns are not in any way unique to Saskatchewan. 
Questions about quality health care are now being asked across 
North America and around the world. Let me be clear, 
achieving quality does not depend on spending more money. In 
fact, quality improvement generally saves money. Problems of 
quality include underuse, misuse, and overuse of health 
services. 
 
More drugs, more tests, and more admissions to hospital may 
not lead to better results. In fact, too much service can be as bad 
as too little. 
 
One nurse I talked to put it his way, quote: 
 

We do because we can, not because we should. 
 

Another nurse who has worked for years in critical care said to 
me, quote: 
 

We seem to have lost a lot of our common sense and along 
with it our compassion. 
 

According to her, quote: 
 

Quality care means doing what is right for each person 
instead of doing everything for everybody. 

 
The purpose of the health system must be to achieve better 
health. Yet we have few tools to measure results. What is not 

measured cannot be managed, and it cannot be improved. 
 
(14:45) 
 
I recommend an arm’s-length quality council be set up to 
recommend standards of care and report to the public on health 
system quality and effectiveness. In addition to these changes, 
my report recommends a number of supporting elements, a 
smaller number of health districts, the renewal of health science 
education programs in our province, increased funding for 
health research, and continued investment in communications 
and information technology. 
 
Taken as a package, these recommendations will lead to a more 
secure, sustainable, and high quality health system. 
Implementing these changes will require an initial investment, 
but in the long run they will help to keep costs down. 
 
My advice to you is this. Invest in change; resist the temptation 
to simply spend more on a system as it is. A healthy society 
takes more than health care. It takes education, it takes 
opportunities for employment, it takes strong communities, and 
it takes hope for the future. 
 
All of these can be jeopardized if you simply give in to the 
demand to spend more and more on health care. 
 
In closing I want to emphasize the need for vision and 
commitment. Change will require everyone to set aside their 
long held positions and commit themselves to work together for 
a greater cause. 
 
I understand that some may fear a loss in what I have proposed. 
But individually and collectively, there is much more to gain. 
 
Thank you. I’d be pleased to answer questions. 
 
The Chair: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. As agreed upon by the 
committee, I’ll first turn to a member on the government side 
for the first 20-minute question period. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Fyke, I would first 
like to thank you for providing us this opportunity to be able to 
ask questions on behalf of the people we represent in 
Saskatchewan, to better understand the commission’s report. 
 
Mr. Fyke, as you’re well aware, in 1993 the government made 
some very major changes in our health system as we knew it. 
We converted some hospitals into wellness centres. But people 
felt that hospitals were closed. Some were. 
 
For many people, change to health care was disruptive to the 
system, hard on very many communities, and put major stress 
on health care providers. 
 
The major question that I’m getting in my constituency, and 
others I’ve spoke to since your report was released is, why do 
we have to go through this again? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I appreciate that there’s been a lot of change in 
the last 10 years. Ten years in the health system is a long time. 
My report will build on the developments of the last 10 years 
and the good things that have occurred in this province. This 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 605 

 

province led the way in regionalization. 
 
But we’ve reached a point in health care, not just in this 
province but across Canada, where I believe we’ve got to 
refocus, refocus our system towards quality and not volume. 
We have focused on volume for the last 10, 20 years, and while 
it may be difficult to look at more change, I believe it is the 
only way that we can have and sustain a publicly funded health 
care system. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Could you be more specific in why you feel 
. . . I mean can we not stay within the same system but still 
focus on quality? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — The difficulty with the current system, it is not 
focused on quality. It is focused on volume. We need to change 
the culture, we need to change the organization as to how it’s 
organized, and we need to change our incentives. 
 
Our system . . . our health care programs today are not a system. 
We are facing in the next few years in Saskatchewan and in 
other provinces a real challenge in having enough health care 
providers to provide the services. We’re also facing the 
challenges of the financial matter as well. 
 
But if we continue to pour money into the current system, we 
will continue to not . . . we will not get the value for money that 
we should. The costs will continue to escalate and we will be 
faced with either alternatives of taking money away from other 
programs or cutting some of the insured benefits that we have 
today. 
 
So we have to reorganize the system to focus it on quality, and 
we have to change the incentives in the system so that our 
health care providers are fully utilized to the maximum of their 
skills, and we must focus on quality. 
 
I don’t believe that we can do that and still maintain the same 
organizational structure in the system. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — In your report, Mr. Fyke, you recommend 
turning many existing small hospitals into primary health 
centres or community care centres. And I know from people 
that I’ve talked to in rural Saskatchewan, their concern is that 
living in a small community and even having a small hospital, 
that I have some sense of comfort that when I need medical care 
it is close at hand. 
 
Now if the reforms that you recommend were to be 
implemented, and say I did become ill or something serious, 
had a heart attack, what kind of service could I expect from 
primary health services or community centres? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I very much appreciate the concern of rural 
Saskatchewan about their local hospital. And what I am 
recommending is taking those resources in 20 small rural 
hospital and utilizing those resources in that community so that 
we can have enhanced services for the people of those 
communities. 
 
I’ll speak about community care centres in a moment. I’ll just 
talk now about my recommendation of converting 20 of the 
smaller hospitals from a 24-hour, 7-day-a-week service to a 

10-hour. 
 
The difficulty that those communities have is sustaining a 
physician and sustaining health personnel. Many people I talked 
to were worried that in six months they wouldn’t have a doctor, 
so the continuity of care was compromised. 
 
And what I see in a primary health services network is to be 
able to bring more services to that community, more skills of 
other providers — for example possibly a nutritionist that 
would serve several communities to assist with patients with 
diabetes — and the physician and the nurse working as a team, 
so that the people in that community would have good, quality, 
everyday services 24 hours a day, 7 days a week. 
 
I’m also recommending that there be enhanced emergency 
medical ambulance service in those communities. So that when 
people have a need for an emergency or urgent care, that that 
service is available readily. Many of our small hospitals today 
cannot provide quality emergency services. They have not got 
the skills nor the equipment; nor do they have enough cases to 
keep their training up in many cases. 
 
So in a community that currently has a small hospital that 
would be converted to primary health services, their everyday 
services would be provided by a team of professionals. What is 
important in health services are the services from the skilled 
providers. It is not the bricks and mortar. 
 
Now let me move to the recommendation for the community 
care centres. I’m recommending that 25 to 30 hospitals — 
currently hospitals, currently named hospitals — be converted 
to community care centres. I am not recommending the closure 
of those facilities. 
 
In many of those facilities now, what is being offered is 
convalescent care, respite care, and palliative care, and some 
long-term care. Many of those facilities are called integrated 
facilities today. I would see very little change in what a 
community care centre does compared to an integrated health 
care centre. 
 
But I would see, again, an enhanced service in that community 
for emergency medicine, emergency ambulance. So that when a 
person has an accident on the farm or on the highway, that there 
is a highly qualified emergency ambulance technician who can 
take that person to the proper facility for the appropriate care. I 
would see that being going to one of the regional hospitals, the 
10 to 14 throughout the province, if that person, for example, 
has multiple fractures or multiple systems or head injuries or 
whatever. 
 
What happens today, they come into the smaller hospital, they 
may wait in the smaller hospital for a short period of time and 
then they’re transferred to a larger facility, and that can 
compromise their care. 
 
So in each of those communities, they will have access to better 
emergency services and a broader range of everyday services 
compared to what they have today. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Fyke, I guess I’m one of those citizens 
who, when I was ill, I went to the hospital or to the doctor and 



606 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

was availed of services. But I have never considered how they 
work or why they work or if it’s the best quality that the people 
of Saskatchewan deserve. They have been satisfactory for my 
family, so I’m trying to understand this. 
 
And I guess when you’re saying that community care centres, 
the things that they provide, I’m struggling to see the difference 
between what the small hospitals provide and what the 
community care centres in your plan would provide. I mean 
taking that hospital sign off the highway or the H off the 
building itself, what difference does that make? And I’m trying 
to put this into some kind of order and what the rationale is 
behind it, and how it would improve the quality of care that 
residents are receiving. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — The community care centres compared to what an 
integrated health care centre delivers today, there would be very 
little change. 
 
What is important with the H sign on the highway? Why is the 
H sign on the highway? The H sign is on the highway for 
people to . . . who need urgent or emergent care. That urgent 
and emergent care, I am arguing, cannot be provided in the 
smaller centres, smaller hospitals, as well as through a good 
province-wide ambulance service. You look at an ambulance as 
possibly a small acute hospital on wheels. 
 
I’m recommending that the ambulance report that was done 
prior to my work, that there be three . . . I’m endorsing that 
report and I’m recommending three things in it. One, that there 
be an upgrading of the training for ambulance driving, 
ambulance attendants, so that they can deal with critical care at 
the site of the accident or the site of the injury. I’m also 
recommending that there be a province-wide . . . a provincial 
central dispatch system so that throughout the province there’s a 
dispatch system that they can get the ambulance to the site of 
the accident as quickly as possible. 
 
(15:00) 
 
With an ambulance program, a well-organized ambulance 
program, the attendant can come to that site and deal with 
whether it’s a, possibly a heart attack — which actually is only 
1 per cent of ambulance calls but it’s something that rural 
people raise with me — or a farm accident or whatever, and 
deal right there with the accident. 
 
What I am told, the research indicates, that it is more important 
what happens at the site of the accident, that the individual 
driving the ambulance knows what to do — that is more 
important than the time it takes from there to the hospital. 
 
The H sign on the highway I think in many ways is an illusion 
because it signifies that there is acute and emergent care at that 
facility just down the road. Now this might be difficult for some 
people, but in fact that is not the best quality care. 
 
And I want to add one more thing to quality. When I speak 
about quality, I’m not speaking of individuals. I’m speaking of 
the system is not able to deliver quality because of the training 
of the individuals in the hospital or the lack of equipment in that 
hospital. 
 

Ms. Higgins: — So in your estimation, in your qualified 
judgment, how exactly would your model change the kinds of 
services that are available in rural Saskatchewan and to the 
smaller centres throughout the province? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — My recommendations would be, would . . . Let’s 
start at the everyday health services level. We would . . . Under 
a primary health services model, you would be able to offer a 
broader range of services to the people in that rural 
communities. 
 
You would offer a higher level of emergency services to the 
people in those communities. You would offer a telephone call 
line 24 hours a day so that people on a farm can have access to 
a call line 24 hours a day which is proven in many other parts of 
Canada and the United States as very effective in screening and 
providing comfort to the individual, whether it’s a child with an 
earache or whether it’s a gentleman with a chest pain. And there 
would be enhanced services in home care and community 
services. 
 
So if you take a community . . . Let’s take a couple of 
communities. Let’s take a community where a primary . . . 
where a small hospital has been converted to a primary health, 
health centre. What I’ve just indicated would occur, there would 
not be a decrease in the services. Every service that is in there 
today would be provided to the people but it might be provided 
in a different fashion. 
 
It may be provided at home rather than in their local hospital. It 
may be . . . The emergency service would provide a higher 
quality by an ambulance or there would be a 1-800 number that 
they could call at any time during the day or night. 
 
Now let’s move to a larger community where there’s currently 
an integrated health facility. That integrated health facility I’m 
saying is a community care centre, should be a community care 
centre, which would be focusing on respite, convalescence, 
palliative, people in the last stages of their life, and long-term 
care. That is what an integrated facility does today. Again that 
wouldn’t change that much. 
 
The physicians in that community would be part of the primary 
health services team. The physicians in that community would 
see the following differences. They would have someone to 
share call with so that they wouldn’t be on call 7 days a week 
— 7 days a week, 24 hours a day. They would have colleagues 
to share their workload. They would be able to utilize their 
skills to the maximum of their training. 
 
So that there is a team that would be working to keep the people 
in that community healthy, providing everyday health services, 
and also dealing with promoting health and preventing illness 
and dealing . . . In many of our small communities in 
Saskatchewan, many of the people living there have chronic 
diseases, chronic disease of diabetes or from heart or from 
cancer. A primary health services team would then be able to 
focus on Mrs. Smith’s diabetes, and handling that diabetes in a 
way that allows her to live an independent life and deal with her 
diabetes. 
 
I’ve had physicians say to me that they . . . many of our 
practising physicians can’t provide the kind of follow-up and 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 607 

 

backup to a lot of our diabetic patients that they would like to. 
So in those communities where the services would not be 
focused on a hospital and a doctor, they would be focused on all 
the health care providers and be provided in the community and 
in the home. 
 
I won’t go into what is a regional hospital on this question, but 
that might come up in a few minutes. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Fyke, one thing I have, I think there isn’t 
one of us that hasn’t had a frustrating experience when trying to 
get through — whether to ask a question or order something or 
— on a phone line. With this electronic voice messaging and all 
the rest of it, it can be a frustrating process. 
 
So I would like you to expand on what you see as the phone 
line or the help line or emergency line that would be set up 
province-wide. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — The advice line that has worked and is working, 
as my report indicates, is working in a number of areas in North 
America, is really an extension of the primary health services. 
 
There would be a person on the line that would be probably a 
nurse, who would be able to deal with your problems when you 
call. It would not be a line that would diagnose what your 
problem is. It is essentially a computer program with a decision 
tree on asking certain questions to then determine whether your 
child’s earache is a problem that you have to deal with tonight 
or you can wait until tomorrow and see your primary health 
team tomorrow; or if it is chest pain, whether you should call 
the ambulance and get to a hospital. 
 
So the telephone advice line provides counsel and advice. For 
example, is it an urgent situation? It does result, the research 
indicates that it does result in better care and more reliable 
service and does actually result in fewer calls, fewer calls to the 
. . . fewer visits to an emergency department because it is a 
scientific, medically structured call line, call system, that allows 
the right questions to be asked of the client or of the patient, so 
that then they can direct the person on the line whether that is 
an urgent matter you have to deal with tonight or not. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The first session for the government side 
has expired. I’ll now recognize members from the opposition 
side for the next 20 minutes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And first of all, 
welcome Mr. Fyke and staff. 
 
I would first of all like to express my appreciation, as the Health 
critic for the official opposition, for the dialogue and 
communication that you extended to us throughout this process. 
We very much appreciated it. 
 
On your last meeting with us you indicated, I think, and I would 
probably be fair in paraphrasing you rather than quoting you, 
when you said, there are some things you’re going to like and 
many things you’re going to agree with; some things your paper 
would agree almost completely but some things you’re going to 
have concerns with. And I think your prediction was fair and 
probably very accurate. 
 

In the time since your report has been tabled, there have been a 
number of issues raised in terms of concerns. And I certainly 
think that this appearance before the legislature is an 
opportunity for you to expand on points that were in your report 
and may have left some issues unclear, although I think as well 
your report’s tone and the way it was written was also very 
good. 
 
You indicated earlier in questioning that while 10 years is a 
significant period of time in health care and the pace of change 
in health care, it’s a very significant period of time. Fortunately 
or unfortunately it’s not enough time to have people forget 
about their past experiences of changes in the health care 
system. 
 
In 1993 there was a process of change in this province that 
resulted in many communities having their hospitals — 53 of 
them I believe — either closed or converted. And at the time 
there were many commitments and promises made that they 
were going to be an improvement of services for the citizens 
that were served by those institutions. 
 
And while I recognize that institutions do not automatically 
mean health care or quality health care, they are the symbols of 
a commitment in many ways to communities that health care is 
there for them when they need it. 
 
In your report you again take this a pretty dramatic step 
forward. You speak of currently something in the magnitude of 
70, I guess, H-designated hospitals at the current time. And 
looking at the report and your comments this afternoon, as I 
understand it, you’re talking about, of those number, that 20 
would be converted to primary facilities, another 25 or 30 
would join the integrated health facilities network as I 
understand it — and I expect that’s in addition to the current 
number that are already in the converted list — and some 
further closures. 
 
On what basis does this conversion . . . Have you got evidential, 
studied work or is this a perception? Or on what basis do you 
make the judgment that further closures and conversions are 
indeed going to result in a pragmatic sense of improved health 
care for the citizens that view these facilities as critical elements 
in the health care system they now enjoy? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you. I want to comment on . . . I’m not 
here to criticize or defend the past. I’m here to look at what the 
system for the future should look like in this province. 
 
I would just make one observation though, that with the 
conversions that occurred in the last decade in this province, the 
research indicates that the conversions had absolutely no 
negative effect on the health of the population of this province. 
 
I would like to now speak to the other issue that I detect in your 
question as well. I think one of your underlying — and correct 
me if I’m wrong here — I think one of your questions that you 
may not have stated entirely or stated, sorry, was whether there 
is a capacity in the number of . . . are there a number of 
hospitals left? I don’t know if that was going to be part of your 
. . . That’s what I interpreted. That was the next question. Okay. 
Can I answer that now? 
 



608 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

Let me say that the 10 to 14 regional hospitals that I’m 
recommending, plus the specialized hospitals in Regina, 
Saskatoon, and Prince Albert will provide about 3,000 beds. 
The system is currently using about 3,000 beds — 2,900. 
 
But I’ve also indicated the research clearly indicates that there 
is lots of room for improved utilization. Even with the 
conversion of 50 beds over the last decade, we still exceed the 
national average by 41 per cent on our admissions. We still 
admit patients to hospitals that other alternative forms of care 
would be more appropriate. We still have one of the lowest 
levels of day surgery in Western Canada. 
 
And there are other areas where improvements in the 
organization and delivery of services can be made so I’m very 
confident — very confident — that between the 10 and 14 
regional hospitals, and the hospitals in Regina, Saskatoon, and 
Prince Albert will be adequate, sufficient — more than 
sufficient — to deal with the acute care needs of this province. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Now when you look at why . . . coming back to your question 
on the evidence, I guess, of the conversions, what people told 
me when I went around the province . . . there’s a number of 
things that were clear from all . . . many, many people said, we 
need a plan. We need a plan for health services in this province. 
People told me they know that the system is not working as 
effectively as it should and that there needs to be change. 
 
And they also . . . people in rural Saskatchewan told me about 
the break in the continuity of care and the concerns that they 
had about losing their physician. They have a physician today 
and he’s here for a few months. Now some areas have been 
fairly stable but there’s some areas that are not. And that they 
really need stability in the system. 
 
One lady was telling me about what happened to one of her 
family going into Saskatoon for surgery, coming back and there 
was no . . . the doctor had left. So I looked at the overall system 
and first of all looked at the capacity. What do we need in this 
province for acute care beds? And then, how do we best 
organize for everyday services? Because it is everyday services 
that are so important. Probably 80 per cent of the people of this 
province use the everyday services on an annual basis. Your 
more specialized services are ones, which is fortunate, we use 
infrequently. 
 
So with the improved ambulance services in rural 
Saskatchewan, which again everyone said was a critical factor, 
and the primary health services team which in North America 
and around the world is proving that you can provide services in 
a better organized way that will promote health and use 
everyone’s skills to their full benefit, I arrived at this plan based 
on a local, regional, and provincial plan which I believe will 
meet the needs of Saskatchewan very well. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. In your plan of the 
organizational structure you talk about the tertiary centres and 
about the regional centres — I think 10 to 14. And again in your 
discussion today you’ve indicated those numbers and the 
conversions to community care centres of a number of the 
current existing smaller H-designated hospitals and some that 

would only serve, I guess, as an 8- to 10-hour primary health 
care centre. 
 
And you also make I think on page 31 of your report, the 
comment that 88 . . . after this plan is implemented, that 
approximately 88 per cent of the population would be within 60 
minutes of an acute care or regional hospital, and 98 per cent 
would be within 80 minutes. Yes; 60 and 80 minutes. 
 
In order to make that and to make that assumption, you must 
have looked at existing facilities and, for lack of a more 
descriptive phrase, put some pins in the map. And if you did, 
would you share that information as to how you see the 
structural organization looking in order to meet those 
commitments of time and distance from acute care facilities? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — We used a number of computer models with 
various options as to which hospitals . . . how many hospitals 
would provide a one hour, roughly one hour, distance from 
various parts of the province. So that that is a computer model. 
It’s I guess the best technology that I could come up with to 
answer the question that how many sites, to distribute those 
2,900 beds, how many sites would we require around the 
province. And looked at a multiple of options. 
 
The reason that I did not put pins in the map for my report is I 
believe that I was asked to provide an overall plan for the 
province. I believe that it is important now for the government 
to sit down with the districts and with those communities to 
decide where the pins go, because they have to be much more 
intimately . . . much more knowledgeable about their 
communities and the various factors that may influence the 
location than I could be in my travels around the province. So I 
specifically did not put pins in the map. 
 
I determined a range of 10 to 14, as I did with the community 
care centres in 25 to 30 and indeed as I have done with the 
number of districts. I think that that is part of leaving some 
flexibility to the implementation and I think that is a prudent 
way to approach this. 
 
In reality it is hard to be absolutely precise on the number. I’ve 
given the little range and I believe that that allows the 
communities and the health districts and government some 
flexibility to determine what makes sense. So that’s the reason. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. I’m no computer 
expert, but if the model was based on Health, Department of 
Health statistics and number of services delivered in certain 
sites over a period of time, or some statistical analysis of that 
nature that would be based on actual frequency of incidence, if 
you like, for lack of a better word, and would relate to where 
those facilities were provided, or where those services are 
provided, it strikes me that a computer model could do one of 
two things. 
 
It could take the rectangular shape of the province and, on the 
basis of theoretical population distributions, attempt to redefine 
the province and say, in theory 12 to 14 regional health districts 
are the appropriate number, based on the number of citizens and 
health population statistics. 
 
The reality is, is that there are communities that were not for . . . 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 609 

 

or thoughtful enough to locate themselves in the best place for a 
computer model. They’ve grown and evolved and developed 
facilities and expertise and personnel, and the population 
distribution as well was inconsiderate in terms of distributing 
itself exactly evenly. 
 
And so there is a practical reality as certain communities do 
exist, certain health facilities do exist, certain physician support 
services do exist, certain speciality services do exist, and to 
simply come up with a computer model that is based on 
theoretical figures is one thing, but to come up with a number 
that says that services will be provided in a practical way, 
within the specifications that you laid down in report, I submit 
requires putting pins in the map. 
 
And I can see why you’re reluctant to undertake that exercise, 
but surely there must have been a model that said, to make these 
commitments, here’s where the sites need to be. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — The options that I looked at were also influenced 
by the number of physicians in many of the communities. And 
one could just take the largest communities outside of Regina 
and Saskatoon and look at the number of physicians and the 
population size of that community and look at various options. 
Now there is, again, I guess, repeating my answer before, the 
model was based on certain assumptions and based on certain 
travel times. Again there is . . . for me to put the exact pin in the 
map, as you suggest, I think would be taking away what I 
believe is better left to the implementation of my report because 
I was looking at a province-wide plan. It wouldn’t take too 
much to . . . for any of you, and I’m sure you may have looked 
at the 14 largest communities or the largest hospitals outside 
Regina and Saskatoon, but I still believe that it’s, that my role 
was to provide a province-wide plan, and that’s what I’ve done. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well I think that I appreciate your 
reluctance to pin the tail, but I also think that the general 
recommendations in your report about these service distances 
and service times also create some obvious concerns. For 
example, is it reasonable to suggest that with the major regional 
hospital in Yorkton that we need a regional hospital 25 miles 
away in Melville? In my constituency, and there’s a significant 
regional hospital in Melfort but a very significant hospital 30 
miles away in Tisdale. You can look at the situation in Estevan 
and Weyburn that are in close proximity to each other and have 
major communities. 
 
So those sorts of issues are issues of concern. And in terms of 
direction that people are looking for and some clarity, coming 
from your recommendations, those are issues of grave concern 
and potentially are going to result in a further round of people 
being very worried and protective about the community’s 
future. 
 
We have a situation in Humboldt that is in the process of 
planning to build a facility, and less than an hour away from 
Saskatoon. So I think why you’re reluctant to specifically name 
locations, there is some expectation that in your report’s 
commitments of distance and time and numbers, that some 
recommendations would come forward in terms of specific 
locations. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — In regard to the regional hospitals, say 10 to 14 

regional hospitals that I recommend is sufficient to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan with about 3,000 hospital beds, I want 
to emphasize that each of those regional hospitals would not 
provide exactly the same services. So when you look at a 
hospital A that is 30 miles from hospital B, it may be a decision 
of the district or an implementation that that facility could stay 
there but it would offer . . . it would not duplicate services that 
were offered 25 miles down the road. 
 
Now one has to examine also the stability and the expertise of 
the physicians in that community; and the workloads, etc., to 
support the programs. But I will still maintain that I believe that 
it should be left to the implementation as to where those 10 to 
14 sites are located. I may have put . . . picked 12 sites that 
upon implementation a couple of them would make more sense 
that they be somewhere else. 
 
And I think that is important that I look at the overall provincial 
plan and leave the implementation to people who know those 
communities much better than I do, and also look at what the 
needs are overall of the province to determine, for example in 
orthopaedics, how many of those regional centres would 
actually do orthopaedics? I would not see all of them doing 
orthopaedic, providing orthopaedic services, but some of them 
would. So I believe this: my conclusion, right or wrong, was to 
leave this up to implementation and for me to give an overall 
road map of 10 to 14 regional centres. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The present round of discussion has now 
expired. I now go to the government side for their next turn. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fyke, 
welcome to the Committee of the Whole. I want to thank you 
and your advisors for joining us here today. 
 
I have a couple of different issues that I want to get clarified. 
The first set of issues I’m particularly interested in, in the 
report, deal with specialized care. In the report you state that 
consolidation of some tertiary services in a single, provincial 
location or joint planning with other provinces for delivery of 
services would be necessary. Obviously this would mean that 
people are going to need to travel further for these services. And 
I’m particularly interested in how this consolidation will lead to 
a better quality of services for Saskatchewan people. I’m 
looking at page 91 of your report. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you. In regard to specialty services, what 
is one of the very important keys to the highly specialized 
services that we see delivered in health care today is that for 
quality we need a critical mass of skills, equipment, and indeed 
patients. And for a population of this province, of one million, 
that in some cases may require several sites, depending on the 
frequency of the situation. For example, replacing hips may 
require obviously more sites than cardiac or pediatric 
open-heart surgery. 
 
So I focused on the quality issues around the critical mass. That 
will mean that the highly specialized would be in Regina, 
Saskatoon, and to a lesser degree in Prince Albert. In some 
cases, I can see that there should only be one centre for the 
province. I’m not suggesting what that would be but when the 



610 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

quality council is up, I’m sure that they would look at the 
current programs or any future programs and say where does it 
make sense; can we provide that in two centres? 
 
We also have a situation on the skill training . . . the skills of 
our highly trained physicians. If you have a program in city A 
with three doctors, and you have a program in city B with three 
doctors and one leaves, you’ve got a problem. If you have one 
program with six doctors and one leaves, you don’t have near 
the difficulty as far as the coverage is concerned. 
 
I believe you referred to out of province as well. And it makes 
sense, in my opinion, for a population of one million that there 
would be highly, highly specialized services that we should be 
working with our other provinces in Western Canada to have a 
one-centre share and provide that service. This is no disgrace 
for a highly specialized service; it is no disgrace to go out of the 
province for that service. 
 
What is a greater risk I believe, and it was exemplified in the 
tragedy in Winnipeg, of trying to sustain a very highly skilled 
program where there were not the volumes or the critical mass 
to keep the individual skills up. 
 
So I think that it makes sense, as we move down the road in the 
more sophisticated health care programs, that we look at 
relationships between Saskatchewan and Manitoba, and 
between Saskatchewan and Alberta. Indeed, there may even be 
a need for a highly specialized service serving all of Western 
Canada. 
 
Again I’ll just make one brief comment and let you get on with 
your next question; need not always be the program is outside 
of Saskatchewan. Indeed Saskatchewan could be the site of one 
of those highly specialized programs. 
 
But it just makes sense from a quality point of view, and that’s 
what my report focuses on, quality must be first. But some of 
those critical skills . . . highly skilled programs need a critical 
mass. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Fyke, I’m 
interested then in, as we move to this consolidation under your 
plan and we improve the quality, what is the impact on waiting 
lists and waiting times? Is there a reduction? Do we expect the 
list to stay relatively stable? How would you be dealing with 
this issue, or is this something that you took a look at? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Yes, thank you for the question. And I, first of 
all, I want to say that wait-lists are on everyone’s mind in the 
Canadian health care system. Not just in Saskatchewan but 
indeed across Canada. 
 
But there is more to wait-lists than just more money. We must 
ensure that the wait-lists are managed better. We must ensure 
that those who need the services get them first. And we must 
ensure that there are protocols and standards and shared 
workloads amongst physicians. So there’s really two aspects to 
a wait-list, how do you get on that wait-list, and then how do 
you move up the wait-list? 
 
And I’ve had many discussions with physicians and others on 
wait-lists, but the bottom line is that money alone will not solve 

wait-lists, that we need to manage wait-lists. 
 
There is also a good project going on in western Canada 
between the four western provinces on the wait-list issue. But if 
my report is implemented, I can see the wait-list being . . . the 
wait-list dilemma, or problem, being resolved as a result of a 
number of initiatives. The way we organize, manage the 
wait-list, the criteria for people going on the wait-list, when 
they get on the wait-list, how do they get their surgery or 
whatever. And having our physicians as being part of the 
system so that our individual physicians are not keeping their 
own wait-lists that we systemically cannot manage. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. So am I correct to assume then 
that you’re saying through the consolidation you’d be better 
able to manage the wait-lists because you’d have a team of 
specialists who would be able to share the workload? I see 
you’re nodding, so I’ll accept that that’s really the answer to 
this question. 
 
I’m unclear as to how the decisions would be made as to where 
these specialized services would be located. Who will be 
making the decision as to what is offered here in Regina at our 
tertiary, our main tertiary centre and what would be offered in 
Saskatoon and what would be offered in all three of the 
potential tertiary centres? Who will be making these decisions 
and what would be the criteria? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — The Minister of Health would be making those 
decisions. And I would hope that the Minister of Health would 
take into — and I’m sure the Minister of Health would — take 
into consideration the advice from the districts and the advice 
from the quality council. 
 
The advice from the quality council would focus on: does it 
make sense to have one, two or three of these programs; where 
is the critical mass as patients; which hospital or which 
community have the current skills now or can maintain those 
current skills. 
 
And this is a role that I see for an arm’s-length body that 
focuses on quality, that will then focus on evidence and not 
focus on lobbying on behalf of certain interests. That the 
decision as to where a certain program, a new program or a 
consolidation of a program would occur would be based on 
quality standards in evidence. 
 
Those recommendations, by the quality council . . . The quality 
council is not a decision-making body. It’s a body that will 
recommend. 
 
I’m sure the Minister of Health then would take those into 
consideration. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. So are there certain services that 
should be offered in every tertiary centre or is this a case that all 
the services are basically going to be looked at and evaluated as 
to what would be hived off to one centre or another? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — No. I would see a lot of services that would be 
common to all three centres; Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince 
Albert. There’d be your special surgical medicine. 
 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 611 

 

But when you start getting into your subspecialities, you could 
certainly look at things like — I’m not suggesting this one; I 
want to make it very clear I’m just using it as an example — 
like cardiac surgery. And some of the subspecialists where you 
would want to look at how you can maximize the skills of the 
individuals with the volume of patients and the support. 
 
So I would see there would be a core of specialist programs that 
would be offered in Regina and Saskatoon, and then there could 
be some others that we would only have one in the province. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I have one final question on this area before 
I move into another set of questions. And that relates to 
questions around how we would involve the College of 
Medicine at the University of Saskatchewan, and how that 
relationship would work under your report? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — My recommendation is that the College of 
Medicine . . . Let me just back up and answer a broader 
question first, if I may. And that is the direction of all the health 
science programs in our province and with emphasis at the 
university, I’m recommending that the six health science 
colleges focus on a training program that will develop 
teamwork; focus on training students that will meet the needs of 
our primary health, our rural health, and our northern health. So 
that our universities, I believe, our programs need to be . . . take 
into consideration the needs of Saskatchewan after they 
graduate. And they need to focus on what I’ve suggested — 
primary, northern, and rural. 
 
With specific regard to the College of Medicine, I’m 
recommending that the Saskatoon Health District become an 
academic health district so that they place as one of their 
priorities, education. On the other hand, I’m suggesting to the 
College of Medicine that one of their responsibilities is indeed 
service. It is not just education and research, it is also service. 
The people of Saskatchewan depend on many of the specialists 
in the College of Medicine to provide a service. 
 
So I’m suggesting that . . . recommending that the College of 
Medicine in the Saskatoon Health District form a closer 
relationship with focus on the three: education, research, and 
service to the people. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. When we discuss 
health care particularly in rural areas, I think one of the groups 
that we often forget to include in the process, and I’m very 
interested to know within your report and your vision of how 
health care should be reformed, what is the strategy for dealing 
with First Nations people? What is our strategy for involving 
them, particularly looking at some of their specific health care 
needs? 
 
I know that a great deal of work and attention is being spent at 
this point on services around diabetes. And I’m very interested 
as we move to a regionalized model and to your system or your 
proposals, how we would deal with this either at the tribal 
council level or at the band level, both on- and off-reserve, I 
guess. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I had a number of excellent meetings with our 
Aboriginal and First Nations peoples. Many of their needs can 
and should be dealt with through a better primary health 

services network. As you indicated, one of their great concerns 
is diabetes. And I was shocked at the number of amputations 
that result from complications from diabetes for, indeed for all 
Saskatchewan residents but certainly for our Aboriginal and 
First Nations. 
 
When I met with the inter-tribal chiefs and many people in the 
North, First Nations and the North, they have done and are 
focused . . . they’ve done good work on the broader 
determinants of health, and we need to encourage them to 
continue a lot of that good work, to be frank about it. Their 
requests to me were all focused on the primary health services. 
They were not focused on sort of the high tech programs that 
we sometimes tend in the health system to focus on. 
 
What I am recommending is that organizationally the 
Government of Canada, the Government of Saskatchewan, the 
Aboriginal First Nations organizations, and the districts look at 
. . . have a structured dialogue I guess on how best to offer the 
services for our Aboriginal First Nations people. 
 
But I do believe that the direction that we’re going in primary 
health certainly will go a long ways to solving many of their 
problems. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. The other area, that I 
didn’t see a great deal on in the report but I am interested in 
hearing more about, pertains to the role of . . . the relationship 
of home care, the idea of how we would make greater use of 
respite services, how these would fit into the primary health 
system, and I’d be very interested in how this relationship 
would work. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you. The issue around home care and 
palliative care over the last decade has changed the way we 
deliver services across this country. Today home care is able to 
provide much of the acute services that were provided and 
indeed in some cases are still being provided in many hospitals. 
 
Home care is an integral part of primary health service teams. 
It’s an integral part of our communities, rural and urban, in 
assisting our elderly people to maintain their independence and 
maintain their self-esteem by staying in their homes as long as 
they possibly can before they . . . and indeed many of them can 
stay in their homes all their lives before they and others may 
need to consider long-term care facilities. 
 
But home care, respite services, palliative services, are a very 
integral part, a very integral part of our primary health services 
teams and are very important to the people in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I want to return, 
just to clarify some of the earlier questions that were raised 
particularly about the changeover from having emergency 
rooms in rural communities that are currently operating, to 
greater emphasis on ambulance services and other emergency 
services that would be provided. 
 
Could you just provide for us again an outline of how this 
system would work, and in particular, the type of services that 



612 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

would be offered to rural residents? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Can I just have a moment to get my facts 
organized here. 
 
First of all, in relation to what is the loss of the emergency room 
as you have indicated, in many of our rural hospitals there 
would still be out-patient care provided in the primary health 
centres or in the community care centres. 
 
We would have the primary health services team in that 
community providing the local services. We would have the 
telephone advice and counsel 24 hours a day. And we’d have 
trauma and emergency services provided by the improved 
ambulance, which would then take the individual to the centre 
that would be able to provide the high quality acute services. 
 
I’m assuming that if the person is critically ill from either a 
heart attack or a trauma from a accident, that person would be 
. . . the ambulance would go to the site, do what they had to do 
there — whether it might be start an intravenous or get an 
airway open or stop bleeding — and then take the person to the 
hospital, regional hospital or specialized services. 
 
For example, if you were at southeastern Saskatchewan and you 
had a heart attack, you may be brought right into Regina where 
they can do an angioplasty procedure, which is opening up the 
artery, and treat you. 
 
Right now it is handled in various ways. It can happen that way, 
but it also can happen that you will go to a local hospital. 
 
And I was just last week told about a case in the southwest, 
where this person was brought to a hospital and was kept there 
for a number of hours before being transferred into Regina. And 
it indeed could have — and it may have, I won’t say it did — 
but it certainly had the makings of compromising the quality of 
care because of that delay in that smaller hospital. 
 
So what my report is recommending overall, that it, the system 
work for the benefit of the patient at all times depending on 
their needs. If their needs, if their need is a serious heart attack, 
then they get the services they require — everyone in the 
province gets the service they require. If it’s an everyday 
service, like an earache or a problem with their diabetes and 
they may need a nutritionist or some other . . . physiotherapist 
or some other service, that they get that closer to home. That’s 
where they should get it and that’s where I’m recommending 
they do get it. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The allotment for questions by 
government members has expired. The Chair will now 
recognize questions by opposition members for the next 20 
minutes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and Mr. 
Fyke. I appreciate the time and I understand that we’ll have a 
short recess after this set. 
 
I would just like to pick up where we left off a bit and to get it 
clarified in terms of these regional centres. As I understood you 
to say — and I’ll try to put this into one question so perhaps 
you can touch on the points that way — that you indicated, 

when I used some examples like Yorkton and Melfort . . . or 
Yorkton and Melville, Estevan and Weyburn, Melfort and 
Tisdale, that in your concept of these regional hospitals you said 
that they wouldn’t necessarily be duplications or mirror images 
of each other, that there might be complimentary and 
non-duplicative services that would be offered in those centres. 
 
Using just those six communities’ examples, they in essence 
serve, I would think in your definition, three regional districts, 
if you like. And if I go just to the straight math, I mean here on 
three districts, if you like, you would have six hospitals. 
 
Does that potentially change the definition of the 10 to 14 
hospital specifics? Or are you thinking in terms of 10 or 12 
service delivery areas that in some instances might actually 
mean that there would be two hospitals serving that district, 
which would then change the number of the 10 to 14 actual 
hospitals? 
 
And if that’s not the case, in that you’re talking in absolute 
terms of 10 to 14 regional hospitals, then how do you justify or 
rationalize these parallel services that I thought you indicated in 
your last response before we left off? And finally, if you don’t 
mean that there would both be paired services, if you like, with 
a duplication, would, for example, you have acute care beds in 
Yorkton and acute care beds in Melville? How does that work 
specifically? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — When I referred to the . . . if there were, and 
again I’m not going to comment on the names of those centres 
that you raised; I will leave the 10 to 14 to others to decide 
where those locations are. 
 
But let’s take a certain . . . an area where there may be, it may 
be deemed that there be two, two regional . . . of the 10 to 14 
that two may be closer together than some of the others. Some 
of their services that they would offer, like basic medical, some 
basic surgical, and maybe maternity, may be — may be — 
offered in both. 
 
But again something like orthopedic surgery may not be offered 
in both because of the, again, coming back to the volumes of 
the patients, the number of patients requiring the service, and 
the critical mass of the skills of the doctors. For example, I 
would find it difficult to believe that we would find orthopedic 
surgeons for 14 regional centres. Just a reality. I’m just not sure 
of the exact number we have right now. I think it’s four or five 
centres outside Regina and Saskatoon. 
 
So there would be some common services that would be offered 
in each of the 10 to 14, but there will also be some of the more, 
slightly more specialized that wouldn’t necessarily jump up to 
the complex specialized services in Regina and Saskatoon, that 
would only be offered in some of them. 
 
Again it would come back to what the quality council would 
say, that to have a safe, high-quality program of X it requires Y. 
And it seems to us that that should be provided in five of the 
regional hospitals in the province, that that would meet the need 
of the outside Regina and Saskatoon. So that’s how I see it, 
that’s how I see it operating. 
 
I don’t know if I’ve answered your question fully, or I hope I 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 613 

 

have. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Well I think what I — and please correct 
me because I want to outline how I interpreted your response — 
that there would be an absolute number of the 10 to 14, in terms 
of regional, recognized, acute care hospital centres. And 
without mentioning names, where you would have two 
communities in close proximity to each other, it is highly 
unlikely that they would both be regional centres by definition 
of what a region is. 
 
Otherwise you’re going to distort the map so badly that if you 
have in essence two regional centres within a half an hour of 
each other in three or four locations, how in the world are you 
going to then distribute the remaining centres to adequately 
service the province? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — . . . recognize that there will be some of those 
centres that would be closer together than others. The constraint 
that I have, the constraint that we have I guess, is where those 
hospitals and where those centres are currently located. 
 
You could take an example like Regina and . . . I’m sorry. You 
could take an example of Moose Jaw and Regina. They’re very 
close and yet there’s a lot of services that are in Moose Jaw, 
that are currently in Regina . . . that are also in Regina. 
 
When you . . . There is not a way of laying out the exact . . . the 
distances between the various regional hospitals would all be 
identical unless you built new hospital facilities. And I’m not 
recommending that, because of cost and other things. I think we 
have to build on what we’ve got in the province. And while the 
10 to 14 is adequate to serve the province, there will be 
situations where between or among those 14 there could be a 
couple of situations where they could be relatively close 
together. 
 
Again I would then come back and say if that is the case, are 
there ways that those two can complement each other so that 
they don’t have to duplicate a lot of services based on the 
volume of services, the skills of the physicians, and the 
equipment that they currently have. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. I would like to move 
on to another few areas in the time I have because my 
colleagues are anxious to ask some questions as well. 
 
As you’re aware, we have a very different environment in the 
last couple of years in the health care professional delivery 
system than we had in the past. During a time of budget 
restraint across this country and perhaps across North America, 
there were no jurisdictions where there was much reinvestment 
into health care if you like. And in fact over the decade of the 
’90s, there was a great deal of curtailing or minimizing new 
expenditures in the health care field. 
 
And as a result of that, there was for a period of time relative 
stability in the labour force in that there weren’t massive 
opportunities for people to move and to transfer so you saw less 
mobility, if you like, among the professionals. 
 
In the last few years there’s been commitments of increased 
investment. And I look to our neighbour to the west where 

there’s been a very significant investment into the health care 
field and, from what we hear, fairly lucrative contracts being 
offered in the nursing profession. The fee for service schedule 
of medical doctors is significantly higher than what is current in 
place in our province. There is a major commitment to the 
expansion of the colleges of Medicine and Nursing and the 
consequent demand for qualified professionals and instructors 
and that sort of thing. 
 
So there is a very competitive environment and almost on a 
daily or weekly basis, you know, we see the pressures of that in 
terms of the information coming forward that specialists are 
leaving, general practitioners are leaving, nurses are leaving to 
take advantage of those opportunities, and health districts are 
finding an increasing challenge in maintaining the professional 
component that they need to deliver services. 
 
In light of that reality, is it responsible or reasonable for us to 
leave a high level of uncertainty into the Saskatchewan health 
care system by taking further time to study your 
recommendations or is it incumbent that an action plan be 
presented so that people who are sitting there mulling over their 
futures and what directions they’re going to go will be able to 
quickly realize that there is a plan in Saskatchewan and they 
could see a part for themselves in it? 
 
We are of course very concerned about further delays of making 
a plan, and I think in your preamble this afternoon you 
indicated that you’re calling on government to make a plan, that 
we need to understand where we’re going and professionals in 
this province need to understand what their role is going to be 
in or, quite frankly, they may find the alternatives very 
attractive. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I would like to comment on physician supply. 
Overall the medical manpower has been . . . medical person 
power has been stable. However I recognize that there will be 
increasing challenges in the future. It is not limited to 
Saskatchewan. These challenges are going to face the health 
system right across North America because there are many, 
many more opportunities for young people now compared with 
years ago. So it’s competing with the health system. 
 
I recommend that there be a province-wide strategy to deal with 
medical human resources. And I believe, in talking to a lot of 
physicians and a lot of nurses, that one of the things that will 
keep Saskatchewan graduates in Saskatchewan and retain 
graduates, is a system where they feel that they’ve done a good, 
quality job when they come home from work. 
 
Right now our health providers — our nurses and our doctors 
and all the staff — are feeling overworked. They feel frustrated; 
they’ve got low morale. And that is again not unique to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The one way that I believe that we can be different in 
Saskatchewan to many other provinces and get the lead right 
now is to develop a system based on quality rather than volume 
— focus on quality rather than volumes — where everybody 
under primary health services fully utilize their skills. There’s 
nothing more frustrating that to have a person train three, four, 



614 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

five, six or seven years and then be underutilized. 
 
And I believe that again, in the primary health services people 
will be working as teams so the quality of life will be better for 
a lot of our physicians. That, taken as a package, I think will 
help to attract young people and professionals to Saskatchewan 
and keep them here. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. In your study leading up to your 
report, I wonder if you looked at — and I believe you did — in 
terms of saying that we must invest into the educational future 
of our health care professionals and that you made comment 
that there should be an investment in the educational 
component. 
 
And I’m thinking in particular of the University of 
Saskatchewan and the College of Medicine, the College of 
Nursing, kinesiology and those areas — the health sciences — 
at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
I think you’re probably aware as well that the University of 
Saskatchewan has made a proposal for an integrated health 
sciences facility that would bring all of these medical 
disciplines together and provide some badly needed facilities so 
that: first of all they would have the experience of being trained 
and educated in a collaborative environment, which is what I 
hear you talking about in terms of primary and secondary health 
care services to some extent; that they would be able to be 
provided with the facilities they need to attract quality 
professionals that need not only instructional space but research 
space; that it would provide a much needed incentive and a 
methodology of levering the light beam project at the 
University of Saskatchewan to draw needed research projects to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There have been articles published in the On Campus magazine 
by Dr. Roger Pierson, for example, an issue or so ago, that 
really flag the concern that if nothing is done in terms of a 
major commitment to the university and the College of 
Medicine, that indeed we’re in dire danger of losing it through 
attrition and through a bleeding of quality specialists, or for in 
fact a lack of accreditation because of the erosion of manpower. 
Certainly Dr. Pierson raises a pretty significant concern, and 
I’ve seen in the subsequent issues of On Campus that that 
opinion is shared by many of his colleagues. 
 
Would you be specific about saying pretty directly what your 
feeling is in terms of the need, first of all, of the value of the 
integrated health sciences project as proposed in general by the 
University of Saskatchewan, firstly; and second of all, that there 
has to be in a very timely way a critical recommitment to the 
College of Medicine, College of Nursing, and other health 
sciences colleges at the University of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Well as my report indicates, I recommend that 
the College of Medicine . . . or the University of Saskatchewan, 
I should say, through the College of Medicine and the 
Saskatoon Health District establish a new relationship focused 
on service, research, and education. 
 
I’ve also indicated that the universities should be focusing on 
graduating training students in the six health science faculties 
that will be collaborative as you — a word I think you use — or 

interdisciplinary so that they can meet the needs of 
Saskatchewan which I believe are going to be significantly . . . 
the significant amount of the need will be based on primary 
health, rural health, and northern health. 
 
I don’t wish to comment on the . . . I’m not knowledgeable 
enough about the specific requests on the building, so I will not 
comment on that. 
 
I would only say, as far as your general premise around 
investments, I do recommend investments in research for the 
health system. I believe that research will do a lot to sustain our 
educational programs, and also to attract dollars into the 
province. I believe, after about three years, you start getting 
back something like $5 for every dollar you invest; something 
like that. I stand to be corrected on the exact amount. But I 
know that research does attract money from outside the 
province and I believe that is critical to keep this health system 
on the — cutting edge may not be the right term to use — but 
on the forefront. 
 
But again I would go back to we have to make sure that we 
have a system that is quality focused and sustainable, and not 
let . . . not have a system that continues to grow and grow and 
take resources away, that should indeed be going to our 
educational system and our universities. Because it is probably 
through our universities that we in this province will be able to 
meet the challenges of globalization in the future, and educate 
our young people, so that we are able to sustain a good quality 
of life in this province, and as well a good quality health system 
that promotes health. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. And I see in the time allocated 
this will be my last question, and in posing it I would thank you 
for your answers. 
 
Your report recommends a significant change or evolution of 
the way health services are provided on a primary level, in 
terms of your primary care teams. On the second area, regional 
level, in terms of the idea of a regional support system that sort 
of is supportive of the community care facilities and the 
primary care facilities. 
 
I’m wondering if you could point to examples in your research 
where this model has been indeed implemented, first of all, so 
that there is some comfort on a practical level that this is more 
than an abstract theory, and indeed a pragmatic, practical way to 
approach things, first of all. And even if there has been some of 
these examples in your research on a national or international 
basis, would there be a role for the initiation at the earliest 
opportunity for a major, significant, pilot project that identifies 
an area or a district of the province that is particularly ready for 
this kind of project to really make sure that we find a way of 
identifying how this could be done in specific, what the pitfalls 
of the changing practice relationships might be between health 
care professionals, and sort of a practical opportunity to address 
how this is done before we roll it out right across the province 
and find that we’ve created huge problems that we don’t clearly 
have the answer to. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you. When one is making a . . . facing a 
significant change like this, one has to look at what are the best 
ways to move towards implementation. I believe that the time 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 615 

 

has come that it’s time to move beyond the pilot projects in 
regard to primary health services. We’ve had some . . . is it 12 
or 14 sites . . . projects in this province already. We have had 
. . . there is examples in our . . . Sorry, 18 sites in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have on page 98 a summary of the primary health care 
developments across Canada. The Prime Minister and the 
premiers agreed on September 11 last year that primary health 
reform be a priority. So I would suggest that we look at it as 
moving now into implementation. 
 
I would just say that in any kind of change, there is risk. There 
is risk. And that’s why it’s important to involve the providers 
and the public in taking this plan — the overall plan that I’ve 
given to the Premier and the government and the people of this 
province — as to how best we get on with implementing it now 
and move forward. 
 
In the past, a lot of the major reforms in health came about 
because people believed that they . . . they were convinced that 
it was going to lead to improvement, and I believe that many of 
those milestones certainly proved that. And I think it’s time 
now to look at how we . . . what kind of a health system we 
have and how we can improve it and move on to the 
implementation phase. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Hon. members, as agreed to at the start, 
this committee will now take a short recess. I’m asking the 
Sergeant of Arms to summon members, to signal members to 
return 15 minutes from now. However, the committee will now 
stand recessed for 20 minutes. 
 
The committee recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The committee now come back to order, 
please. Order. 
 
Hon. members, I was talking to Mr. Fyke and at times he’s 
having a little difficulty picking up the last parts of people’s 
questions. So I just ask that when questions are being directed, 
try and keep the same volume up. The difficulty seems to come 
at the end of questions, so speak more clearly into the mike or 
just raise the volume ever so slightly when you’re asking 
questions. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and my thanks to 
members of the Fyke Commission for their attendance here 
today, and also my thanks to the hon. member for 
Kelvington-Wadena for surrendering her desk so we’d avoid 
me having to speak behind you and you getting a crick in your 
neck as you’re questioned from the nosebleed section. So I 
appreciate that. 
 
It’s just been a week since your report came out, but I’m 
concerned that much of the media has been negative, and I think 
there are indications that the government is reluctant to act on it 
because of the perception of it being politically difficult to sell. 
I realize that it’s not your business to be politically selling 
anything. It is your business to say what you think is a 
sustainable quality health care system for our province. 
 
But if there have been problems in the way your report has been 
received, I think it is found in one small statement on page 17 

where you say, “The realities of modern health care . . . have 
simply made the small hospital obsolete.” And that clearly has 
made many people in the province nervous. 
 
And I realize that you have made your proposal about primary 
health care centres, but nonetheless that statement that small 
hospitals are now obsolete has unquestionably raised concern 
and danger flags throughout the province and I’d like you to 
discuss that for a minute, if you would, please, sir. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you very much. And I do appreciate the 
question, I appreciate the observation, and I appreciate the . . . 
that people in the smaller communities with rural hospitals are 
concerned about the, I guess I could say, the security and the 
sustainability of their health services. 
 
I wrote this report in a way that I wanted to lay out the issues 
very clearly and succinctly. I do believe that we need to move 
from the system that we have today to a system that is focused 
on quality. 
 
I am certainly not blaming any person or individual within the 
current system as to some of our difficulties. It is the reality of 
health care delivery in the year 2000-2001, that is focused on 
. . . a lot of it is focused on high-tech, highly qualified people, 
providers, and equipment. And the reality is a lot of our smaller 
hospitals, no fault of theirs; they are not able to provide the kind 
of services that are necessary today. And in reality a lot of 
people are going by them and moving . . . going to the larger 
centres. 
 
I have certainly had people from our smaller communities 
express to me the economic benefit of the small hospital, and 
the security issue, and I appreciate that. I was born in a small 
town in Saskatchewan and I have relatives that live in a small 
town in rural Saskatchewan. I very much appreciate that. 
 
But I also am convinced that Saskatchewan can lead the way in 
moving to a sustainable health system that provides the 
services. And I want to emphasize this again. What my report 
does is provide a plan for the provision of secure sustainable 
services. It does say very clearly that services . . . what we talk 
about focus on services, quality services, rather than bricks and 
mortar. 
 
And I stand by the . . . I stand by my report. It was written to 
focus on the services. That’s what’s important. That’s what’s 
important to people in rural and urban Saskatchewan. We need 
to organize differently to provide those services. We need to 
recognize what the needs are of rural Saskatchewan and urban 
Saskatchewan, particularly rural — that is everyday services. 
 
And we need to focus on quality. If we do not, we will be faced 
down the road with some decisions that I think will certainly 
compromise a publicly funded system. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, I think that leads into my next question, 
sir. You’ve clearly said that the present system, where we have 
health expenditures increasing at four to six times the growth in 
our economy, that that system is not sustainable. 
 
So I’d like you to tell us: what in your view is the price of us 
allowing your report to gather dust while we muddle through 



616 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

and avoid the hard issues and the hard questions that are raised 
in your report? What do you think is the price of doing that? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Well first of all I want to say that I think it is 
important that the government and the providers and the public 
have an opportunity to express their views. If there is anyone or 
any groups that can take my report and improve upon it, I say 
great. If there’s suggested changes that can make it better, I say 
wonderful. Because I’ve done my best but that isn’t to say that 
this report can’t be improved upon. 
 
So I think it’s important that the providers in our health . . . the 
providers, our public, and our rural communities have an 
opportunity to make their views known. 
 
If this report is not implemented, I guess a couple of comments 
I would make. One, I think it’s a wonderful opportunity for this 
province to change the way it’s delivering services. It’s an 
opportunity for this province quite frankly to lead the nation 
again because every province is struggling with how do we 
have a sustainable public system. 
 
If we place ourselves in a position of just putting more money 
into the status quo and we go down the road, I can really only 
see six policy options that the government of the day will be 
faced with. 
 
One is to establish an alternate insurance system, insurance 
options, for the publicly funded system. Two, to decrease the 
current insurance services and de-insure some services; 
probably de-insure those that are not protected under the 
Canada Health Act. Introduce user charges in order to bring 
more revenue in, increase taxes, or increase the share of the 
budget for Health, take it away from other programs like 
Education and Highways and others, or to make better use of 
existing resources. And that’s my option that I’m 
recommending to you, that I don’t know of any other options. 
 
I certainly carefully considered user fees and premiums, but 
those in the final analysis, the final conclusion, are really forms 
of taxes. They compromise equity. And I’ve met with a number 
of people who are very poor in this province who told me the 
difficulties they are having with some of the . . . they would 
have if we implemented a surcharge or user fees. 
 
So I think the province will be faced with six, what I can think 
of, six policy options at some point, and some decisions I guess 
will have to be made within those six policy options. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Six policy options, all of them unattractive. In 
that regard you said this is Saskatchewan’s chance to lead the 
way, but you also said that we’re unique. Now I suppose every 
province is unique, but it does seem to me though that the basic 
Canadian issue is of course that we’re the world’s second 
largest nation with a comparatively small population, half the 
population of Great Britain or a tenth the population of the US. 
So the issue of how you service this huge land mass with a 
small population is true of Saskatchewan, but it’s more or less 
true of all of Canada. 
 
So I’d like you to discuss that. But also what you would say to 
those who might argue that one reason for delaying action on 
your report is now to await the national review that was 

announced by the federal government recently? Is that in your 
view a valid submission? To what extent have you addressed 
Saskatchewan? To what extent are you addressing issues which 
you say are true of the whole of Canada? And would you accept 
it as a valid position to take that we can delay action on your 
report now until the national review has been completed? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I don’t think I want to comment on the national 
study. I think the national study will be focused on national 
issues. I focused on the provincial issues, so I don’t think I want 
to pass comment on whether we, whether the province, should 
wait for the national study. I think I have to leave that up to the 
wisdom of others. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Then I think I’ve already indicated that my 
concern is that while in a democracy it’s obviously always good 
to consult, nonetheless consultation can and at times has been 
used as an excuse for inaction. 
 
Now specifically you say you have consulted with hundreds of 
people, yet I’m hearing that maybe some groups have not been 
allowed the input they should have had. So I’m going to ask 
you if you feel that citizens in general, but especially those 
groups with a particular interest and insight, a particular stake 
— such as SAHO, SUN, SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association), groups like that who have a particular perspective 
— have they had full opportunity to come before your 
commission? And in your view, would they have anything 
further to offer to the MLAs at this time beyond the 
perspectives which they have already supplied to yourself? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Health care is a very, very important public 
policy issue. I consulted with many people about their 
suggestions for improvements but I think it is very reasonable 
for those groups now to be able to formally respond to the 
proposals that I’ve laid before the people of this province. 
 
I think it’s important that everyone have an opportunity to 
debate and comment and as I say, offer suggestions that may 
improve my report. That seems to me to be a reasonable way of 
proceeding. I’ve had a lot of meetings with a lot of people, but 
on the other hand when I was meeting with them it was 
pursuing solutions that . . . I wasn’t meeting with them to 
discuss specifically my final recommendations. Because my 
final recommendations were really finalized just in the last few 
weeks before the report was tabled. 
 
So I think it’s reasonable to, very reasonable, to give people the 
opportunity to comment and indicate whether from their 
perspective the report makes sense, whether it can be improved 
upon. I have publicly called for all parties including our 
professions and our health unions that it is time to look at the 
greater good and the greater issue that’s before us, facing this 
province, and to come together and make their suggestions. So 
that’s really all I have to say, I think. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The response to your report has, frankly, 
largely focused on what is perceived to be cutbacks and I know 
you strongly object to that. You say this is not a take-away from 
smaller communities but an enhancement. But nonetheless the 
media response and the political response has mostly focused 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 617 

 

on the perception of cutbacks. 
 
But I notice that under ambulance service you have taken a 
strong position that ambulance charges should not be distance 
spaced, and that distance-spaced ambulance charges obviously 
discriminate against the rural resident, and it is an example of 
two-tier medicine. Obviously that is going to be very popular, 
certainly something I like and strongly support. 
 
But my question to you is: how do you see that working so that 
that is financially feasible? How can that be done? And clearly 
the present system is totally unfair to those residents who don’t 
happen to live in a tertiary centre. And then in my own case, I 
know in order to get to a tertiary centre where residents in my 
community routinely pay 900 and $1,000 ambulance bills, and 
I’m sure it’s higher in other communities. 
 
But so obviously I like it. But how do we do this so this doesn’t 
become a huge financial drain on the health budget? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — The ambulance report, again I would reiterate 
that this is a report that was done by a group of experts that had 
done this prior to my . . . or in the early part of my work. The 
proposal that the patient fee would be not based on distance was 
based on the fact that it would be cost neutral. So those that 
would be paying, the people that would be paying more, would 
be those who travel less distances. In other words it would be a 
system based on fairness of the use of the ambulance and not 
based on the actual distance. 
 
So the report that recommended this, the ambulance report, is 
cost neutral to the province. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The province of Alberta has moved in part to 
helicopter service for emergency transportation. That seems 
very attractive. Do you see that as feasible for our province? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Again I must outline my qualifications in the 
whole issue of ambulances. That is not one of my . . . I would 
not hold myself up as an expert in the ambulance business. 
 
But in my meetings with the team that carried out the 
ambulance survey and prepared the report, it is my 
understanding that helicopters are excellent for short distances, 
high-population areas. That in Saskatchewan where we are 
travelling in bad weather, great distances to bring somebody in 
to Saskatoon or Regina, that the fixed-wing aircraft is still the 
best. It can be used more days of the year, and is quicker, faster, 
than the helicopter or the rotary wing. 
 
That is the . . . just maybe, if I may, read part of page 34 of the 
report. 
 

It is appropriate to address the issue of initiating a 
helicopter program in the province in this recommendation. 
Frankly, a helicopter-based, air medical program cannot be 
supported within the province. The high cost of operation 
and the limited range of helicopters do not provide an 
appropriate cost benefit for provincial residents. Helicopter 
programs have an effective range of approximately 120 to 
150 kilometres. This limited range and the susceptibility of 
helicopters to not being able to fly because of poor weather 
support the concentration of the province on its fixed-wing 

air medical program and ground ambulance services rather 
than investing in a helicopter air medical transport. 

 
So I would have to rely on the author of this report in regards to 
it. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — And a final question. I’m sure that you’ve not 
been happy to see that the initial response has been that again 
something is going to be taken away in terms of health care — 
especially from rural areas. 
 
And is there anything in the week since the release of your 
report that you have thought of that you can say that suggests 
that your report offers hope and something for the future as 
opposed to offering cutbacks and take-aways in terms of 
service? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I understand the concern that is being raised in 
certain quarters. I have done my best to clarify my message and 
I’m attempting to do that today as effectively as I can. 
 
I am absolutely — absolutely — convinced that if we move to a 
system based on quality with all the investments that I have 
indicated, that the citizens of rural Saskatchewan would have a 
better service than they have today. I recognize that it’s going to 
require a lot of change but Saskatchewan has faced change 
before, they’ve faced challenges before and if anybody can do 
it, the people in this province can do it. 
 
I would also comment that in many ways I have been very 
pleased with the positive response to my report. There have 
been many groups come out — the professions and the health 
unions and others — that have been extremely positive. And I 
believe that even some of the response that I expected from the 
critics were not as severely critical as I may have thought would 
happen the day I released the report. 
 
I think it’s important that we have a debate in this province, as I 
guess, part of what we’re doing here today and what both sides 
of the House will do in the weeks ahead and with the people of 
the province; I think that’s a good thing. But there is no doubt 
in my mind, and I make it very clear and I reiterate this, that 
this report is good for rural Saskatchewan. It is about more 
services, better services, higher quality services, and faster 
services than what they have today. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The present round of questioning time 
allotment has expired. The Chair will now recognize members 
from the government side for the next 30 minutes . . . 20 
minutes, I’m sorry. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome Mr. Fyke 
and your staff. The last question was a good lead into, actually 
what my questions are going to be at the beginning. 
 
This magnitude of change that your plan proposes will have a 
huge impact on providers. And I was a provider during the ’93 
changes and I know that it worries providers both where they 
work and where they live, what will happen to them. 
 
And I think some of the comments you made about recruitment 
and retention will also lead to what you see the roles of people 
in this system, especially in rural Saskatchewan. How would 



618 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

you see a nurse practising in a primary health care site and a 
community care centre? And how would you see a doctor 
practising there and how will you see an emergency medical 
technician practising? 
 
I want to talk about the roles of people and how you were 
saying that the services will be better in rural Saskatchewan. 
And I also want to allay some of the fears of the providers that 
their work will be there, and what work they will have. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I see this report as enhancing a lot of the work 
that our providers do right now. I see a change in many cases. I 
see doctors being utilized fully, to the extent of their skills, in 
diagnosing and treating illness. That’s what they’re trained for. 
We need physicians. We need them as part of the team. I see 
nurse . . . but on the other hand, doctors have told me that a lot 
of what they do, they don’t need a medical degree. 
 
What nurses do today, a lot of that work could be done by other 
professionals, like LPNs (licensed practical nurse). And I would 
see the nurses having an expanded role in primary health 
services, through the advanced clinical nurse role, or involved 
in home care or community services. I see, again, utilizing our 
nurses to the full extent that they’re trained. 
 
And so on down the line. I see pharmacists being much more 
involved in dealing with drug reactions, in dealing with what is 
the most appropriate medication to take in this particular case, 
and is the most expensive drug the one that’s necessary. In 
many cases it isn’t. 
 
I see the emergency medical technician as someone who is 
highly skilled in . . . Now there are various levels of training for 
the emergency medical technician, your basic and your 
paramedic, and the other two levels, I just can’t . . . four levels 
anyway. They’re highly trained to deal with emergent, an 
urgent situation, so that when they arrive at an accident on the 
farm, or they arrive at a motor vehicle accident on the highway, 
they can very effectively deal with the situation with the patient 
or the client, be it getting an intravenous line going, being . . . 
maybe it might be defibrillating someone’s heart, it might be 
getting an airway in, or it might be stop the bleeding so that 
they can get the person to a centre to deal with their situation. 
 
This is not to say that I am implying that we . . . that I’m 
considering certain providers as more important than others. It’s 
a team. It’s a team of professionals working together to utilize 
their skills for the benefit of the patient or the client. And that is 
the wave of the future and that is very much part of the primary 
health model. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I know you’re talking about an 
expanded role for some providers, but some of the providers in 
the system now don’t really want to change their role. Like 
they’re not —I’m going to say nurses since I’m most familiar 
with that — they don’t want to be nurse practitioners or 
advanced clinical nurses. So a role for a nurse in a rural area in 
a community care centre, what would the role there be? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I don’t see the role of a nurse in a community 
care centre significantly different than what it is right now. If 
you look at respite, convalescent, palliative care — probably 
not. 

I realize that, as we make changes like this, there will be 
professionals — nurses, doctors, pharmacists, physiotherapists 
— may not want to embrace this change and may take maybe a 
little longer to embrace it, but I think that once we have 
programs working effectively, I think you’ll see a lot more job 
satisfaction with our professionals than we’re seeing today. 
 
Ms. Junor: — One more question about the emergency 
medical services. The technicians that we envision from your 
report being trained up to a certain level of skill, what will they 
be doing in the times that they’re not in an ambulance, sort of in 
the mobile acute centre, what would they be doing and how do 
you see them fitting in this system? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I believe that the emergency medical technicians 
and the ambulances in our smaller centres could be health 
professionals the rest of the day when they’re not on a call. 
 
In many of our urban centres, they’ll be busy all the time with 
the ambulance. But in our smaller centres, it could be an LPN, it 
possibly could be a nurse, it could conceivably be another type 
of professional working in a long-term care facility or a 
community care centre who would be able to go out on the 
ambulance call when they’re called and then be able to be part 
of the . . . either the primary health services team or the 
community care centre the rest of the time. 
 
I don’t think that we can afford to have a system where we have 
trained ambulance people sitting around waiting for one or two 
calls a day. I think we’ve got to make sure we fully utilize those 
individuals in the system. That’s why the report, the ambulance 
report talks about making sure that the emergency medical 
transport system is part of the health system. 
 
So I see these professionals having, in many cases, a dual role 
in some of our smaller centres. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Now when you’re changing roles and you’re 
changing responsibilities — who does what and where — I 
think many people in the providers will be asking, do you see 
this as a net loss to the system? Are there going to be jobs lost? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I think over the next five years in the health 
system that one of our greatest challenges will be to maintain 
the number of health professionals we’re going to need. I 
believe that there will be changes in scopes of jobs. I do not 
believe there will be net job losses. 
 
If we could throw a switch and have this plan in place 
tomorrow, I would see changes in some job responsibilities and 
roles. And that would mean maybe some of our professionals 
will have to look at what their scope of practice is and indeed it 
could require other changes and possibly negotiated within 
contracts, etc. But I don’t see a net job loss. 
 
I certainly see actually a net increase in rural Saskatchewan 
employment through the ambulance . . . Some of the ambulance 
programs I say will use some of the driver . . . the people on the 
ambulance will be integrated into the other, under other 
programs but there will also be additional people added to the 
system. 
 
Overall I don’t see a net job loss. 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 619 

 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I’m also interested in . . . you’re 
talking about everybody has to be ready for the change. 
Everybody has to participate in the change. Do you find that 
readiness with the providers? Are they ready for a change? Are 
they going to . . . There’s changes that will have to be made in 
collective agreements perhaps and stuff like that, that I think 
people may . . . I’m wondering if they are ready for that. Do 
you think that is . . . 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Well I don’t want to . . . I don’t think it would be 
appropriate for me to speak for the unions and the professions. 
On the other hand, did I witness a willingness to look at new 
ways of doing things and change? Absolutely. Obviously there 
are those people who don’t want change and you know I speak 
to that in my report. But there’s a lot of professionals who say 
to me that they know that changes are required and they want a 
system that will be satisfying to work in. 
 
And I think there’s a change out there. I think there’s a 
willingness to change. I think there’s also a willingness in the 
public — and you people are the, are clearly much more expert 
on this than I am — but I detected a lot of willingness to look at 
some changes in the health system. Because people 
fundamentally know it’s not working. Now they may not like 
the change, specific change that I’m recommending, but I think 
in their heart they know that we need to change. 
 
And I had a number of people give me comments privately that 
the health system has to change and let’s get on with it. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I also want to talk about . . . we 
talked about recruitment and retention for a bit, and there’s been 
a theme actually through several questions, that it’ll change the 
way doctors practice in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Do you see that it’ll be difficult for communities to attract 
doctors to practice in community care centres or primary health 
care settings? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Many communities are having difficulty 
currently recruiting physicians. I think that if we focus on the 
job satisfaction and the workloads, it will actually make it 
easier. 
 
And I think I answered before the break that, when you look at 
the last 10 years, the number of physicians has been very stable. 
There’s been specific situations where there’s a difficulty 
whether . . . in the specialist’s area. 
 
But I think that physicians are willing to look at new ways of 
working, especially a lot of our younger physicians clearly want 
to look at ways of . . . many said to me and, you know, 
obviously may not represent the, obviously, not the total 
profession but many physicians said to me that they would like 
to look at alternate forms of payment. They’d like to look at 
ways that would let them focus on quality rather than where 
they’re having to focus on volume to make a decent income. So 
I think there’s a willingness. 
 
Ms. Junor: — The comment that leads me to ask that question 
was, that if we don’t have a hospital, we can’t have a doctor. 
And I think that you said doctors will come to practice in 
different ways and they seem to be open to that. 

So now my next question, again along the same line, is your 
proposal to pay doctors differently. And how do you see that 
helping with recruiting or how do you see it actually 
happening? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — What’s important in changing to primary health 
services networks is mainly how physicians are organized. 
That’s probably the most critical. There’s probably no 
individual way of paying physicians that is ideal. 
 
I would want to see us reimbursing physicians though in a way 
that will encourage quality and not volume. But I’m not saying 
that the fee-for-service would have to go in every situation. The 
payment method, I believe, should be open to discussion with 
the physicians and the districts when we implement . . . if the 
province implements a primary health service. 
 
So I’m being open on that because I think there’s alternate ways 
of paying physicians that will be appropriate and still focus on 
quality and not on volume. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I now want to ask some questions 
about information. I have a keen interest in SHIN 
(Saskatchewan Health Information Network), of course, and I 
think when you’re talking about quality, you need to have 
information. And I think you mentioned that in your report. I’d 
like you to expand on how you see . . . what importance you see 
of information technology and gathering of information. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Well there’s an old saying that if you don’t 
measure it, you don’t manage it. And we don’t measure very 
well in the health system because we lack the information. This 
is not unique to Saskatchewan. Indeed Saskatchewan has done 
some . . . has initiated a number of innovative programs like the 
one you referred to. 
 
I am recommending that there be investments put into, one of 
the things is information and communications technology — 
the electronic client record. I think that a lot of the quality 
issues that we face today is the inability . . . a lot of the quality 
issues and a lot of the waste is the fact that we don’t have good 
information systems. 
 
Tests are done here and you’re referred to another physician and 
all those tests are done again. And with the technology today, it 
would be so much easier to have that information available to 
all the providers who are providing services to that client. 
 
The other aspect of information that is part of the electronic age 
is Telehealth. And I refer to the use of Telehealth. And there are 
some pilot projects in the province where some of our rural 
communities could be connected to physicians in regional 
centres or Regina and Saskatoon, where Telehealth could be 
used to treat and deal with patients so they do not have to travel 
those distances. 
 
So information technology is one of the investments that I’m 
recommending that the province consider. 
 
Ms. Junor: — It leads me then to the quality council itself. And 
some people will think of the quality council as perhaps just 
another bureaucratic arm of government. Could you explain 
how you see the quality council operating and its benefits to the 



620 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

system? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I consider the recommendation of the quality 
council one of the, one of the most important recommendations 
in my report. It will emphasize and assist in changing the 
culture to one based on evidence and quality rather than 
volumes and anecdotes. 
 
I see the quality council as being arm’s-length from 
government, and arm’s-length from the professions; 
independent arm’s-length, but not a decision-making body. I 
think it would be more effective . . . I think it will be more 
effective if it’s a body that contemplates some of these very 
important, very critical issues around quality, around where is 
the best place for a certain program to be located given the 
volume of patients and the skills and training of the professions. 
 
It may . . . I see it maybe commenting on where new technology 
might be introduced and how it might be introduced. It may 
even, indeed, take over the wonderful work that this province 
has been known for across this country in the drug formulary 
committee, in the . . . so that it will be a body that will look at 
the quality assessment, the performance of the health system, 
and report to the public. 
 
So it will be a body that will be speaking to the public about 
accountability and performance of the health system from a 
quality perspective. 
 
Ms. Junor: — We have somewhat of that role right now being 
played by HSURC, Health Services Utilization and Research 
Commission. How do you see those two interacting? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I see the quality council expanding its mandate, 
and eventually those responsibilities that HSURC are carrying 
on that would . . . could be combined into a quality council. In 
other words, the quality council could take the responsibilities 
of HSURC. It could indeed take the responsibilities of the 
formulary committee and if . . . to fulfill their mandate. 
 
There’s a lot of good work has been done in this province under 
. . . with HSURC. It’s work that’s recognized across this 
country. So I see the good things of that being built in the 
quality council. I see the people on the quality council as 
individuals who are knowledgeable about quality, are people 
who are . . . represents the professions, the general public, and 
possibly the university, as people we could draw from. 
 
(17:15) 
 
But people who are not representing . . . wearing certain hats 
around that table to represent the interests of a certain group. I 
see them coming there and representing the interests of the 
people of Saskatchewan on . . . focused on quality, and how do 
we ensure we have quality, and how do we measure that 
quality, and how to report to the public. The public have a right 
to know, and I think it’s time that we put a mechanism in place 
that will provide the public with that feedback on the 
performance of their system. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Now we talk a lot about quality in the system 
and switching to quality rather than quantity in your report. Can 
you define for us, quality? 

Mr. Fyke: — Quality is many dimensions. Quality is indeed 
doing the right thing for the right reason and doing it well. My 
report defines quality from the Institute of Medicine in the 
United States: 
 

Quality of care is the degree to which health services for 
individuals and populations increases the likelihood of the 
desired health outcome, and are consistent with current 
provincial knowledge. 
 

Essentially it boils down to doing the best possible job with the 
resources available. It also has an aspect of what I call 
underuse, overuse, and misuse of the health services. In other 
words, quality can minimize misuse, overuse, and underuse. 
 
And some of the underuse I could refer to is insufficient 
management of diabetes leading to complications and 
amputations, insufficient attention to mental health concerns. 
 
In misuse I could use the example of inappropriate prescribing 
of antibiotics, unnecessary duplicate testing, use of emergency 
rooms when other options . . . due to the lack of other options, 
and allocating a lot of resources to treatment when we should be 
putting more resources into prevention. 
 
And overuse could be the use of hospital beds for non-acute 
patients, unnecessary routine use of ultrasounds and other tests, 
and it could even be abdominal surgery for gallbladder removal 
when laparoscopic procedures would be more appropriate. 
 
So it’s using the latest . . . what is the quality standard, and of 
course that quality standard changes year after year. But that’s 
how I, in a very broad way, how I would define quality. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The current time allotment has expired. 
And just before I recognize the opposition, hon. members, it’s 
come to my attention that some conversations, especially at, 
down at this end of the Assembly, can be a little bit — given 
our acoustics and set up — can interfere a little bit with our 
guest. So I just ask that, especially at this end of the Chamber, 
members if they do have conversations amongst each other to 
go back behind the bar if they could. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I too would 
like to express my thanks to you, Mr. Fyke and your officials, 
for being here. I would also ask you to take my remarks as not 
being disrespectful but certainly being very frank and forthright. 
 
I believe that many of us expected a better case to be made and 
a better defence for the recommendations in your report than 
we’ve received. I think they’ve been a little lacklustre. 
 
I think also, Mr. Fyke, you have avoided taking stands on some 
of the more difficult issues and that does not help in our 
discussion here today. It seems that what you’re saying is, just 
adopt my report; Saskatchewan will have better health care 
because I say so. And that’s a real concern. 
 
You talk about the primary health care teams and that’s a 
fundamental block in your plan. And there was a wise person 
— I think it was perhaps King Solomon — who in a proverb 
said nothing is new under the sun. 
 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 621 

 

And you were asked if you could give illustrations of where this 
plan has worked somewhere else. And I don’t think you 
actually did give us an example of where this has worked 
somewhere else, but you said there would be some risk 
involved. And given the fact that your commission was actually 
demanded because there are concerns about our health care 
system, obviously there are lacks now because we took some 
risks and the risks didn’t pay off in the past. 
 
And it rings a little hollow to say just because I say this will 
work, you know trust me; let’s go ahead; let’s jump in with both 
feet and assume that these health care teams are going to 
suddenly, with the waving of a magic wand, appear. I mean 
health care professionals are very difficult now to recruit. There 
is a shortage of health care professionals in Saskatchewan at the 
current time. And I’m not just talking about doctors, nurses. 
We’re talking about anaesthetists. We’re talking about 
paramedics. We’re talking about a whole host of health care 
providers. 
 
You know in reading your report, I see no reason to believe that 
suddenly there’s going to be a flocking of people into the 
profession; that people are going to rush into Saskatchewan to 
fill a void that is already here. And so that leads one to conclude 
that actually health care may, may deteriorate rather than 
improve. 
 
The result being that, for instance in my part of the world, there 
will not be an acute care facility not only within the boundaries 
of the riding I represent but within many miles of the boundary. 
And notwithstanding there will be additional pressure on the 
tertiary centres of Saskatoon and Regina, and certainly many 
people then from within the urban areas will feel a strain in 
their health care system. 
 
So my question is, why didn’t you provide us a stronger 
defence for the recommendations you’ve made? Why did you 
not give us concrete examples of where these initiatives have 
worked in other provinces, or if need be, in other parts of the 
world? Why am I just to believe that suddenly, magically these 
gaps in our system will be filled simply because your report 
says they will? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you for your comment and question. I 
appreciate that. I would only direct you to 27 pages of 
bibliography in my report — 27 pages. There is one thing that I 
made every effort to do and that is reference every suggestion 
that I could possibly find in the literature and reference either 
through research in Saskatchewan, research in Canada, or 
research in the United States. 
 
And the other comment I would make is that there are some 
very important professions, very important professions in this 
province that have come out and said that this report is sound 
— the Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association, the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
So I have made every effort that I can to justify my . . . to back 
up my arguments and my case. 
 
On page 98 I list what’s going on across Canada in primary 
health care development. 
 

I will stand by the comment I did make a little while ago that 
change is risky. I appreciate that. But this province has taken 
many risks in the past and not only in the health industry, other 
industries have taken risks and need to take risks sometimes to 
move ahead. 
 
So I do appreciate your comments and I very much respect 
those comments, but I would suggest that I have put a lot of 
references and bibliography in this report to back up my 
arguments. 
 
In regard to your constituency that . . . as far as getting care, all 
the people in your constituency, in your riding will have access 
to needed services. They will be delivered differently, but I will 
maintain again that if you have an effective primary health 
services, effective emergency services, that those services will 
be of a higher quality than what is being delivered there today. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you for those comments but 
that’s still not reassuring because that was the exact same 
commitment that was made to me as a resident of Saskatchewan 
about 10 years ago. And the result was that health care 
deteriorated to the point that your commission had to be struck 
and we have to review how we can provide better health care to 
the people of Saskatchewan — not because it’s good now but 
because it’s not good, because it needs to be improved. 
 
I’m not questioning that you have searched and researched well 
and you have resources, which you identify in your report. But 
they tend to more or less ratify your contentions there are 
shortcomings and failures in the system. 
 
In other words we have a problem with diabetes in 
Saskatchewan rather than again showing that some of the 
recommendations that you have suggested, particularly the one 
I mentioned about these primary health care teams, actually 
working. And again I gave you an opportunity to defend and to 
tell us how these teams would be recruited and how they would 
work, but you’ve just said that health care will be better without 
saying how that would be achieved. 
 
In the Canada Health Act there are the five tenets to which we 
all hold. And one of them is accessibility. And when the Canada 
Health Act was written, I think the greater concern was that 
health care would not be denied people because of lack of 
funds. And of course we all agree that that shouldn’t happen. 
 
But what has happened is accessibility is not provided simply 
because of a rationing of health care. In other words, waiting 
lists have gotten longer and it’s becoming a more urgent issue 
all the time. It’s certainly becoming very, very much a concern 
in Saskatchewan because we have the longest waiting lists in 
the entire country. 
 
Now the Canada Health Act says something to the effect that 
reasonable access to ensure health care services should not be 
impeded. And quite frankly they seem to be impeded simply 
because there are not enough professionals in the, you know, in 
some of the key areas. There are long waiting lists and they’re 
getting longer and longer for more and more emergent health 
care needs. 
 
There’s a clause in the Canada Health Act that uses the “where 



622 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

and as available” rule. And I would have hoped that in your 
report you would have attempted to clog that loophole because 
as long as there is an as “where and as available” rule, we can 
have no health care in this province and we are not in 
contravention of the Canada Health Act. 
 
In other words we can continue to ration health care to the point 
that waiting lists become even longer than they are now, and no 
one thought that there would be as many people on the waiting 
lists in Saskatoon and Regina as we currently experience. This 
is frightening in two respects. It’s frightening because there will 
be vast regions of the province with unsatisfactory service and 
they will have to go to a regional health care centre or to a 
tertiary centre for more and more of their health care service. 
 
But it’s also frightening because that means that our major 
centres, and particularly Saskatoon and Regina, will become 
more clogged than they are right now with people in a system 
that’s not meant to handle that many people. 
 
For instance, in your report you could basically argue that 
Moose Jaw should be just serviced with a health care centre and 
that the specialists serving the city of Moose Jaw would be 
better off in Regina where they’re part of a larger team, and 
everybody from Moose Jaw should come to Regina for most of 
their health care needs. You could make that argument because 
it’s only about 35 miles down the road. 
 
And yet I don’t think you would. I don’t think anyone in 
Saskatchewan would suggest that recommendation should be 
made, but there are other huge areas of the province which have 
20 or 30,000 people in which you were saying that they should 
not expect that same kind of reasonable health care service and 
that they should clog the systems in the larger centres. 
 
I don’t see anything in your report that adequately addresses, 
other than you talk about some procedural things like day 
surgeries and that sort of thing. But I don’t see anything beyond 
some of those recommendations which we’re already aware of 
that could be implemented to alleviate these frightening 
concerns about a rationing of health care in Saskatchewan to the 
point that the human pain and suffering is even more 
unbearable than it is at the current time. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you. I’d like to read page 11, the quote by 
the College of Physicians . . . Family Physicians of Canada; 
College of Family Physicians of Canada. Quote: 
 

The success of health care reform in Canada will rest with 
the establishment of family medicine group practice 
networks, and with closer collaboration of family 
physicians with other health care providers as part of 
effective multi-disciplinary health teams. The success of 
heath care reform will be realized with a strengthened 
rather than diminished role for Canada’s family physicians. 

 
That is one of the quotes and one of the many references and 
many pieces of material that I read in preparing my report. 
 
In regard to wait-lists, I would comment that there are indeed 
people that are waiting unduly for procedures that shouldn’t. 
But why? It isn’t for the lack of surgery in this province. It isn’t 
for the lack of capacity in this province. 

(17:30) 
 
We have an admission rate, as I indicated earlier, 41 per cent 
higher than the national average. In 11, 11 out of 16 surgical 
procedures across Canada, 11 out of 16, Saskatchewan leads in 
a standardized rate, number one, 11 out of 16. 
 
What I’ve indicated about wait-lists, I’ll . . . I’d like to just say 
it again that what is needed in the wait-list issue is better 
management, not more money. And I would again suggest that 
just pouring more money into the same system is exactly what 
we have been doing for the last 20 years, and it hasn’t worked. 
Wait-lists have got longer. The more money you put in, 
wait-lists get longer. 
 
So I believe that that supports the premise that we have to focus 
on something different. We have to start focusing on quality. 
We have to focus on outcomes. We have to focus on 
performance and accountability, and only then will we have a 
sustainable system. Just throwing more money at the system 
today will not sustain it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair, and 
welcome to Mr. Fyke. Mr. Fyke, I want to pose a couple of 
questions only, and I know time is of the essence. I have had a 
number of concerns raised by people in the Canora-Pelly 
constituency, specifically from the communities of Kamsack, 
Preeceville, and Canora. And Dr. Cornelius VanZyl who heads 
a team of physicians, general physicians, in that area, a very 
strong team that are currently delivering health care through 
acute care beds, both in the communities of Kamsack, Canora, 
and Preeceville, are delivering a very adequate acute care. 
 
And they take great exception to your comments that the small 
hospital is obsolete. And I guess the question is what is the 
definition of small, first of all? And in your definition of closing 
at least 50 hospitals, they believe that you have not listened to 
them. And their proposal was put forward that there is a need 
for tertiary care centres, that there is a need for regional quote 
“secondary” acute care centres, but there is also a need for 
primary acute care deliverers. 
 
And that proposal was put forward, and they’re wondering 
where that disappeared because you have not looked at that at 
all. And as a result, the pediatric needs in those communities 
that I have identified, the seniors’ needs for geriatric care, the 
acute asthmatic concerns, in fact, Mr. Fyke, the cardiac 
concerns of people like myself, who have been addressed at 
those very hospitals that I just mentioned, will not be met. They 
will not be met because now you’re suggesting that we have to 
move on to the next level, which is a regional centre, and I’m 
assuming that that probably is Yorkton. 
 
So those facilities that I just mentioned lose their acute care 
status. The concern that Dr. VanZyl expresses, and all of the 
physicians and health care providers in that area, is that without 
acute care, there is no reason for them to stay. They are 
providing a great level of care, acuity in many respects, and as a 
result of closure of that type of facility, they must leave because 
their practices will not be sustainable. So that is a concern that 
they have. 
 
So the question, I guess the general question, Mr. Fyke, is what 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 623 

 

happened to the proposals by people like Dr. VanZyl and a 
number of people who said we need to have primary acute care 
facilities, as well as the two recommendations that you’ve 
made? And how do you expect health care providers and 
physicians to stay in those centres once you’ve eliminated the 
acute care? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Well first of all, that care will still be provided 
there. There is acute care that can be given in home care. Home 
care can be acute care . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well it 
can. You can give acute care in homes and it has been given 
across this country right today. 
 
As far as the pediatric, the child that you referred to, that will 
still be handled through the primary health services team and I 
expect those physicians to be integral parts of that team . . . an 
integral part of that primary health services team. 
 
The elderly and dealing with chronic disease — I think you 
referred to the elderly — the everyday services can still be 
provided in that community by those physicians or by advanced 
clinical nurses or whatever the appropriate professional may be. 
 
As far as the physicians leaving, there may be some that will 
say they will leave. But I believe that those physicians will find 
their workloads, their quality of life, and working within a team 
to be very satisfying, and I suspect and I believe that the 
majority of them will stay. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. You know, Mr. Fyke, 
Dr. VanZyl says that the team approach in the Assiniboine 
Valley District is something that he supports and is part of right 
now. And they work very, very co-operatively with home care 
and with all of the other providers to ensure that the needs of 
the people are met. That’s number one for physicians in the 
area. 
 
And I want to tell you a little bit about Dr. VanZyl. Dr. VanZyl 
is a South African doctor and we’re very fortunate in this 
province to have many very competent doctors from South 
Africa. He was part of a management team in the early ’90s that 
went through this very process, I think, that you’re suggesting. 
 
And in the early part of the ’90s, South Africa moved in exactly 
the same way. They closed many, many small hospitals, moved 
towards regional hospitals, and then tertiary care centres. 
 
And I’m wondering if you, if you’ve studied that approach 
because Dr. VanZyl tells me in his two years in the 
management centre of a strong, of a very large tertiary centre in 
South Africa, that the problems that developed where 
everybody flocked to the tertiary care centre because there was 
no acute care delivery at the small local levels resulted in the 
fact that the government of South Africa had to close the 
tertiary care centres for a while and actually move everything 
back out to those primary, acute care hospitals that they now 
have. It was a failure. It was a system that failed. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Fyke, if you’ve had a chance to look at 
the South African model of the 1990s or any other country for 
that matter that is looking at health reform and is trying to meet 
the needs of the people? 
 

Because if you want, Dr. VanZyl’s available to discuss this with 
you, and many other doctors in Saskatchewan are available to 
discuss this with you, to show you that the combination that 
needs to be developed is probably somewhere in between where 
we are today and what you’ve recommended. 
 
But that their concerns are that the availability of care for 
people in the cities, in those tertiary care and regional centres 
that you talked about, that you propose — those 20 locations — 
that we may end up in the same situation as South Africa. That 
we will experience high cost of delivery of care at those levels 
and we’ll have to close those facilities and back up to what we 
have maybe today or at some other level. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I thank you. No, I want to make it very clear that 
my report will not force everyone into Regina and Saskatoon. 
Regina . . . indeed some of the services that are offered in 
Regina and Saskatoon could go back to the 10 to 14 regional 
centres. I am in no way suggesting that all acute care come into 
Regina and Saskatoon. I’m talking about highly specialized care 
where there are highly trained specialists or sub-specialists that 
are not in the regional centres. So I’m looking at regional 
centres giving your basic medical, surgical, maternity, and the 
wide range of acute services. 
 
The everyday services that people require which is, as I’ve 
stated before, those will be available in that community, in your 
community. They will be there for the citizens of that 
community. When they require, when they require a serious 
acute care, specialist’s care — heart attack, broken leg, other 
very acute services — they would go to the regional centre, one 
of the 14 regional centres. Or in case of a heart attack, would 
probably come into Regina or Saskatoon. 
 
That is the way that I’m recommending. That is indeed very 
close to the way that it’s being delivered today. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The time allotted for the current time of 
questioning has expired. The Chair has been asked if we could 
take a recess for one-half hour before coming back again. I’d 
ask, are committee members agreed to recess for half an hour? 
We will stand recessed for one-half hour at which time we will 
be returning for questions. 
 
And I’d ask the Sergeant-at-Arms if he could signal members 
five minutes before that time. 
 
The committee recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Committee will come to order please. 
Order please. I’d like to call the committee to order, and up to 
the next 20 minutes I’ll recognize questions from government 
members. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Fyke, I want to add my welcome to the welcome that others 
have extended to you in the Assembly. And thank you for the 
work you’ve done in putting together a very comprehensive 
report. 
 
I want to ask a number of questions with respect to the 
proposed structure of health districts and the restructuring in 
effect that you’re recommending in this report. You 



624 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

recommended a significant decrease in the size of the . . . or a 
significant decrease in the number of health districts in the 
province. And I want to get at why you think it’s necessary for 
a substantial reduction in the number of districts. 
 
As you know, there are difficulties associated with further 
reducing the number of health districts in the province. 
Amalgamation is a tricky business. It’s often difficult for staff 
and creates some uncertainty. It involves a merging of various 
health unions, because you may have CUPE (Canadian Union 
of Public Employees) representing one health district and 
SGEU (Saskatchewan Government and General Employees’ 
Union) representing another in terms of a lot of the health care 
staff. 
 
(18:15) 
 
So given some of the difficulties that are involved in reducing 
the number of districts, and given the fact that, as you point out 
in your report there aren’t a lot of administrative savings 
involved in reducing the number of districts, could you explain 
for us why you think that it’s critical to significantly reduce the 
number of health districts in the province? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you. You’re quite correct. The rationale 
for recommending a reduction in the districts is not the 
administrative saving, even though it may be a small 
administrative cost saving, but that is not the reason. 
 
The reason is, when the health districts were formed nine or 10 
years ago, there has been quite a shift in the population and 
we’ve seen a number of districts grow smaller. Secondly, I’m 
asking the districts to take on a lot of additional responsibilities 
in the area of emergency service, in the area of primary care 
reform. So you need the capacity within the districts to carry 
out those extra and very important responsibilities. 
 
The exact number of districts, there’s probably no correct 
answer of exactly one number. When you look at the research 
again, you’re looking at other areas of Canada. In Alberta the 
average size of a district is about 20,000. The Institute for 
Research on Public Policy at Queen’s University recommends 
that we should have a size district, for proper infrastructure of 
everything, of about 100,000 people. 
 
So I looked across the country and looked at British Columbia 
with 11 regional health boards and Alberta 17, looked at what I 
was asking them to do. I also learned that there is some 
difficulty in recruiting really qualified administrative staff for 
32 districts. There’s certainly a difficulty in coordinating the 
work of the districts. There is examples where the are districts 
competing with each other for recruitment of staff, and 
difficulty in sort of having a unified policy across the province 
in a number of areas. 
 
So I felt that there had to be a significant reduction so that the 
size of them would be larger and be able to sustain the 
responsibilities that I was recommending for them. I concluded 
that 12 to . . . sorry, 9 to 11 would be a reasonable number. I left 
again some flexibility there when we proposed one model of 9 
with the borders on the amalgamation of the districts, and 
another one was 11. I thought that it would be prudent to leave 
the final decision again to when the government and the 

districts sit down and talk about whether the boundaries should 
go within this district or on the other side of it. So there’s some 
flexibility between 9 and 11. 
 
I will certainly be the first to admit that it’s a judgment call, 
because it’s hard to find evidence as to what is the optimum 
size. I’m convinced though that some of our districts are too 
small and, you know, if the final decision, instead of 9 to 11, it 
was between 10 and 12 or somewhere around that, that 
wouldn’t bother me, not that it need bother me. But that would 
certainly work for the province. 
 
The important thing is that we have a number of districts that 
can carry out the responsibilities that will be assigned to them, 
are able to look at what is best for the total province so that we 
can have a provincial response to many things so there isn’t 
sometimes a decision made by one district that has implications 
in the other districts and there’s poor communication. 
 
And, sorry, there was one other point that it’s just escaped me. 
 
But that was the rationale for a significant decrease to 9 to 11. 
 
Sorry, there was one more point I would like to make. It’s 
important that the districts, no matter what size they are, put 
mechanisms in place to make sure they receive the input of the 
public in the communities they serve. And I see this input 
coming from the various communities into the primary health 
services networks and also into the district boards and 
management. And it’s important that those priorities of the 
smaller communities are recognized in the boards. 
 
I know that there’s some concern that these districts are maybe 
too large. I don’t believe they are. When you look at 
Saskatchewan, we’ve got a large land mass but we only have a 
million people. And some groups said to me, how much 
infrastructure can we have for a million people. 
 
So I think the balance that I came down with, looking at all the 
factors, was in a range of 9 to 11 or 12 — 9 to 11. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Just as a follow-up on that, one of the things 
that I noted in the report is that you envision a fairly significant 
change in the relationship between the district boards and the 
province. And I know that one of the things that I find as a 
member of the legislature in my own riding is that a lot of my 
constituents have the expectation that ultimately the province is 
responsible for the big decisions around health care. And I have 
a lot of people phoning me to address questions that perhaps 
their health board representative might address, but they look to 
their member of the legislature to address these. 
 
So I’m wondering if you can explain for us . . . I certainly have 
a lot of my constituents who are looking for the province, I 
think, to play a somewhat more significant role than we have in 
the last few years. And I’m wondering if you can explain for us 
what role you see the province playing in terms of health care 
delivery decisions? And what roles you see the district health 
boards playing? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — This is an issue raised with me by a number of 
the health districts, and particularly by SAHO. There appears to 
have been misunderstandings in the past on what is the 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 625 

 

respective roles and responsibilities of the districts versus the 
provincial government. I established a broad guideline that said 
that the provincial government of course sets the policy 
framework and sets the standards, and the districts manage and 
evaluate those services. 
 
There are some who are looking for a partnership, and I say in 
my report that it is not a partnership. There’s clearly delineated 
lines of accountability up through to the Minister of Health, and 
the Minister of Health is responsible through the government to 
this . . . to the ultimate authority of this Legislative Assembly, 
and that that accountability must be very clear. 
 
On the other hand the districts, I believe, once the policy 
direction is set, they should be left to manage within their . . . 
within those parameters, as long as they must always recognize 
that if they make a decision that has province-wide 
implications, then obviously the Minister of Health and the 
Department of Health and the government are going to have to 
deal with that issue so that there is a proper policy decision and 
proper implementation of that policy from a provincial 
perspective. 
 
In a province the size of Saskatchewan, with one million 
people, I think it’s always going to be the reality that the 
average person on the street will go directly to the Minister of 
Health for a lot of these issues. I think the Minister of Health 
has got to be careful at times that they do not get pulled into 
some of these issues, that they refer them back to the district to 
deal with. But I accept your point that a lot of the members of 
the public see the Minister of Health as the one that’s 
responsible. And that was probably some of the rationale for 
some people suggesting to me that we really only need one 
district for the province. 
 
And if you look at a community district like Calgary, Calgary 
serves 1.3 million people with one district. But I felt with the, 
coming back to your previous question, I felt that one district 
for Saskatchewan was not workable and therefore I 
recommended the 10. 
 
But I outline in my report, on page 59, the roles and 
responsibilities for the provincial government and the district as 
one suggestion for both the delivery of specialized services 
province-wide and the delivery of primary health services. 
 
It is clear — this is my last comment — it is clear that the 
province must develop, in my opinion, one health plan for the 
province and that there be a provincial perspective. You need 
community input, but on the other hand what’s critical for a 
province with a million people is that there’s one provincial 
plan for specialized services and the delivery of primary health 
services. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Just one other question on structure. And this 
builds on a comment that you already made with respect to 
small communities. 
 
And if your plan was to become provincial policy, in the event 
that it did become provincial policy, obviously we’d have much 
bigger health districts. And I think in rural Saskatchewan 
there’d be some smaller communities who feel that they’ve got 
a real voice right now in their health district but might feel with 

a much larger district that their voice may not be adequately 
heard. 
 
So I’m wondering if you’ve got . . . if you can elaborate on 
suggestions you might have about how the voices of smaller 
communities could be genuinely heard in the context of much 
larger health districts, particularly in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Again I would refer the hon. member to page 57 
when I talk about public participation and public engagement. 
And it is important that all communities have input into the 
priorities and the needs of their community. 
 
But I say there, many have talked about a number of . . . how 
you provide input, and I say a small population size is one way 
of encouraging public participation but it is by no means a 
guarantee. There is considerable evidence to suggest that larger 
districts can find ways to engage the public about how health 
services can and should be delivered. 
 
So just size alone does not guarantee community involvement 
and public input. I think the mechanisms have to be put in place 
so that there is a meaningful dialogue and a meaningful way of 
providing that input from the small community into a larger 
body. 
 
I heard a mixed message in some ways around the province on 
districts. There are some people who will say that we should 
leave the number of districts the way they are. They certainly 
were lots of others who said that we could have larger districts, 
and there were others who quite frankly wondered why we 
needed districts. 
 
So there’s a whole range of a kind of opinion out there, but at 
the end of the day I thought that in the area of 10 was 
appropriate. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — I’d like to change the area of questioning and 
look at a section of your report that deals with determinants on 
the quality of health that are not directly related to the delivery 
of health care services by the Department of Health. 
 
And I think you make a point in your report that I agree with, 
that we need to pay attention to the real determinants of health 
care, and that issues like addressing poverty and ensuring we 
have adequate housing, adequate nutrition in our . . . for all 
people of the province, is just as important as having good 
quality health care delivery services. 
 
So I’m wondering if you can elaborate on a recommendation 
that you make on page 42, where you say that we need to pay 
attention to strategies to address the broader determinants of 
health. Do you have any specific recommendations for the 
legislature about determinants that we should pay particular 
attention to; and that both with respect to policy development 
and also with respect to funding, and funding that wouldn’t 
necessarily be through the Department of Health but that would 
impact significantly on people’s health in the province? 
 
(18:30) 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I’m not sure if I have any unique suggestions to 
make other than I guess my whole report is almost focused on 



626 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

this, that if we don’t change the way we deliver health care, that 
we will indeed reach the point where we’re compromising the 
health of the population. Because health is more than health 
care — health is a good job, it’s an education. It’s other social 
support networks. It’s our physical environment. 
 
And I know that when I talked to people in the North, northern 
part of the province, their concern was focused on clean water 
and immunization. And the way that — well my report specifies 
some of these things in chapter 3 — the way that we will really 
change the system to one that deals with what I call upstream 
issues versus the downstream treatment models, is putting the 
. . . is organizing our primary health delivery system so that we 
can indeed focus on preventing illness. 
 
For example, coming back again to the large diabetic 
population we have in this province and ways of handling the 
diabetics from their onset of diabetes through understanding the 
disease, understanding how to live with the disease, 
understanding how you change your lifestyle to cope with the 
disease — all of those things — if there was more emphasis put 
on it, it would prevent a lot of the problems downstream which 
is not only poor quality, poor health care, poor health, it’s also 
expensive. 
 
So there’s the broad determinants. I don’t think I have anything 
unique to suggest other than we always have to keep in mind 
that health care has a contribution to the population health but it 
is somewhere in the . . . I don’t want to use numbers but the 
research would indicate that it’s somewhere in the 15 to 25 per 
cent impact on the health, whereas other issues in our lifestyle, 
jobs, etc., could contribute up to 75 per cent. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much for those comments. 
Just dealing with that same chapter, chapter 3 of your report, 
you also talk about the importance of a strategy for injury 
reduction and accident reduction, and this is a particular interest 
of mine. And I wonder if, during the course of your discussions, 
was there input from the Institute on Prevention of Handicaps? 
And could you elaborate on your advice with respect to new 
initiatives that we might take to reduce accidents and reduce 
injuries, in effect injury prevention and reduction in the 
province? 
 
I note with some interest that you see the primary health care 
teams as playing a very critical role in this regard. But I’m 
wondering if you have any specific suggestions about 
particularly province-wide policies that we might initiate that 
would make a significant difference in terms of injury 
reduction, accident reduction. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you. There’s a lot of good work in the 
intersectoral . . . intersectorally. The child action plan is one 
that’s . . . I believe there’s another example, but escapes me 
right now — it must be getting late in the day — that I should 
refer to. 
 
Again as I indicated on page 40 “Meeting the Health Needs of 
Northern Communities,” the deaths in the North are more likely 
the result of injury, violence, and lung disease, of heart, than 
others. So injury and violent deaths is very high. It’s not quite 
as high as heart disease, but it certainly is one of the highest 
ones. 

And that’s something that we’ll . . . as part of the northern 
health strategy that the northern communities are working on, 
which I support very much, in taking a broader approach to 
their health issues in the North. And they are very focused on 
again what I would consider as primary health services, not on 
the high tech end of it. The ones that for a very little cost has a 
great payback for the health of the people of the North. 
 
The Chair: — The Chair will now recognize questions from 
the opposition for up to the next 20 minutes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. 
Fyke, I was asking a number of questions when my time 
expired, and your answer was at the end of that time period. But 
your comments provoked a couple of comments now that have 
been generated from other people in the area that I represent. 
 
Mr. Fyke, the last wave of health reform produced 53 hospital 
closures of which Theodore and Norquay and Invermay were in 
the area of the east-central side of the province. And there is a 
very firm belief by the people in that area that health care 
services have not improved as a result of the closure of those 
three facilities. 
 
What has become accepted though of course is that the people 
who require acute care in those communities have to travel 
further, and the result is of course that the cost is now borne by 
the individuals who need to seek acute care in the communities 
of Preeceville or Kamsack and Canora. 
 
Your proposal of course suggests that the acute care in those 
facilities will also now be removed. And there is a firm belief 
that the people in those areas see this as a step backwards. They 
see this as the removal of a need, a service that it needs to be 
provided in that area. And as I mentioned before, the physicians 
that I’ve talked to you about who provide a team approach to 
delivery of the needs of the public in that area believe that acute 
care beds are necessary at those community levels. 
 
The question, Mr. Fyke, is that history has shown in the 
examples in South Africa and in other places that as you move 
up from the smaller acute care facility to the regional hospital to 
the tertiary care centre, that indeed the delivery of cost seems to 
be more expensive. 
 
In your research, did you find that to be true? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — The costs in a tertiary hospital are clearly more 
expensive than in a regional hospital because you are paying for 
high-cost infrastructure, and the cost of a regional hospital 
would be more expensive than providing primary care services 
which indeed are primarily what’s been provided in a small 
hospital. That’s why my report focuses on primary health 
services as a priority of the health care system because you get 
the biggest bang for the buck. 
 
And then coming back to what I believe your question was 
earlier, sir, I want to reiterate it that I am not suggesting that all 
of the acute care funnel into Regina or Saskatoon — not at all. 
Indeed some of the care that’s coming into Regina, Saskatoon 
could go back to the regional centres. 
 
I am proposing though that the acute care — that is truly acute 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 627 

 

care that requires the skills and the qualifications of people 
around the regional hospitals that can assure quality care — be 
delivered at the regional centre. And again at the local level, the 
everyday health services would be delivered through the 
primary health services network. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Fyke, one of the concerns that has been 
raised by people in those four communities that I just identified, 
that have hospitals by the way including Foam Lake, is that 
hospitals like the Regina General here in Regina or the Royal 
University who provide a specialized care and will do cardiac 
surgeries and will do all kinds of other surgeries that cannot be 
done in the smaller centres, that there is a need for those people 
who receive that care to be able to transfer back. They’re not 
yet in the stage of convalescent care; they’re still requiring 
acute care. 
 
Yet the people that administer these hospitals tell me right now 
that in many instances when receiving calls from the Regina 
General, they are full. Their acute care space that they have 
currently is being fully utilized. 
 
Under your proposal, if we are going to now close those 
facilities and only have acute care available at somewhere 
between 15 and 20 regional centres, where do you see the 
people of this province being able to receive acute care if 
indeed now we have longer waiting lists? We have examples of 
people who are waiting a year and a half to two years now for 
specific types of surgeries because those beds are occupied. 
 
We need to develop a system that works in the team approach. 
And again I’m referring to comments made by Dr. VanZyl who 
says we need to be involved at that local level as well. If there is 
a person from Canora who requires an additional three days of 
acute care and they’re currently in a bed in Yorkton Regional 
Hospital or in Regina General, they could be transferred back to 
that very facility in Canora or Preeceville or Kamsack as acute 
care patients. If you remove the acute care in those hospitals, 
they no longer can do that. 
 
How do you see this functioning in the province as a whole as 
we move towards reducing the length of time on waiting lists to 
be able to provide better services for all people in 
Saskatchewan? Because I hear you talk about equality and the 
need to ensure that everyone receives services. Well the people 
in the facilities that I just talked about are now going to have to 
rely on Yorkton or Regina as the place where they receive acute 
care after the specific 10 hours that you might have a primary 
health care centre open. 
 
I’d appreciate your comments. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you. First of all, I see the . . . well first of 
all, I want to back up and talk about the capacity. The capacity 
of beds required in this province to provide all of the acute care 
is about 3,000 beds. I reiterate again that Saskatchewan 
residents use hospitals more than any other Canadians — page 
27, 41 per cent more than any other Canadians. 
 
I agree with you that when you come into Regina or Saskatoon 
for specialist services, be it heart surgery or hip surgery or 
whatever it may be, after that acute phase which may be 9 or 10 
days or whatever, they could go back . . . and I would see them 

going back to a community care centre for their convalescent 
phase. They could do one of two things — they could go home 
to Canora on home care with visiting physiotherapists or maybe 
a visiting nurse, or they could go back to a community care 
centre for a period of time to convalesce and receive their 
physiotherapy and then possibly go home. 
 
So there’s two routes they would be able to be discharged out of 
Regina hospital to go back to their local community or home 
care or the community care centre for convalescing. 
 
The capacity in Regina and Saskatoon — they’re having 
concerns raised about whether there is enough capacity. There 
is if Regina and Saskatoon will be used for the tertiary services. 
And that is some of the services that are currently . . . that could 
currently be . . . or that are currently coming to Regina and 
Saskatoon could be done in the regional centres. 
 
So A, there is a capacity to provide acute care. What we’re 
probably debating is what is acute care. And that’s a difficult 
. . . that is a very difficult term to define. All again I would 
reiterate that acute care is being given successfully in home care 
and can be given . . . would be given in the regional centres and 
the tertiary centres. I do not classify convalescent as acute care. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — One final question, Mr. Fyke. Your 
comments I think may be misunderstood by some urban people. 
And I’m wondering if you could explain what would happen in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert if indeed tertiary care 
provision and those services now provided by a tertiary care 
centre for those facilities. Are residents then, in the city of 
Regina for instance, expected now to travel out to the regional 
hospitals that are now outside of the city to obtain the kind of 
care that would no longer be available even though it’s called 
acute care? Because now you’re expecting that description to 
change. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I would see Regina and Saskatoon residents 
receiving their, what they would normally call services from a 
regional hospital, they would receive those in Regina and 
Saskatoon. 
 
On the other hand, I want to reiterate for the people of rural 
Saskatchewan that when they require a tertiary, highly 
specialized bed in Regina or Saskatoon, they should have claim 
on that bed based on their need rather . . . over whether it’s a 
citizen from Regina or a citizen from Yorkton, they should have 
that claim on that bed based on their need. 
 
Regina and Saskatoon residents would still go to Regina and 
Saskatoon for services that the Yorkton residents may receive in 
Yorkton. But what I’m saying that some of the services could 
go back. I am told by physicians that there are services that 
come into Regina and Saskatoon now that could be looked after 
in a regional hospital. 
 
(18:45) 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Fyke, I guess as I’ve been listening today 
your comments and answers to many of our questions have 
raised many, many more concerns and many more questions 
which time just does not permit for me to ask. 
 



628 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

But I would just like to make a comment about your answer to 
the member from Canora-Pelly about releasing patients from 
acute care and how they are going to be looked after when they 
go back to their home constituency. And I think if you’ll look at 
the case today is that because of being released from hospital 
too soon there are many cases of repeated hospitalization and 
added cost to the system and much undue hardship for people 
that are required to do this. So I would hope that that whole area 
would be revisited by yourself. 
 
The member from Canora-Pelly also raised some of the issues 
that I would also like to reiterate but from a different 
perspective. Some of the concerns he raised have also been 
raised by a Society of Rural Physicians of Canada and I would 
just like to quote from a news release that they issued: 
 

The Society of Rural Physicians of Canada cautions 
government from centralizing hospital services to the 
degree recommended by the Fyke Commission. The 
commission has recommended closing 71 per cent of 
Saskatchewan hospitals, which will increase travel time to 
a hospital to over an hour in good weather for 12 per cent 
of the population. 
 

They further comment: 
 

Hospitals are not Wal-Marts but more like grocery stores; 
they deal with perishables. Even if the distant hospital is of 
excellent quality, the results will not be as good for people 
who have to travel long distances to receive it. 
 

They further go on to say: 
 

A further irony is that it may cost more money to 
centralize. The cost per case in rural hospitals can be lower 
than that of larger hospitals even before you add in the cost 
of the ambulance. It is notable that the last series of hospital 
closures in 1993 did not save any money. 
 

And that is the end of their press release. And we all know in 
fact that health care costs have escalated in Saskatchewan, and 
yet the care has not . . . the cost has not been proven by the care 
received. 
 
I would like to ask you, Mr. Fyke, did you consult with the 
Society of Rural Physicians of Canada and them and others that 
are concerned with delivery of health care in rural situations? 
And secondly, how does your proposal to close 71 per cent of 
existing hospitals guarantee accessible quality care no matter 
where you live in Saskatchewan? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Mr. Fyke, just before you continue. Hon. 
members, just in the last couple of questions I think we’ve been, 
or the last two or three questions, we’ve been leading a little bit 
more to engage in Mr. Fyke, I think, perhaps in some debate 
here as opposed to some questions on the report. I think in the 
last question, certainly there is a question directly there about 
having consulted on the report, but then I think the second part 
of the question is definitely, I think, in the opinion of the Chair, 
leading to engage Mr. Fyke in some debate. And I just would 
like to remind members to . . . members, we’re here to ask 
questions of Mr. Fyke and his report . . . 
 

Order, order. Order. I’m directing that the questions be asked of 
Mr. Fyke dealing with his report, and I’m detecting that this is 
moving to a bit of debate and I’d just like to bring that to the 
hon. member’s attention, please. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you, I want to reiterate again, my report 
does not close 71 per cent of the hospitals in this province. My 
report recommends that 20 hospitals be converted to primary 
health centres. My report recommends that 25 to 30 hospitals be 
classified as community care centres, basically recognizing 
what they’re doing now as integrated health facilities. 
 
I would like to also let the hon. member know that I talked to 
many physicians, including the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association, the College of Physicians and Surgeons, and many 
individual doctors about the health care in this province. I do 
not recall speaking to the organization that you refer to, but I 
did speak to many other individual physicians. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Fyke, 
you indicated that primary health centres would provide care, 
and that our estimation of how many hospitals would be closed 
is incorrect. Are the primary health care centres providing acute 
care? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Primary health centres will be the location of the 
primary health service teams networks. They will be providing 
the everyday health services that people require. As far as the 
home care is concerned, they will be providing acute care in the 
homes. That is acute . . . in not all cases, but in some cases, it is 
acute care. 
 
Many services that a primary health services team will provide 
today, on an out-patient basis, a few years ago may have been 
admitted to hospital. What I define as required in a hospital are 
those where there is necessary for around the . . . intensive 
observation on a 24-hour basis, or the bringing together of skills 
and equipment that is required to provide the necessary care to 
that patient. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. I guess then we can 
conclude that the primary health centres do not provide acute 
care. 
 
I spoke to one RN (Registered Nurse) who works in the ICU 
(intensive care unit) in my constituency, and she has read your 
report and she has concluded that it does not address the reality 
of life in rural Saskatchewan which she deals with and works 
with every day. She notes your report implies we live in a 
perfect world where everything happens according to Hoyle, 
and we just don’t know that that is just not the way it is. 
 
This RN’s concern and many others in my constituency is that 
timely access to acute care and emergency services will not be 
available. We’ve asked you for the names of the hospitals that 
will be closed and I understand that you’re not willing to give 
those. And so there’s grave concern in Weyburn about that, 
because of our location to Regina and Estevan. 
 
But you have stated that you are endorsing the EMS 
(emergency medical services) report and their 
recommendations. Yet this study has been widely denounced in 
rural Saskatchewan as taking away local control and timely 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 629 

 

response to emergency. There have been many questions asked 
of doctors and citizens across rural Saskatchewan about how 
this EMS study could provide the services. 
 
There was a great loss of local control in 1993 when hospitals 
were closed in Saskatchewan and they are very concerned that 
this is now going to happen with emergency service and 
ambulance service. 
 
How do you justify endorsing this study, when indeed it does 
take away local control and it does take away timely access to 
emergency services? 
 
We have already had cases across the province where, now that 
the dispatch is in Yorkton, where valuable time has been lost 
because of the relaying of information back and forth. And yet 
if that information was directed right to the local ambulance 
deliverer, they would know where to go and they would provide 
service much faster. 
 
And I’m wondering how you justify endorsing this report. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I’m struggling with the last part of your question 
about the . . . not the timely access to the emergency. I’m sorry, 
I didn’t get the essence of your question. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Fyke, I’m wondering how you can . . . 
You’ve said you endorse the ambulance report and would 
implement their recommendations. 
 
Local control is going to be lost in delivery and as well as in, 
say, of how ambulance services deliver. Presently, we have a lot 
of volunteers that provide service. The people in the local areas 
know where locations are if someone phones up and says 
there’s someone had a heart attack at the local church. They 
know where to go. 
 
There have been cases in my constituency and I’m sure in all 
other MLAs’ constituencies where time, precious time has been 
lost because of a central dispatch system and having to relay the 
information. But the more important part I think is that they’re 
losing the actual control at the local level, same as we did in ’93 
with the hospitals. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Okay, first of all I want to clarify that the 
recommendations of the ambulance report that I specifically 
endorsed is a central dispatch, it is the equalization of the costs 
— the transportation costs, the patient portion — and it is to 
improve the services for all of Saskatchewan. It is also the fact 
that it is going to move to a 24 hour, 7-day-a-week service 
which a lot of the services, ambulance services in this province 
do not operate under now. So that the 24-hour service will be 
available throughout the province, not just in some 
communities. 
 
As far as the local control is concerned, I see the ambulance 
program being managed by the districts and how they contract 
with some of the local . . . I’m just not sure if the concerns that 
some of the local operators have are legitimate or not until they 
move towards implementation. 
 
I must conclude my comments though by saying that this report, 
all the details of it, were not carried out by me and I’m not, I 

must admit that I’m not that familiar with all the details of the 
ambulance report. But I do believe in reading the report, that it 
provides a much better service for rural Saskatchewan moving 
to 24/7 than the current inconsistency across the province. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The Chair will now recognize an 
additional 20 minutes of questions from the opposition 
members. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fyke, 
and associates, welcome today. 
 
I’ve been listening very carefully to the discourse this afternoon 
and this evening to gain an understanding of exactly what this 
report is about and why or why not we should accept it. And in 
listening very carefully to the report that’s cost the taxpayers $2 
million to prepare by yourself, I have heard a lot of things such 
as: I believe that this will happen, I suspect that this will be the 
case, or I recommend that we do this. But in this presentation 
and in the answers that you have been providing or not 
providing, Mr. Fyke — and in fact, it’s been a lot more of not 
providing than it has been in providing — in fact, I’d suspect 
and I feel that you have been relatively uncooperative with our 
questions. We have been asking some very specific questions 
related to your report and to the methodology that you used to 
come forward with your recommendations and you have not 
provided us with those answers. 
 
How are we to make a determination, Mr. Fyke, on this report, 
good or bad, when we’re being asked by you to accept the I 
believes, the I suspect, or the I recommends when you provide 
little to no evidence either today or in your report to support 
your conjecture? 
 
My colleague asked about the number of hospitals, the number 
of acute care facilities that would be in this province. You said 
you used a computer model, the latest technology to make this 
determination. And when he asked, based on what did you 
make your recommendations of three cities with tertiary care 
hospitals, six hospitals, 10 to 14 regional hospitals, your 
response was well I didn’t stick pins in the map. 
 
But what methodology did you use, Mr. Fyke, to make that 
determination? You’re saying 60-miles travel distance around 
some mythical circle that you expect us to believe is what 
Saskatchewan needs, and yet you do not provide us with the 
information to make a judgment on whether there is any 
validity to your claim. 
 
So, Mr. Fyke, I ask what methodology did you use? What 
circles did you draw on what map? 
 
(19:00) 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I believe I have been very clear in my report. I 
have recommended that specialized services be provided in 
Regina, Saskatoon, and Prince Albert. I have recommended that 
based on a population of one million and the size of this 
province and the capacity that the acute care system has to be, 
that we need 10 to 14 regional hospitals. 
 
And I’ve also recommended 25 to 30 community care centres 
and primary health centres. I believe that is very clear. I am 



630 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

using, I believe, because a part . . . there does in writing a report 
like this, you look at the information, you look at the research; 
at the end of the day you have to make a judgment call on some 
of these issues. 
 
In regard to the capacity of the acute care system, I will reiterate 
again: Saskatchewan has an admission rate 41 per cent above 
the national average. We currently use about 2,900 to 3,000 
beds. There is adequate capacity in those 10 to 14 plus the 
Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert to provide those services, and 
therefore there is logic in my recommendation. And as far as 
the proof, I will only reiterate again that the report is full of 
references, and there is a full and complete bibliography at the 
end. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. Yes, I read your 
bibliography at the end. And I doubt very many other people 
will go through and read all those resources that you used, and 
that’s why you were paid $2 million to do this so that the rest of 
Saskatchewan didn’t have to read those. 
 
But when you come forward and make a recommendation and 
what you call a judgment call, we’re being asked to make a 
judgment call also. And we need some of the information that 
you used to make your judgment call. Why won’t you provide 
that? What are you hiding? 
 
The Chair: — Order. I’ve listened to the last few questions 
here. And the Chair’s interpretation of the purpose of inviting 
Mr. Fyke and his colleagues before the board today is for Mr. 
Fyke to answer questions of members of this committee of 
questions to do with his report. 
 
The last few questions I would say that the, by and large, you 
know the committee has followed this all afternoon. By and 
large though, in the last few questions, the preambles to the 
questions that have been posed by many members, the Chair is 
starting to interpret as being debative, that these are engaging 
Mr. Fyke in debate. It’s up to this committee and the Assembly 
to debate each other, not with Mr. Fyke, in the opinion of the 
Chair. 
 
I would ask that all hon. members confine their questions, 
would minimize their preambles if they could, because I think 
the Chair’s interpretive of these as being debative, and please 
confine their remarks to questions of the report and of Mr. 
Fyke. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Point of order, Mr. Chairman. 
 
The Chair: — Point of order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Chairman, my point of order is that 
we have a witness before us today that we are asking specific 
questions on, who is not answering the questions. I would ask 
that Mr. Chairman instruct the witness to answer the questions 
properly. 
 
The Chair: — I think, hon. member, that the Chair has already 
ruled that the . . . that this is debate and we’re not here to 
debate. We’re here to ask questions, so I think that you . . . no I 
think you’re . . . the Chair’s interpreting this as being debate 
and I . . . we’re here to ask questions of the member, we’re not 

here to debate. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fyke, 
you have stated a number of times this evening that 41 . . . that 
Saskatchewan utilizes hospital services 41 per cent of the time 
more than Canadians. Do you have any statistical evidence of 
that? Do you have any breakdown of that statistical evidence? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I would refer you to page 27 of my report, 
hospital visits per thousand residents 1998-1999, adjusted for 
age and sex — Saskatchewan 133.4; Canadian average 96.7. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you . . . 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I’d like to site the source of that data. It is the 
Canadian Institute for Health Information, 2001. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. Mr. Fyke, what 
are the demographics of Saskatchewan based on seniors, youth, 
people ages 15 to 55? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — The data that I quoted to you is adjusted for age 
and sex. Standardized data adjusted for age and sex across the 
country . . . (inaudible) . . . variation and age. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. I wonder, though, 
if you would have the information available on the 
demographics of Saskatchewan — the percentages of seniors 
that we have in Saskatchewan compared to the national 
standard. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — We can provide that information and get back to 
you; I don’t have it with me tonight. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. Mr. Fyke, we 
know that there is a serious health issue amongst the Aboriginal 
community. I have three reserves in my constituency. This 
creates a great deal of difficulty in some of those areas. 
Statistics show, I believe, that the Aboriginal community 
utilizes the health care services at a greater extent than the 
Saskatchewan average. I wonder if you have any statistics on 
that, Mr. Fyke. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I have some data in the Challenges document that 
I tabled in October, but I don’t have that data with me now. 
We’ll have to get back to you on it. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Good evening, Mr. Fyke. I 
have a few questions that deal with research and education in 
that section of your report. In your report you make reference in 
numerous areas about the importance of research to our health 
care system and the integral role it plays in providing and 
maintaining quality health care in the province. 
 
In fact on page 65 of your report, you say Saskatchewan has no 
choice but to make a strong commitment to research. Recently 
the Canadian Institute of Health Research awarded some 410 
research grants. The province of Manitoba received eight of 
those awards, Newfoundland got a few, and the province of 
Saskatchewan got none. And this is something that has been 
going on for quite some time where we score very low in 
obtaining federal dollars for research and so on. 
 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 631 

 

The College of Medicine is an integral part of our research 
capacity in this province, and we all know of some of the 
serious problems that have been facing the College of Medicine 
in recent months and weeks. We have noted award-winning 
researcher of the College of Medicine, Dr. Roger Pierson, 
recently saying that if we don’t increase funding to the College 
of Medicine and fix some of the problems there, that we should 
perhaps close it. He compares the College of Medicine as a 
patient in critical condition. 
 
I was wondering, did you look at some short-term solutions to 
some of the problems at the College of Medicine, and if so, 
what would those short-term solutions be? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I met on more than one occasion with President 
MacKinnon of the university to discuss the issue around 
training of our health sciences professionals. I do recommend 
that we invest in health research for all the reasons that I 
reiterated earlier. 
 
I commented on the role and relationship between the College 
of Medicine and the Saskatoon Health District. I did not go into 
the specific issues in the College of Medicine for a couple of 
reasons. It was beyond my mandate and I knew that the 
president of the university was dealing with a lot of those 
issues. 
 
But I do support more dollars going into research. I believe it 
will bring more money into the province. That will be good for 
our province, it’ll be good for our universities, and it’ll be good 
for the people that are being trained. 
 
It’s important though that the College of Medicine and the 
Saskatoon Health District work out a relationship based on a 
role for education in the Saskatoon Health District and come to 
an understanding of their respective roles so that those 
difficulties that we were seeing and hearing about last fall will 
be resolved. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. I read with interest your 
recommendation of making the Saskatoon District Health 
region an academic health science centre. And I guess some of 
the questions that that part of your report raised was how would 
the university and the College of Medicine and Royal 
University Hospital and the Saskatoon Health District, what 
type of mechanism would have to be put in place so that there 
would be a smooth functioning to prevent turf protection and 
that sort of thing? 
 
And in your research, did you come across any models in other 
jurisdictions in Canada and perhaps elsewhere that could be 
looked at to perhaps we could pattern that sort of a change 
after? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I think, or I believe there is, or I know there is 
several examples in Canada. In Alberta there’s the relationship 
between the Capital Health Authority in Edmonton and the 
Faculty of Medicine in Edmonton. I know that those have been 
looked at by the officials in Saskatoon. 
 
And I’m quite confident that the University of Saskatchewan 
and the Saskatoon Health District will be able to structure an 
agreement that will recognize the priorities they all have in 

regard to research, education, and service. I’m quite confident 
that that can be done, and there’s no reason why it can’t be 
done. 
 
Mr. Hart: — I have one more question that deals with the 
health care professionals in the health care field. You indicate 
that your primary health services team require highly trained 
personnel to provide the services that would no longer be 
available once the hospitals were changed, and you require 
highly qualified people in the ambulances and that sort of thing. 
 
Did you look at the training capacity of the province to train 
and educate health care professionals that we have at present, 
and is it sufficient to provide the people that we’ll need in the 
future? Did you look at that area? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — My report touches on the need for the training 
programs to focus on interdisciplinary training and to focus on 
the needs of the health system when people graduate, and what 
I have outlined as to those important needs in primary health 
and rural health and the northern health issues. So that’s what 
my report speaks to, and doesn’t go beyond that in what my 
report covers. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening to Mr. 
Fyke and associates. Mr. Fyke, I want to continue along the line 
of questioning that refers to the needs of Aboriginal people in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(19:15) 
 
As I’m sure just about every member of this Assembly 
recognizes, Aboriginal people in Saskatchewan are suffering 
with a number of illnesses. They’re facing an epidemic of 
diabetes and substance abuse, FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome), 
teen pregnancies, and many problems related to a high 
incidence of children, Aboriginal children, exploited in the sex 
trade. 
 
Aboriginal children and Aboriginal people in general deserve 
and need mental and physical health services to assist them in 
their journey towards a wholesome and healthy life. 
 
Mr. Fyke, I am sure that by now you recognize also, as 
everyone else does, that historically Saskatchewan has had the 
highest infant mortality rate in Canada. And it has been 
recognized that a high percentage of those child deaths are 
deaths of babies and young children from Aboriginal 
communities. 
 
As the critic for Aboriginal Affairs and as a citizen I am very 
concerned, and I know that many First Nations people and 
Metis people are also concerned because they’ve come to me 
with these concerns. They are wondering how they fit into this 
system. We have a very complex problem in that we have many 
off-reserve Indian people living in urban centres. We also have 
people that are on reserves that are facing all of these illnesses. 
 
Now although you stated in your report, for instance, Mr. Fyke, 
that diabetes is a major issue, I don’t see any concrete 
suggestions on your part or recommendations that provide a 
road map to address that very important issue as well as the rest. 
I have to ask: how does the consolidation of health services and 



632 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

expanding the number of health managers address the very 
serious health issues pertaining to Aboriginal people? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you. I agree with you that the health of our 
First Nations and Aboriginal people is not up to the standard 
that we should have in this province. My report addresses it in 
two ways. 
 
Primary health services and the primary health service network 
is one way of dealing with the First Nations and the Aboriginal 
peoples problems. They are . . . the issues that they raised with 
me — one of them was what you indicated — is the high 
incidence of diabetes and that is clearly an area that a primary 
health services network would improve. 
 
The other recommendation that I make is sorting out the 
organizational — what’s the appropriate word — the 
jurisdictional issues around our First Nations people who are 
on-reserve and off-reserve. And I believe that the federal 
government and provincial government and the First Nations 
people and the districts need to sit down and work out in a 
structured way, in a structured dialogue as I’ve suggested, a 
way of dealing with these issues. Because there’s a lot of . . . 
there is duplication between what the federal government does 
and our own provincial health system. 
 
That is as far as I felt I could go in resolving this, and I think I 
do believe it goes a long ways. I can only say that if there is 
ever an example that clearly indicates the need for primary 
health reform it is in that area. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The current allotment is expired for this 
period of questioning. The Chair will now recognize questions 
from the government members for up to the next 20 minutes. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fyke, I’m 
wanting to ask about a different set of issues that had maybe not 
been addressed to a great extent yet today, and that pertains to 
the contracting of physicians and the contracting of specialist 
services. Could you explain to me what you mean by this term 
of contracting. Would this be in place of the current 
fee-for-service arrangements? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Currently in our system the physicians practise 
outside the system. They’re not part of the rest of the district 
structure. Many physicians have indicated to me that they want 
to be part of the system, as I think I referred to in my opening 
remarks. It is important if we’re going to have a lot of these 
issues dealt with, that we have one cohesive system that 
includes physicians and all of our providers. 
 
In order for the districts to operate the primary health services, 
it is important that the districts contract or employ all the 
providers on the primary health services teams. And I see that 
as . . . it could be a contractual arrangement. The way that the 
physician is paid for his services, I’m leaving open to some 
negotiation and discussion as long as it focuses . . . as long as 
the incentive for the physician’s payment is focused on quality 
rather than volumes. 
 
In regard to the specialists, I would like to see over the next 
number of years our physicians, our specialists, to come into the 
system as well and be part of the regional hospitals and the 

tertiary centres. 
 
Specialists are so critical to the health care services in this 
province. If we had a contractual arrangement with them, and 
they were being paid and remunerated in a way that would 
allow them to maybe go out into rural Saskatchewan and 
provide clinics and maybe in the regional centres, or even 
indeed be on a consultative basis to our primary health teams, 
and also working in a way that helps to manage our wait lists in 
a way that reduces the time line for patients on the waiting list, 
that the whole . . . that the system would work much better. 
 
We see many physicians in this province on alternate forms of 
payment and contractual arrangements with some of our 
districts. And I think there’s merit in sitting down with our 
physicians, the districts sitting down with their physicians and 
bringing them into the system and having them as part of the 
system and having their expertise. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. So am I correct to understand 
then that there would be basically parallel systems; that districts 
would have the option of contracting services with physicians, 
but some physicians may very well decide to stay on the 
fee-for-service basis? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I believe it will take some time to implement 
some of these recommendations. And I can see a situation 
where there may be some time before our primary care 
physicians . . . I would see the primary care physicians being 
the first to be brought into the primary care teams. I see 
probably some additional time left for the specialists to be 
brought into the . . . under the district structure. 
 
Again that’s up to the districts and the profession to sit down 
and discuss how the objectives of this report can be 
implemented. I think it’s important that the doctors and the 
SMA be involved in those discussions as to how we best do it. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you. I don’t want to move too far 
along that discussion except I am of the view that this is still 
one of those critical pieces in order to make this system work, 
that we would need to look very seriously at contracting, which 
will mean the physicians will need to . . . I don’t know what the 
appropriate word is. I don’t want to say buy in, but they will 
need to agree to these set of changes. 
 
I’m interested as to what sort of discussions you may have had 
during the course of your deliberations and your work on the 
report with the physicians around the province and what their 
views were. You’ve mentioned some physicians are interested. 
Did you meet a fair amount of resistance as well? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — There are people who resist it and there are 
people who . . . there are people who resist going off 
fee-for-service. And there are people who would dearly love to 
go off fee-for-service and move to alternate forms of payment. 
 
I’ve talked to physicians who are on alternate forms . . . 
alternate to fee-for-service, and they like it very much. I’ve 
talked to physicians who believe a fee-for-service system is the 
best way to go. I guess there’s a range. 
 
I believe there is some research done by the medical association 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 633 

 

in this province that indicated up to 50 per cent or a large 
number of physicians were willing to look at alternate forms of 
payment. One or two physicians that I talked to — I spoke to 
more than one or two — but one or two physicians I spoke to 
indicated that they . . . one was on an alternate form, the other 
one was on fee-for-service. But they both said that they would 
. . . the one that was on an alternate form of payment said he 
liked it very much, was able to manage his time and he didn’t 
have to worry about, I think what he said, the business end of 
running a physician practice. 
 
Another one, a fee-for-service physician, really lamented to me 
about not being able to focus on a lot of the chronic diseases 
that he felt he should be spending more time with his patients, 
because the fee-for-service system did not reward him for doing 
that. If you have a target income you have to put the volume . . . 
see the volume to get the income. 
 
So I think the medical profession is . . . there’s mixed feelings 
across the medical profession as to what is best. I think what we 
have to do is sit down and listen to the physicians and 
determine how best to approach. 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Along the same vein, in terms of the 
consolidation of services and the discussion you had with 
physicians, and I guess other health care providers, where we 
have highly specialized services currently in say Saskatoon and 
Regina, but we may not have a critical mass of them to be able 
to have an effective practice, or a high quality of service 
provision, what was the view of these people in terms of 
combining their practices and their teams and their resources 
into one centre? Obviously this would mean relocating in many 
cases if I understand the report correctly. Was there some 
support for this or is this a contentious issue? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Oh I guess I would define it as a contentious 
issue. I didn’t sit down with any particular group and discuss 
about bringing their practice in, but certainly I had discussions 
with people in the College of Medicine about the need that we 
look at focusing on programs that can ensure high quality 
services, and some of those may have to be one site in the 
province. 
 
At a theoretical level I think they would certainly agree, but I 
would have to define, if we did move that, we’d have to 
certainly look at all the implications of it and there would be 
some hurdles to overcome. 
 
There’s ways of doing that and I’ll have to just leave it, I 
believe, for the quality council to start looking at some of these 
programs and saying what they’re suggesting that there isn’t 
probably enough patients to have two programs or for whatever 
reason. 
 
There may also be other opportunities down the road if certain 
physicians left the province, or where there’s new programs 
started. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the member on her feet? 
 
Ms. Junor: — So I could ask a question. 
 
The Chair: — Apologies of the Chair. 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you. The Japanese have a saying that I 
think is loosely translated: fix the problem, not the blame. And I 
know some providers in the system may feel that they have 
some way contributed or had some part in the inadequacies or 
the deficiencies that have been pointed out in the report, and 
may feel that they’re to blame. 
 
What do you say to them? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I say we move on and look at the system as to 
how it can work better. I think the term I use: there’s no villains 
in the piece, I think is the term I use in the report. 
 
I’m not blame . . . This report is not about blame. This report is 
certainly not about who’s to blame. This report may be about 
what is to blame and how can we fix it. But I want to emphasize 
so clear to the members here this evening and to the public that 
this is a report that looks toward the future as to how we can 
build and sustain an improved health system, a better health 
system for this province. It is not about looking for people to 
blame. That will never move ahead by doing that. 
 
And I had a number of discussions with our health care 
providers about how I word the report in order that I minimize 
people feeling that I’m blaming individuals or individual 
professions. 
 
This is not about blame. This is about recognizing what is, and 
how do we move forward. The airline industry and other 
industries have looked at quality and said, and Berwick is 
quoted in here and Berwick has done a lot of wonderful work in 
the United States on quality improvement, and I just can’t put 
my fingers on the exact page. 
 
(19:30) 
 
But we have to accept that I suppose we’re all to blame — all of 
us collectively, as a society, and I comment on that in my 
conclusion. But let’s now move on to the future and say how do 
we all work together to make it a better system. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you. I have another question. The 
questions I’ve heard lead me to believe that we still are defining 
health services as acute care, a bed, or a doctor. Did you find 
that in your deliberations and in your consultations that people 
still have that view, or are they of the view that health services 
cover a broader range? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I found both views. There are still people who 
believe that the small hospital and the single doctor is the health 
care system. And there are other providers who believe that a 
health care system is broader than that and that the health 
system is much broader than the health care system. 
 
I believe today there’s a lot more recognition of the broader 
determinants of health and the broader need in the health care 
system — all the different professionals and technology and the 
information age that we’re going through — I believe there’s a 
lot more acceptance today than there was 10 years ago. 
 
And I’m quite optimistic that in a few years this report will . . . 
a lot of things in this report will be just very common 
knowledge in health care systems and be common practices. 



634 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

Ms. Junor: — I have one more question. When you talk about 
reporting, the public has a right to know, and decisions should 
be made on reports of quality and evidence, how will we know 
when we’ve made the system better? How will we know when 
we’ve got there, when we’ve made a difference? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — With your permission, can I answer your 
second-last question, expand on that and then answer that 
question? 
 
I just wanted . . . I think it’s important to your last question. 
What did the public say? And I just want to quote on our 
Challenges document and our questionnaires: 
 

Nearly 60% of respondents to The Challenges Ahead 
questionnaire felt that it is the job of the health system to do 
more than treat disease, illness and injury. They felt the 
system should promote health through programs that 
support good parenting, provide nutritional advice, and 
help people quit smoking. Over 52% of respondents agreed 
that the health system should make a special effort to reach 
out to groups that face higher health risks. Others said that 
it is not the sole responsibility of the health system to 
address these issues. In the public forums organized by the 
commission, some participants called for outreach services 
to seniors, poor families, and other groups. Others 
advocated support for housing and home care initiatives. 

 
So there was a fairly . . . over, nearly 60 per cent, so it was a 
pretty broad response to our questionnaire. 
 
Now when . . . your question on when do we know we’ve made 
a difference. First of all we’ve got to set some goals for the 
health system and decide what it is that we’re going . . . how 
we’re going to define success, because today we cannot define 
success. Today success has been if we’re putting more in each 
year, and we’re not defining success. 
 
First of all, before we know where we’ve gone to, we have to 
know where we’ve come from. And we have to define where 
we are today and where we’re moving to. I would like to . . . 
there’s a number of broad indices but certainly an infant 
mortality, life expectancy, there’s a number of indices of . . . 
broad indices of the health system that can be measured. I’d like 
to see how we’re dealing with a lot of our chronic diseases in 
preventing the complications of chronic diseases, and how that 
compares. 
 
And I think that some districts — and many districts are 
interested in this — they could certainly measure what it is 
today and five years from now and see how we’ve progressed 
on certain health issues that may be unique to their districts. 
 
And the question on the other side of the House here, on the 
Aboriginal, I think that is an area that we could clearly measure 
progress over the next five to ten years. And I think that would 
be wonderful if we did see some real progress in some of those 
. . . for the underprivileged people of our society. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. Mr. 
Fyke, I’d like to ask a question about exactly where you see the 
provincial government investing additional funds. I think 
you’ve made it very clear that we don’t necessarily need to be 

spending more money in order to have a better system, and you 
want us to move, as I read your report, to a system that has a 
much greater focus on quality of care. 
 
But in terms of new strategic financial investments, what are 
you recommending in terms of where the province should 
invest additional dollars to make a difference in terms of health 
care quality? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I’m recommending investments in four or five 
areas. One in the change that will be required to a primary 
health services system, which requires transitional funds to 
move to that system. 
 
I’m recommending investments in emergency services. I’m also 
recommending investments in measuring quality with the 
quality council so that we know whether we’re getting value for 
money or not. Recommending health research. Recommending 
money be put into information and communications technology 
and a human resource strategy. 
 
I see those investments and I’m estimating that they would in 
the area of a hundred million dollars over the next four years. 
And I have to caution that it’s very hard to make some of those 
estimates because of the premises, some of the factors that may 
change in the next few years. 
 
And I believe if those investments are made, the gap that is 
referred to, if we take a status quo, maintain the status quo 
system with health growing at six and a half per cent and 
revenue of the province growing at two and a half per cent, it’s 
going to have a $300 million gap — that the gap will be less in 
four years than that. It will not be zero of course, but it will be 
less than the $300 million. And then the costs would, the 
increasing costs would decrease. 
 
And I would never . . . I don’t think I have any evidence to 
suggest that the actual costs will go down but it’s the rate of 
increase of the costs that is concerning me from a sustainability 
point of view looking at the provincial revenues over the next 
few years. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you. I just want to ask a brief question 
to clarify whether there’s any proposals in this report that would 
actually expand the range of publicly funded services right now. 
 
We roughly, in this province, we’re putting a little over . . . 72 
per cent of our health care costs are covered through the public 
system and a little under 30 per cent are paid for privately. Are 
there any service areas where you’re recommending that we in 
effect expand the public system and publicly fund things that 
are privately funded at the present time in the sense that they’re 
paid for by the individual taxpayer when they’re utilizing the 
service? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — No I am not. Drugs is an area of concern. I 
believe that we need to address the drug issue between the 
provinces and the federal government. My conclusion on should 
public funding cover more services, on page 78 and 79, I 
comment that: 
 

Without eliminating unnecessary and inefficient utilization, 
without reforming the delivery of everyday services and 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 635 

 

without realizing the effects of successful prevention and 
health enhancing social and economic programs, expanding 
Medicare will be unaffordable, however desirable it may 
be. 

 
Expanding as you indicated, and my data shows that 
Saskatchewan is about 73 per cent public, or 72 or 73. The 
Canadian average is 70 per cent, 70/30. 
 
But we have to make sure that the system is . . . that we’re 
getting value for our money, that we’ve eliminated unnecessary 
and inefficient utilization. And then maybe the bonus will be 
able to expand some of the services that are required. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The Chair will now recognize questions 
from the hon. members of the opposition up to the next 20 
minutes. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Fyke, the people in 
and around Humboldt have for quite some time now been 
planning for, in fact they have received funds from the 
provincial government for the planning of a new integrated 
health facility in Humboldt. 
 
The Central Plains Health Board concurs that this is a facility 
that is needed. They have certainly met every bit of the criteria 
that they believed was necessary in order for that facility to 
become a reality. 
 
Mr. Fyke, there has been great initiative taken on the part of the 
rural municipalities surrounding Humboldt, as well as the 
people of Humboldt. The facility is targeted . . . The targeted 
cost for this new integrated facility would be about $16 million. 
And right now the local share, which is about half of that from 
what I understand, 95 per cent of that local share is in place 
right now. 
 
So fundraising has taken place. Many, many service agencies 
and the hospital foundation have been working very hard to 
make sure that they are meeting their part of the cost. The 
people of Humboldt believe that that new hospital is in the 
making. And with the tabling of your report last week, I think 
there’s a little bit of confusion going on in the minds of many 
people that have worked so very hard for that centre, simply 
because there’s some contradictory in your . . . contradictory 
sort of statements in your report. 
 
And I’ll give you an example of what I mean there. You have 
stated that a regional hospital, which I believe is what the 
Humboldt hospital was designated to be, a regional hospital 
would in fact need three to five doctors, as far as I can 
understand, in residence or that would serve that hospital. 
 
You also mentioned a population base that that regional hospital 
would have to cover as I believe 30 to 50,000 population base. 
So Humboldt serves, or that hospital right now serves about a 
25,000, I think, population base. However if there was an 
expansion of the district boundaries, there may be a change in 
how many people that hospital may serve. 
 
But nonetheless the other criteria that one would have to meet 
in order to have a regional hospital is that . . . like I said, there’s 
the doctors, there’s — I’m trying to think of all the other criteria 

you mentioned — but nonetheless it seems like just about 
everything is in place there. However Humboldt hospital is 
about not quite a hundred kilometres from Saskatoon. And so 
that’s where the contradiction lies as far as your 
recommendations for regional hospital. 
 
The part of this that’s a little frustrating is the people in that 
area do not want to delay any longer. They have worked very 
hard at their plans. This has been on the drawing board for quite 
some time and, Mr. Fyke, frankly they would like an answer. 
 
They want to know whether or not Humboldt will have an acute 
care facility, be it an integrated facility where all services will 
be under one roof you could say, or in one area. And they 
would like to know, with the tabling of your report, if you can 
give them a definite answer as to whether or not their dreams of 
a regional hospital will come to reality soon. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Thank you for the question. I appreciate that 
during a major review like this and the tabling of the report will 
certainly, and has caused uncertainty in the system. And I don’t 
see a way of preventing that because it is a time of where all the 
issues are reviewed and the recommendations are put together 
and then those recommendations have been dealt with. 
 
I cannot and will not speculate on whether Humboldt will be a 
regional hospital or a community care facility. That is going to 
have to be up to how my report is addressed and implemented 
between . . . and a decision of the district and the government as 
to the designation of those 10 to 14 sites throughout the 
province. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. Mr. Fyke, in your report 
under the executive summary portion right at the beginning of 
your report, I notice that a portion of your mandate was to 
recommend an action plan for delivery of services across 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Giving a sort of a vague answer to a question as precise as I 
have presented to you in my interpretation is not a direct action 
plan. 
 
The people of the province have been waiting for some very 
concrete answers. They’ve been waiting for your 
recommendations to come across, presenting a clear picture of 
where the facilities will be, what services will come from those 
facilities, and what people can expect. 
 
So in respect to the hard work and the dreams of those people 
that should be able to determine the kind of services they need, 
and especially when they’re working so very hard to put in their 
own funding, in respect to them and respect for them, I ask that 
you give us some clearer indication from your 
recommendations, from your thought process that you’ve put 
into this. 
 
Certainly from the information you’ve gathered there is, or 
must be, a pretty good indication in your mind as to whether 
Humboldt will have a regional hospital. Mr. Fyke, could you 
please give us that answer? 
 



636 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

Mr. Fyke: — I would be pleased to comment on my mandate. 
The mandate that I was given is threefold. 
 
Number two, you refer to the recommendation of an action plan 
for the delivery of health services across Saskatchewan through 
a model that is sustainable and embodies the core values of 
medicare. I have provided that in my report and my report 
recommends there be 10 to 14 regional centres and I stand by 
that. 
 
Ms. Julé: — But, Mr. Fyke, in my mind there’s a question as to 
how you could come up with the recommendation of 10 to 14 
regional centres without considering what is already here, what 
people have worked at previously, what is being built now, 
what the population base surrounding those areas is. 
 
We have hospital plans that are started. There’s been a great 
deal of money projected towards that, not only from the 
provincial government for planning but certainly in increased 
mill rates and so on for the people in those areas. 
 
Certainly all of those things should be considerations into 
whether or not there will be in fact a regional hospital in certain 
areas. And I would hope that those were taken into 
consideration when you came up with the number of 10 to 14, 
otherwise I really have to question how you did come up with 
that number. 
 
Mr. Fyke: — Again I would reiterate that on the 
implementation of my report, if it is the government’s decision 
to implement my report, on the implementation phase it is most 
appropriate to sit down with the districts and with the . . . the 
government and the districts as to where those 10 to 14 facilities 
should be located. They may be 10 facilities; there may be 11 
and there may be 12 or 13 or 14. 
 
My role was to put a plan before the Premier and the 
government and this House, the people of Saskatchewan. I am 
focusing on a provincial-wide plan. And the details of where 
those sites should be, I again reiterate that I’m . . . I want to and 
I stand by the decision. My report does not define the actual 
locations; that that would be left to the implementation across 
this province with input from the districts and the providers and 
the public. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. The recommendations that 
you have put forward have been after a great deal of 
consultation with people in this province, with service 
providers, with service organizations, with the people of the 
province that are involved in the health system, as well as the 
people that receive health care. 
 
Those consultations have basically been done. The taxpayers 
have been willing to pay $2 million for that to be done. The 
taxpayers now want some very definite answers. 
 
Mr. Fyke, if it’s not you that gives those definite answers, 
surely it seems to me that the recommendations are to be 
brought before the government of the day and they would look 
at those recommendations because consultations have already 
taken place. The people have spoken. And so certainly the 
government should be acting, just as I believe that an action 
plan on what is going to be happening as far as delivery of 

services to Aboriginal people should have been just that, an 
action plan — that means to act. So I don’t see any direction 
that you have given as far as concrete action taking place. 
 
So would you agree that the consultations were very thorough? 
Because I would hope they would have been for $2 million. 
And if you in fact agree with that, would you agree with me that 
the government should act in one way or the other on these 
recommendations? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — I believe the consultations have been very 
thorough. You can always have more consultations, but I had 
extensive consultations. I put a plan to the Premier and the 
government. The government is now seeking input from the 
providers and the public, and that to me seems reasonable. And 
it is up to others to decide whether my report should be 
implemented. 
 
My mandate was to place recommendations in front of the 
Premier for an action plan for the delivery of health services in 
this province that is sustainable. I believe that I have fulfilled 
that mandate. And it is now up to the government, indeed 
members of this House, to say how they wish to proceed and 
whether they can improve, whether others can improve on my 
report to bring about improvements in the implementation. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Fyke, I have received a number of concerns 
from a doctor in my constituency, and of course that’s a rural 
area; this is a rural doctor. This doctor has made reference to 
your comments on NTR’s (News Talk Radio) talk show 
regarding your findings. And he states that you stated that 
people in rural areas will get a higher quality, good or better 
emergency health services from emergency medical technicians 
than they will from doctors in rural hospitals. There is no doubt 
that this doctor took offence to that. 
 
The very fact of the matter is that even with advanced training, 
maybe of four months, emergency medical technicians couldn’t 
possibly have the kind of expertise that rural doctors or any 
doctor have as far as diagnostic ability, as far as having access 
to patient files and their history. 
 
Rural doctors in rural hospitals, in emergencies, have patients 
come into the hospital, or patients come in. These doctors 
stabilize and they monitor patients because they need 
immediate care, and they shouldn’t be moved great distances 
until they are stabilized. 
 
In the event that EMTs would be responsible for this, picking 
up a person at the site of an accident, trying to stabilize them at 
the same time that they’re moving them would be dangerous. It 
is after the original diagnosis and stabilization and the 
monitoring of patients that rural doctors would put them in 
ambulances and transfer them to tertiary centres. 
 
Mr. Fyke, are you saying that you really believe that EMTs can 
offer the same professional and knowledgeable services as a 
doctor could? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — My report does not compare the relative value of 
any health provider. We need physicians, we need nurses, we 
need qualified emergency medical technicians. I don’t believe I 
would have ever said that on any open-line show. Because I do 



April 19, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 637 

 

not believe it, that emergency medical technicians were better 
than doctors, or in some form like that. If that was interpreted 
by a physician, I would certainly give him my apologies. 
 
I would likely have said that rather than a farmer who is injured 
in the field being brought into the local hospital in a half-ton 
truck and then treated in a hospital where the hospital doesn’t 
necessarily have a lot of emergency cases, that is not as good as 
an ambulance with a trained technician who arrives on the site 
and can stabilize that patient and then transfer him to a hospital. 
 
The work . . . the training programs and the qualifications and 
what an emergency medical technician do across this country 
are clearly delineated. I believe physicians have emergency 
medical . . . emergency room physicians . . . emergency room 
specialists have a lot of input into the program for emergency 
medical technicians. 
 
So I certainly stand by the comment that emergency medical 
technicians provide a much superior service at the site of an 
accident. I’m not comparing that person to a physician who may 
happen to be there. But, indeed, physicians are not riding in 
ambulances. Physicians are in the hospital, maybe in a regional 
centre, receiving the patient or in a current site receiving a 
patient. 
 
So I will certainly stand by my remark that emergency medical 
technician upgrading will enhance the quality of services for 
rural Saskatchewan when they have an accident. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. Mr. Fyke, one other 
contention of the doctor I talked to was that his understanding is 
that these recommendations that you put forward after doing 
your study would be achieving overall cost savings. His 
question is: where is the rationale in closing rural hospitals 
because rural hospitals were not an overall . . . one of the 
overall highest cost items in health? 
 
And he maintains that what we save in closing hospitals, we’ll 
be putting into ambulance services. Now what is the point in 
doing this? 
 
Mr. Fyke, where will you . . . or how many ambulance services, 
rather, and how much extra staff will be needed if your 
recommendations are implemented? Have you counted the 
cost? Have you done the study on how many ambulances would 
be filling the roads of Saskatchewan and rushing into the 
tertiary centres to arrive with their patients? You know the other 
point, there’s a four- to six-hour emergency wait for people 
when they come into emergencies in the tertiary centres right 
now in Saskatoon and Regina. 
 
With the increased load from the rural areas, and loads of 
ambulances coming in with people, one can be sure that the city 
hospitals will not even have the physical space to accommodate 
patients. More ambulances will not cut down waiting time in 
emergency. That is the contention of this doctor. 
 
But I would just revert back to my question regarding how 
many ambulances and staff will be needed if your 
recommendations are implemented, and have you counted the 
financial cost? 
 

Mr. Fyke: — The financial cost of an ambulance program is 
outlined in the report of the ambulance . . . report on the 
ambulance services which I believe were tabled in this House 
several months ago. 
 
In regard to the cost issue that the hon. member raised. When 
I’m looking at rural Saskatchewan this is not about saving 
money, it’s about in making the services better, it’s about 
improving the services for rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Many, many people told me during the process of this 
consultation that what they really needed in rural Saskatchewan 
is better ambulance service. Those ambulances right now were 
not there 24 hours a day and that people were not trained. 
 
So I go back again to the fact that my report recommends better 
services for rural Saskatchewan through primary health 
services, better services through improved emergency services, 
more enhanced home care, and telephone line to call 24 hours a 
day, 7 days a week. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Fyke. Mr. Fyke, I just want to 
make one final comment. And people in rural Saskatchewan 
particularly, and urban Saskatchewan, the ones I’ve spoken 
with, are not buying this. They say that it is a continuation of 
the system that started in 1993. That has been a disaster. And 
this is just a continuum of that. 
 
People are very distraught because they know that if 
responsibility and the ownership of health services remain at the 
local level and determination of those health services, that they 
would be able to run a very good system. 
 
In fact many people are saying that they would like to abolish 
the whole district idea and go back to the model that we had 
prior to the wellness model — the district formation. At that 
time communities had autonomy over their services. They were 
the ones that determined what they needed and they took the 
action to put it in place. 
 
And so they feel that there’s very little rationale backing your 
recommendations. There’s very little common sense and there’s 
a lack of understanding as to the situation in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I thank you, Mr. Fyke. And I needed and wanted to make 
that comment on behalf of the people in my constituency. 
Thank you. 
 
The committee recessed for a period of time. 
 
The Chair: — Order. The committee will come to order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Chairman. Mr. Fyke, I will be very brief in my question. 
 
I just want to say on behalf of myself and the government 
members that we really do appreciate your time spent with us 
here today. You’ve been in that chair since 2:30 this afternoon 
and some would suggest it might have been very informative — 
I being one of them. 



638 Saskatchewan Hansard April 19, 2001 

 

I do have a question though with respect to the document that 
you have presented. Some people have suggested that it’s very 
much compared to what has been called for in this legislature 
— that being a value-for-money audit. And I’m just wondering 
if you might be able to respond to that? 
 
Mr. Fyke: — My report, my report is about change. It’s about a 
sustainable, better system and it’s about quality and it’s about 
teamwork. Part of quality is making sure that the system is 
effective and efficient and produces the — what I have referred 
to this evening several times and my report refers to it as well 
— is one of the foundations of a sustainable health system is 
one where we do get value for our money in the system. 
 
And that is a theme of my report. I recognize there is other 
aspects to the report that we’ve discussed here in the last 
number of hours, but that is the whole issue of sustainability, 
efficiency, effectiveness, and quality. Value for money — that’s 
what the report’s all about. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. Fyke. 
Mr. Chairman, as I indicated a little earlier this has been a fairly 
long day and Mr. Fyke has spent a considerable time answering 
questions of the legislature. And I do note that it is past the hour 
of adjournment and I would ask that you call the clock. 
 
The Chair: — It being now past the hour of adjournment, the 
committee will now rise and report progress and ask for leave to 
sit again. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Speaker: — Pursuant to rule 3(2) it is incumbent upon me 
now to adjourn the House. The House will stand adjourned until 
tomorrow at 10 a.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 20:26. 
 
 



 

 

 


