















































Hansard: May 15, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1129 
 May 15, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
communities of southwest Saskatchewan, those particularly in 
the constituency of Cypress Hills, have expressed their concern 
that should recommendations from the EMS (emergency 
medical services) report released last fall be implemented, that 
those communities believe they would suffer significantly in the 
loss of their community-based ambulance services. And so I 
would like to present this petition on behalf of the people of 
Richmound, Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition to present on behalf of residents in 
and around the Assiniboine Valley district. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctoral services available. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, signatures on these petitions come primarily from 
the community of Kamsack, but they’re also communities in 
my constituency, namely Veregin and Pelly. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition signed by citizens of the province of 
Saskatchewan regarding the provincial government’s report, the 
Saskatchewan EMS Development Project, which calls for 
provincially run and centrally operated ambulance services. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the signatures are from Lucky Lake, Beechy, 
Demaine, and Kyle, Saskatchewan. 
 
I’m pleased to present the petition on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens today concerned about the high cost of 
energy. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its windfall oil and gas revenues to provide a 
more substantial energy rate rebate to Saskatchewan 
consumers. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, in addition to my 
home community of Melfort, are from Spalding and Semans, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition of 
Highway 339, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 

 
And the petition is signed by individuals from the communities 
of Moose Jaw and Briercrest. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
petitioners concerned about the state of the Swift Current 
hospital, Mr. Speaker, and the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition today is signed by residents of 
the city of Swift Current, of Abbey, of Hodgeville, of 
Shaunavon, and of Kyle. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the citizens of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
concerned about their ambulance service, and the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 



1130 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Lake Alma, Radville, 
and Trossachs. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
present a petition concerning improved cellular telephone 
coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Rabbit Lake, Hafford, Blaine Lake, Leask, Radisson, 
Borden, Perdue, Maymont, Mistawasis, and Muskeg Lake. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Blaine Lake and Shell Lake. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition opposed to the possible reduction of 
health services in Kamsack. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that health care services in the 
Kamsack Hospital be maintained at its current level of 
service at minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, 
and doctoral services available. 

 
The petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are all from the community of 
Kamsack. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition on 
behalf of citizens concerned with the centralization of 
ambulance services. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to improve community-based ambulance 
services. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Wynyard, Mozart, Saskatoon, and Dalmeny. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding 
improved cellular telephone services. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service in the districts of 
Spiritwood, Medstead, Glaslyn, Leoville, Chitek Lake, Big 
River, Canwood, Debden, Shellbrook, Parkside, Shell 
Lake, Duck Lake, and Macdowall. 

And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the signatures on this petition are from 
Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, Prince Albert, and Chitek. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
undersigned by citizens of the province and they’re concerned 
with the Pioneer Lodge in Assiniboia. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at very least, current 
levels of service and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again 
with a petition from concerned citizens who are getting further 
and further concerned with reference to the Assiniboia Pioneer 
Lodge. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure that, at the very least, current 
levels of services and care are maintained at Pioneer Lodge 
in Assiniboia. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed in total by members of 
the Eastside Court in Assiniboia. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
petitions to present today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Redvers Health 
Centre be maintained at its current level of service at 
minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from our district, southeast 
Saskatchewan and southwest Manitoba, and beyond. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
These petitions, Mr. Speaker, come from the Redvers, Antler, 
and Fairlight areas. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following new petitions have 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1131 

 

been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read 
and received. 
 

Of citizens requesting the government to repair Highway 
339 in order to facilitate economic development; 
 
Causing the government to include tow trucks in their 
description of emergency vehicles; 
 
Providing reliable cellular service in 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood; 
 
Reversing its decision to raise the price of fishing licences; 
and 
 
Other petitions that are addendum to previous sessional 
papers nos. 3, 4, 10, 58, 110, 121, 136, and 146. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 42 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Finance: how are the municipal and 
education taxes on forest fringe land determined; who is 
responsible for collecting them; and whom is it payable to? 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet, I have another one. I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM: how many land grazing permits 
were issued to users of forest fringe land by SERM in the 
year 1999 and 2000? 

 
And the third one. I give notice that I shall on day no. 42 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of SERM: how many land grazing permits 
have been issued to users of forest fringe land by SERM so 
far in the year 2001-2002? 

 
I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
Assembly 26 grade 4 students from Westview Elementary 
School from Estevan, Saskatchewan. They’re seated in the east 
gallery. They are accompanied by teachers, Ms. Linda 
Henderson and Ms. Susan Husband. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the former Speaker — and the member from 
Melville will notice that I said former Speaker, not old Speaker 
— when him and I did the Speaker’s tour last January we did 
visit these grade 4 students at Westview School and they were 
very gracious to us and I thank them for that. 
 
And later on I will be meeting with them. We’ll have our photo 
taken and have some refreshments, and I’m sure they’ll have 
lots of questions to ask. So I would like all members to join me 
in welcoming them. 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. With 
full appreciation — it’s nice to be recognized by the opposition 
as well, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce to you, 19 grade 3 
and 4 students from Ross School in Moose Jaw, who are seated 
in the west gallery. Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied today by 
their teacher Ms. Leisa Johnson-Neufeld and their chaperone, 
Ms. Guylaine Locours. 
 
Earlier this day, Mr. Speaker, the students visited the Royal 
Saskatchewan Museum and then they are now, of course, in the 
midst of making their first ever visit to this, their Saskatchewan 
Legislative Assembly. I met with them earlier and we had a 
chance for photo and visits. I enjoyed their questions and look 
forward to having a chance to visit with them again before the 
end of the school year. 
 
I’ll ask, Mr. Speaker, if all the members of the Assembly would 
welcome these bright young students from Ross School in 
Moose Jaw. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Seated up in the 
east gallery today — way, way up there in the back row — is a 
visitor from Ottawa, Nicole Beaudoin is joining us today. She’s 
here from Ottawa visiting friends. Although during her day job 
I understand she spends her time worrying about Elections 
Canada. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join with me in welcoming her here 
today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, seated in the west gallery is a constituent of mine who 
has been in the Assembly a number of times. Ms. Isabelle 
Muzichuk is from the Canora-Pelly constituency and has been a 
strong advocate for her concerns around air and water quality 
and the whole work around the intensive livestock operations. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, more importantly, I think, I want to wish 
Isabelle as a grandmother well, because in the last two weeks 
she’s spent most of her time here in Regina with her daughter, 
very concerned about her granddaughter who is in the Regina 
General Hospital recovering from a very serious vehicle 
accident. And I want to wish Isabelle, and most importantly her 
granddaughter, Krystal Chicilo, well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Shellbrook Credit Union 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today I rise before the 
House to speak about more good news for the province of 



1132 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan, in particular the Shellbrook Credit Union, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It was payday for members of the Shellbrook Credit Union on 
Wednesday, April 25. This was a record payday with $335,000 
in equity payments being distributed to its members. This 
distribution of cheques represented 10 per cent of the interest 
earned on deposits and a 10 per cent rebate on loan interest. 
 
This record distribution goes hand in hand with the credit 
union’s best financial year ever. Besides the main branch in 
Shellbrook, Mr. Speaker, equity payments were also distributed 
in Canwood, Leask, and Marcelin branches. 
 
The success of the rural credit unions and co-ops throughout 
Saskatchewan are a mirror image of the success of this 
government. We along with all people of Saskatchewan will be 
ready and able for the shift into the future, a future that is 
deemed prosperous for all those who reside in the Land of the 
Living Skies. 
 
I’d like to congratulate General Manager Larry Herman and the 
staff at the Shellbrook Credit Union for proving that our 
province is on the road to success with a partnership of 
government, business, and community, Mr. Speaker. By 
working together, we will ensure that we all have a prosperous 
future in our province, Mr. Speaker. The strength of our 
community is working together. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Musical Production at Birch Hills School 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure this afternoon to rise in our honoured Assembly so that 
I can bring recognition to Birch Hills high school. 
 
During the first week of May, almost 100 people were involved 
in the performance of the hit musical Godspell. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for four days 2,000 people had the opportunity to 
witness this marvellous production presented entirely by the 
staff and the students of Birch Hills high school. 
 
Thirteen different schools afforded their children the 
opportunity to witness the coming together of Jesus Christ and 
his disciples. 
 
The trials and tribulations that each disciple must overcome, 
reached their finality at the Last Supper as Jesus declares each 
disciple is now ready to carry out his role. 
 
Darcy Sander, the principal of Birch Hills School, was the 
director and prime promoter of Godspell, Mr. Speaker. And 
Darcy is still overwhelmed by the remarkable achievement of 
the cast and crew in the performance of this 90-minute musical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask that all members of this Assembly join me in 
paying tribute to Mr. Darcy Sander, all the staff at Birch Hills 
who helped out with the musical, and especially to the students 
for their fantastic performance of Godspell. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

New Extended Care Centre for Weyburn 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday we heard 
from both sides of the Assembly about the planned long-term 
care facility in Melfort. 
 
Also on Friday there was similar good news for the city of 
Weyburn. The Minister of Health, the deputy mayor, and the 
Chair of the South Central District Health Board took part in a 
sod turning ceremony for a new Souris Valley extended care 
centre. 
 
This new facility, to be known as Tatagwa View, will replace 
the current outdated centre and will offer long-term care 
services to residents from across the district. When completed 
the project will provide 135 long-term care beds, 20 adult day 
spaces, district offices, support services, physiotherapy, 
administration, and child care. 
 
This government has worked very closely with the South 
Central Health District because we’re committed to accessible, 
quality health care services and to supporting the needs of our 
most vulnerable residents. 
 
Like the Melfort project this centre will be cost-shared by the 
province and local governments on a 75 per cent/25 per cent 
basis. The total cost will be $19.7 million. 
 
This is good news for Weyburn, Mr. Speaker, and one comment 
in particular by health board Chair Ernest Elder captures the 
importance of this new facility. He said that: 
 

I look forward to working together with our partners . . . to 
provide a new, home-like environment for our residents. 

 
Not just a facility or a project, Mr. Speaker, but a home 
environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

National Mining Week 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to take this opportunity to share with my colleagues 
some information about National Mining Week, which we are 
currently in the midst of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our country’s rich, natural resources are many and 
this week allows us the chance to recognize this and to look 
ahead to what opportunities are in front of us in terms of mining 
development. 
 
Mr. Speaker, statistics show Canadian mining exports earn an 
astonishing $45 billion a year. That equals 13 per cent of all 
Canadian exports. This industry also employs close to half a 
million people across the country. Mr. Speaker, 400,000 people 
are making a living thanks to the mining industry helping to 
grow the economy. 
 
As the Saskatchewan Party critic for Energy and Mines, Mr. 
Speaker, I realize and appreciate the value and importance of 
the mining industry and the contribution it makes to the 
Canadian economy. I should add as well that I commend the 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1133 

 

environmentally sound practices that the industry follows and it 
is my hope that this business continues to grow. 
 
Mr. Speaker, related to this, Saskatchewan Mining Week is fast 
approaching and that will give me another opportunity to talk 
about this industry and the unfortunacy of red tape, regressive 
taxation, and unfair royalties the mining industry has to face in 
Saskatchewan thanks to this NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cumberland Gallery Display 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On a brighter 
note, tomorrow morning in this building, but not in this 
Assembly, I’m going to deliver one of the better, most heartfelt, 
and shortest speeches of my career, and I invite all the members 
to attend. 
 
I’ll be speaking in the newly opened Cumberland Gallery, the 
gallery on the lower floor officially opened by Prince Charles, 
and my audience will be the artists, parents, staff, and 
volunteers of the Regina Early Learning Centre. 
 
The artists are three to five years old and they’re students of the 
centre, which is in my constituency of Regina Centre. What 
these young artists have done is create a display which, frankly, 
is quite remarkable for any age. If you must miss my speech, at 
least go to see their display. 
 
The children from the green room recently visited the 
MacKenzie Art Gallery Mi’kmaq basket display and while they 
were there they walked through the Café Guerbois which was 
part of the Impressionist masterworks on display from the 
National Gallery of Canada, and a fine show it was. 
 
The kids were fascinated by the tables in the café and how they 
were decorated so they set about to make their own tables and 
plan their own café. The result is what they call the Scyther 
Café, named after a TV cartoon character. 
 
The Scyther Café is their exhibit and it is remarkable. They 
worked in teams to design their tables. They made Playdoh food 
— it’s not too fattening — and a menu for their café. And some 
people say that art is a solitary affair, but in this case teamwork 
paid off. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Early Learning Centre has been doing 
excellent work for city kids since 1977, and I’m proud to 
represent it and especially proud of this exhibit. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Day of the Families 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today, 
May 15, marks the International Day of the Families, a day that 
the United Nations has set aside to promote the awareness of 
issues relating to families as basic units of society, as well as to 
promote appropriate action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every member of this House knows what it’s like 

to be a member of a family. It is this family unit that nurtured 
us, challenged us, and made us who we are today. It is the 
family unit that taught us tolerance, attitudes, and acceptable 
patterns of behaviour. Without our families, Mr. Speaker, who 
would we be? 
 
Mr. Speaker, all members of this House know that the family 
unit has seen some dramatic changes in the past few years. 
Differing values, beliefs, and norms have forced the family unit 
to adapt as best as it could. We have all seen the effects that 
those changes have made — changes like increased divorce 
rates and single-parent families. 
 
External factors have also had a significant impact on families 
— factors like unemployment, crime, and poverty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the family unit remains one of society’s most 
cherished institutions. It is up to all of us to do what we can to 
ensure that it does not suffer any further destruction. Mr. 
Speaker, I ask all members of this House to acknowledge the 
importance and significance of today, the International Day of 
Families. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lester B. Pearson United World College Scholarship 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me 
pleasure to inform the Assembly that one of my constituents has 
been chosen to attend the Lester B. Pearson United World 
College in British Columbia. 
 
Nigel Francis from Carpenter High School in Meadow Lake 
will be attending the college this fall, enrolled in the two-year 
International Baccalaureate Program. Nigel has received a 
$54,000 scholarship from the Saskatchewan government and 
from Pearson College. 
 
Lester B. Pearson is a school that promotes through education a 
greater understanding between the peoples of the world. And 
they subscribe to the philosophy that international 
understanding cannot be created in the classroom alone. 
Therefore pupils attending the school will take part in 
community service activities and outdoor expeditions. 
 
One of the goals that these students have managed to achieve 
should impress and inspire all of us. They have managed to 
raise enough funds to build a school in Ecuador. Over 200 
students from 80 countries attend this school. 
 
I also want to mention that two other students, Sarah-Marie 
Gross of LeBoldus High School here in Regina, and Réal 
Carrière from Cumberland House, will be returning to complete 
their program this fall. 
 
On behalf of all of the members of the Assembly I want to 
congratulate and wish Nigel, Réal, and Sarah-Marie luck as 
they continue on the path of education at the Lester B. Pearson 
United World College. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1134 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

100th Birthday Congratulations 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, and 
members, it gives me great pleasure to extend warm 
congratulations to Mrs. Doris Kinne in celebrating a young 
hundredth birthday. 
 
Doris is a remarkable lady who at a hundred years old 
complained because, I quote, “I used to read a lot, but I just 
don’t have time to any more.” The reason, she said, is because 
her life is so full of social outings enriched with friends to visit. 
 
Mrs. Kinne was born in Leeds, England and arrived in Harding, 
Manitoba three years later with the rest of her family to join 
with her father. She married Bill Kinne in 1925 and shortly 
after, moved with him to the Golburn area where Doris was 
very active on the farm and as a volunteer in the agricultural 
community until they retired in Tisdale in 1960. Doris raised 
two daughters of her own and has been a foster parent to 
children in numerous countries for the past 30 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to read a quote from a reporter who 
recently interviewed her: 
 

This feeling of contentment with her family and of being at 
peace with the world illuminates her gentle and modest 
personality. 

 
Mr. Speaker, it is with delight that I ask the Assembly to join 
me in congratulating this very special lady on her hundredth 
birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Sex Offender Registry 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. The Saskatchewan Party 
has been asking the provincial government to establish a 
provincial sex offender registry for some time. The member 
from Humboldt has introduced private members’ legislation 
that would do just that. The Minister of Justice has stated he 
wants to wait for a national sex offender registry to be set up 
even though the federal government is moving at what could be 
described as snail’s pace. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the province of Alberta has been waiting as well 
for a national system, but in light of the devastating murder of 
five-year-old Jessica Koopmans, the Alberta Premier has 
announced that they will move to set up a provincial registry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister . . . Mr. Speaker, the minister of 
Ontario and British Columbia have already set up national sex 
offender registries. Alberta is now taking the action. My 
question to the minister is will he and the NDP government 
support our private members’ legislation and establish a 
provincial sex offender registry right here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, first I’m sure I 
speak for all members of the Assembly when I pass on our 
concerns and sympathies to the family of Jessica Koopmans, 

and indeed to the people of Lethbridge who cannot be 
unaffected by such a tragedy. 
 
What I would say in response to the member is indeed that 
Premier Klein has a very similar view to this government in 
regards to a sex offender registry. He’s talked about, as you 
know, the preference to have a national registry, and he is now 
talking about considering setting up a registry — a provincial 
registry in Alberta. 
 
I would only say to the member that officials have been 
working on this . . . provincial, federal, and territorial officials 
have been working on this. We anticipate a response from the 
federal government shortly. If we don’t get one by the next 
ministers’ meeting in the fall, then we will act here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
looks like we’re making a little progress, but Saskatchewan is 
still standing with . . . the government is still standing with their 
hands in their pockets, while the Premier of Alberta and the 
Solicitor General there are taking some steps to move this issue 
forward. Believing that a national sex offender registry would 
be the best is not, in case . . . the result that we’re seeing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it took a tragedy — the death of a child — for the 
Alberta government to decide that a provincial registry was at 
least a start. Mr. Speaker, we could join Ontario and BC 
(British Columbia), and now it looks like Alberta as well, in 
leading the country in this initiative. We too could provide 
provincial enforcement officials with a valuable crime-fighting 
tool. 
 
How would any of us feel if we neglected this opportunity to 
establish a registry, and one of our children were taken from us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the Minister, will Saskatchewan residents have 
to wait for a tragedy before this government will act to establish 
a sex offender registry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the issue here is what 
can we do in our various areas of responsibility to protect our 
children from repeat sex offenders. And, Mr. Speaker, a 
registry, in particular a national registry, would have some 
component to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not clear that a registry would have made any 
difference in this particular case. As the member will know, 
registries are designed to inform the police not to inform the 
public of the presence of a pedophile in the community because 
it is the police who are responsible for keeping order. 
 
The member will also know that from time to time public 
disclosure is made when it’s regarded to be in the public interest 
by a committee of citizens to advise the members of a 
community that there is a dangerous offender in their 
community — one of the other vehicles for addressing this 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1135 

 

concern, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I say we’re looking at this properly, thoroughly. We’re 
taking the time to do a job that needs to be done. It’s not clear 
that these registries work well so we want to make sure that we 
get it right when we do introduce it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Repeat Sex Offender Living in Nipawin 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
also for the Minister of Justice. 
 
My constituency office is receiving a tremendous number of 
calls this week since people in Nipawin learned a convicted sex 
offender is now living in their community. What they are most 
alarmed about is the warning by Provincial Court Judge 
Stephen Carter that this individual is, quote: 
 

. . . at an extremely high risk to reoffend. It is not a matter 
of if, but when that will happen. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the judge said the failing is not the court system, it 
is the provincial government. He said, and I quote again: 
 

There are no facilities in Saskatchewan that can treat or 
take in this repeat offender. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this man is a multiple sex offender with a number 
of serious disorders. The judge believes it is only a matter of 
time before he reoffends. How does the minister explain the 
gaps in the system that allow a high-risk, repeat sex offender to 
be released into a Saskatchewan community? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, of course when an 
offender finishes his or her sentence, he or she will be released, 
and the authorities ensure that there is close surveillance of 
those people. 
 
And in regards to Mr. Young, the member should be aware that 
Health department officials are working with both Prince Albert 
and North-East Health Districts looking into treatment options 
for Mr. Young. But the member should also be aware that there 
are significant controls placed on Mr. Young’s activity under 
the peace bond, which has been issued under section 8(10) of 
the Criminal Code. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister is 
quite right when he indicates that there are numerous different 
agencies involved with this particular individual. But all of 
those agencies, Mr. Speaker, agree that this individual requires 
long-term, in-house care. But there are no such facilities in this 
province. 
 
And since he has completed his sentence for two previous sex 
offences, Corrections Canada has no control over him. He 
hasn’t been declared a dangerous offender and he can’t be until 
he reoffends. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the judge raised alarm bells about the release of 

this individual. The people of Nipawin are very concerned 
about his presence in their community, and all of the release 
conditions in the world are not going to ease their concerns. 
This situation is clearly the responsibility of the provincial 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the minister doing to correct the problems 
with the justice system and protect the people of Nipawin? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member seems to be 
suggesting that this particular offender and indeed offenders 
like this should stay in jail for the rest of their lives. Mr. 
Speaker, I don’t think that’s the view of the majority of the 
people of Canada, and certainly it is not the view of anybody 
who would consider how we might deal with these cases in an 
effective way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can’t refer specifically to the case in question, 
but much of it has been made public. But people in this 
situation are subject to significant conditions on their activity. 
 
For example, they might be required to stay away from young 
women, from young children, from schoolyards. They’ll have a 
curfew. They’re required to stay away from drugs and alcohol 
and to report to psychiatrists and probation officers and police, 
Mr. Speaker — significant constraints to ensure that some 
unforeseen event does not take place. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Use of Government Aircraft by Cabinet Ministers 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Premier. The Canadian Taxpayers 
Federation has released information acquired through the 
freedom of information Act. This information shows NDP 
cabinet ministers’ use of government airplanes is increasing. 
 
And while it’s appropriate for cabinet ministers to use aircraft 
in carrying out Saskatchewan business, it’s definitely not 
appropriate for cabinet ministers to use government airplanes 
for NDP political purposes. And that is exactly what appears to 
have happened during the NDP’s leadership campaign. 
 
Government records show that three NDP cabinet ministers 
used government planes to fly to NDP leadership forums last 
December. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the Premier approve of the use of 
taxpayer-funded government aircraft for NDP political 
purposes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Richard 
Truscott and the Taxpayers Association may not know, but I’m 
sure the government . . . opposition members would know that 
government is not just for the people in Regina. 
 
There is increased demand by groups across the province that 
require government ministers and officials to travel to consult 
on local issues. 
 



1136 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

Mr. Speaker, it’s not uncommon for a minister to travel several 
kilometres in one day, covering hundreds . . . or travel to 
several communities. Several hundred kilometres might be 
covered in one day in order to meet with local organizations and 
business organizations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the member’s question about government 
airline for political purposes. That information is very clear. 
The policy of air transportation services is that the aircraft are 
not to be used for political party purposes — only for 
government business, such as stakeholder meetings, cabinet 
meetings, Treasury Board meetings. Not that of a political 
party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well indeed 
government is not just in Regina. That’s why the Premier was 
going to get a bus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, according to the government’s own records the 
Environment minister, the Culture minister, and the Crown 
Investments minister all used government planes to get to NDP 
leadership debates last December. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from a news release issued this 
morning from the Canadian Taxpayers Federation. And I quote: 
 

On December 4 there was an NDP leadership forum in 
Meadow Lake. The next morning . . . a government plane 
picked up Belanger and Crofford in Meadow Lake and took 
them to Regina. 

 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Premier, my question. Other than the NDP’s 
leadership campaign meeting, what government business in 
Meadow Lake required both the Environment minister and the 
Culture minister on December 4? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Hamilton: — Mr. Speaker, I believe I was very clear 
on the use of government aircraft for government business. 
Each individual minister is responsible to book those flights to 
meet with local organizations, to meet with cabinet meetings, 
officials that would take stakeholder meetings into 
consideration. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I would point out that also use of SPMC’s 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation) 
transportation services has increased for two reasons. The first 
reason is that during a legislative session the opposition MLAs 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) who live more than 350 
kilometres from the Legislative Building are able to travel by 
government aircraft. 
 
And the second one, Mr. Speaker, would be that we’re utilizing 
government aircraft now for some of those out-of-province trips 
that would have significant savings and also provide flexibility 
for those ministers who need to have some additional time for 
meetings and also need to be back very quickly to attend 
meetings at home, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
these meetings were just in the province. 
 
But it seems that the Premier isn’t too concerned about the 
apparent misuse of government aircraft by his own NDP cabinet 
ministers, or he can’t be bothered to investigate. 
 
Maybe the Premier would be interested in a little more 
evidence. Mr. Speaker, I’m quoting again from this morning’s 
news release. I quote: 
 

On December 5, there was a forum in the Battlefords. The 
next morning . . . a plane flew Belanger from North 
Battleford to a day-time forum in La Ronge. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Environment used an aircraft, 
government aircraft, to fly from an NDP leadership campaign 
meeting in North Battleford to another NDP leadership 
campaign meeting in La Ronge. 
 
Does the Premier support the minister’s use of the 
government’s aircraft to attend the NDP campaign forums? 
Will the Premier investigate this apparent violation of the rules 
of the use of government aircraft for NDP purposes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I’d be pleased to answer on behalf of the government, 
and the answer is this, Mr. Speaker. The policy is clear. The 
members have logged their flights and they book them in the 
regular fashion. They’ve been public knowledge. They’ve been 
released as public knowledge, and this government and these 
ministers, sir, have nothing to hide. 
 
What I want to ask that member is: on whose payroll is his 
researcher from the Saskatchewan taxpayer’s federation? 
Former chief of staff to that Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Do they not get paid enough from their caucus funds to do their 
own in-house research, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
seems that when the NDP start getting dirty, they have to get 
dirty. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the rule clearly established that ministers cannot 
use government planes for political purposes. But the 
government’s own record show that the cabinet ministers were 
using . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — That the use of government planes to fly 
to and from NDP leadership campaign meetings. Yet the 
Premier sits there and does nothing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe he needs some more evidence. I’d like to 
quote again from the taxpayers’ news release, and I quote: 
 

The next morning (Dec 6) a plane flew Belanger from 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1137 

 

North Battleford to a day-time forum in La Ronge. Later 
that evening there was another forum in Prince Albert. The 
next . . . (day) (Dec 7) a plane flew Belanger, Crofford, and 
Sonntag from Prince Albert to Regina, where there was 
forum on the evening of December 7. 

 
Mr. Speaker, once again, does the Premier support those 
ministers use of government aircraft to attend NDP leadership 
forums? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, this government has 
nothing to hide with respect to ministerial travel. And I want to 
tell you why, sir. 
 
We are accessible to the people of this province. There are 
executive aircraft available to members for government 
business, and that is what they’re used for, Mr. Speaker. The 
same as they are used to take members opposite home on the 
weekend. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if there’s anyone has anything to be 
embarrassed about, perhaps it’s the fact that their researcher sits 
downtown in Regina under the guise of the Canadian 
Taxpayer’s Federation; the former chief of staff to the Leader of 
the Opposition, who won’t admit who pays his wages, who 
won’t admit who pays his salary of his staff, who won’t admit 
who pays the rent for the office building that he’s in, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I ask them, the public, the financial statements of the Canadian 
Taxpayer’s Federation, their research office downtown — table 
those documents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the minister says he has nothing to hide, yet they’re only 
accessible to the public during an NDP leadership campaign. 
 
Mr. Speaker, government records appear to expose the misuse 
of government aircraft by at least three ministers during last 
year’s NDP leadership campaign. Will the Premier investigate 
this apparent misuse of taxpayers' dollars by three of his cabinet 
ministers? 
 
And if the Premier’s investigation confirms that the NDP 
ministers were using the airplanes to fly to, from, and between 
NDP leadership forums at taxpayers’ expenses, will the Premier 
instruct the ministers to repay taxpayers for all of the costs of 
the plane trips? 
 
And will the Premier ask for the immediate resignation of all 
three of those ministers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said earlier, all 
of that information will be made clear to the media shortly after 
question period. It’s all there. It’s all public record. 

Now what I want to do is I want to ask the Leader of the 
Opposition if he will ask his former chief of staff who indicates 
in the letter: 
 

We do not have annual general meetings. In fact, unlike 
other organizations like unions, chambers of commerce, we 
don’t have members, per se, who pay annual fees. We have 
supporters who make voluntary non-receiptable 
contributions to us when they can. 

 
I ask that member if he’s going to investigate as to whether or 
not he’s funded through that political party or the PC 
(Progressive Conservative) metro fund. That what I . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Premier of the province. Mr. Speaker, we 
have more evidence that the NDP Crowns are completely out of 
control. The NDP now say they asked SaskTel if its purchase of 
Ag Dealer would put them in competition with any 
Saskatchewan company. SaskTel said no. Even though it is 
clear — it is very clear — that there is a Saskatchewan 
company in exactly the same business. SaskTel is now 
admitting that they weren’t aware they would be competing 
with IRON Solutions of Outlook. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where is the due diligence? One phone call to any 
implement dealer in the province, a 30-second search on any 
Internet search engine, would have told them . . . that SaskTel 
would have found out about IRON Solutions. Anybody with a 
pulse and a PalmPilot could have found out about IRON 
Solutions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel just spent $8.3 million without doing even the most 
basic due diligence. How long is the Premier going to tolerate 
this incompetence in his Crown corporations? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again I’m going to 
repeat my answer from yesterday. SaskTel through Ag Dealer is 
not in direct competition, Mr. Speaker, with IRON Solutions, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, IRON Solutions is a software and 
technology company. Ag Dealer publishes magazines and sells 
advertising. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by that member’s definition of what competition 
is, it also puts The Leader-Post, The StarPhoenix, The Western 
Producer, and every other print media that sells classified 
advertising and has a Web site in direct competition, Mr. 
Speaker, with IRON Solutions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, we just heard it 
again from the minister. We heard that these two companies 
don’t compete at all. Yesterday he said, mind you, Mr. Speaker, 
that there was, quote: “some overlap.” Well, Mr. Speaker, let’s 
find out what the Canada West Equipment Dealers were saying 
this morning. They said, and I quote: 



1138 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

What we have seen in the past is salesmen for Ag Dealer 
out calling on dealers, saying they should be doing business 
with Ag Dealer instead of IRON Solutions because they 
have this used-equipment database. 

 
So we have Ag Dealer telling implement dealers, don’t use 
IRON Solutions, use us. Well, Mr. Speaker, we understand 
there’s not a lot of captains of industry on the other side of the 
House, but let’s just point out to them and assure to them that 
that’s competition. Anywhere you go, any day of the week, 
that’s competition with a Saskatchewan business. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP made a huge mistake when they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Would the 
member go directly to his question. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, it’s not too late. Will the minister 
simply admit that they made a huge mistake when they spent $8 
million to buy an Ontario company that clearly is competing 
with a Saskatchewan company in Outlook, Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’ll tell you 
who made a huge mistake. It’s that member who says that we’re 
always in competition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m going to quote from The Leader-Post of May 
15, 2001, and here’s a letter that talks about “SaskTel criticism 
unfair.” 

 
I quote, and here’s from the president, Robert Freberg, 
president of Brigadier Security Systems, who says: 
 

Our totally independent firm, Brigadier Security Systems, 
was started in 1985, but in the past few years found it 
increasingly more difficult to compete with many of the 
large U.S. and out-of-province security companies who 
provide security systems on a monthly payment option 
(security) rather than a retail sale. 
 
SecurTek has more than 16 dealers in Saskatchewan and is 
providing a much-needed service to Saskatchewan people, 
protecting lives and personal property and all the while 
creating jobs and profits that stay (right here) in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
End of quote, Mr. Speaker. That’s what they say. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, yesterday the cabinet . . . two 
different cabinet ministers admitted that SaskTel did not answer 
their question as to whether these two companies compete with 
each other. They admitted that. 
 
Well maybe they don’t mind, maybe they don’t mind the Crown 
corporations making fools out of them, but I think the taxpayers 
of this province mind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact is these companies do compete with each 
other. But when cabinet asked SaskTel the question, will they 
be competing with the company at Outlook, SaskTel said no. So 

either SaskTel isn’t doing its research or they were lying to 
cabinet. Either way it’s unacceptable. 
 
Cabinet is making decisions based on either incomplete or 
inaccurate information by their own admission. And now, 
Saskatchewan taxpayers are on the hook for $8.3 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can the Premier put up with this? How can he 
allow SaskTel to recommend decisions to cabinet based on 
either incomplete or inaccurate information? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re always 
concerned when there is issues of competition with the private 
sector here in Saskatchewan. And that’s why, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re meeting with the individuals tomorrow. And I quote 
again from yesterday’s paper The Leader-Post, from the 
president and CEO (chief executive officer) 
Merlyn Friesen who says, and I quote: 
 

At this point we’re getting great support from both sides of 
government . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the president and CEO of ironworks 
said. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to ask this question though. The members 
talk about investments. I want to say to the members opposite, 
they made an investment, Mr. Speaker, as well that I want to 
talk about. The investment was in a gentleman by the name of 
Stockwell Day who was going to be prime minister, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I ask them, Mr. Speaker, I ask them did they do 
due diligence, Mr. Speaker? How do they feel about their 
investment today, Mr. Speaker? How well is your stock doing, 
Mr. Speaker? And, Mr. Speaker, I want to ask one last question. 
Is due diligence a guarantee of success? I think not. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to stand and table questions 176 through 182 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 176 to 182 inclusive 
have been tabled. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Improvements to Drinking Water 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Following the tragic 
events in Walkerton last year, clarification of roles and 
responsibilities for all government departments that had 
overlapping or complementary responsibility for water safety 
was done. Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management, SERM, led all departments in preparing 
information and coordinating interdepartmental efforts to deal 
with the issue of safe drinking water in the province. 
 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1139 

 

This undertaking was started in May of 2000 and initiatives to 
track and improve our processes are ongoing. Drinking water 
from properly equipped and operated treatment plants is safe to 
drink, which is the case for the majority of Saskatchewan’s 
almost 1,000 cities, towns, villages, resort villages, rural 
municipalities, and organized hamlets. However without 
appropriate treatment and monitoring, the safety of drinking 
water cannot be guaranteed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ever since the Walkerton tragedy, existing SERM 
resources have been redirected to set up drinking water 
inspection, monitoring and compliance activities — that is 
making sure all communities are following the rules — and the 
response time to issues such as water contamination has been 
reduced. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SERM’s role in regard to drinking water safety is 
to regulate municipal water and waste water treatment systems, 
to set requirements for monitoring and treatments, to licence the 
operation of waterworks, to conduct compliance inspections, 
and to set qualifications for water treatment plant operators. 
Mandatory certification for water treatment operators was made 
law in July of 2000. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the water facility operators regularly submit water 
samples to environmental protection in Regina, which is located 
at the provincial lab. If a test result indicates the possibility of a 
problem, the SERM staff in the region are alerted. They then 
immediately contact the plant operator to conduct additional 
testing. If these follow-up tests continue to indicate a problem, 
SERM’s regional officer goes to the site and works with the 
operator to find the source. 
 
SERM works with Sask Health and the local health districts 
whenever there is a potential health concern related to drinking 
water. 
 
As you can see, Mr. Speaker, this process is dependent on many 
people doing very important jobs. In this year’s budget we 
provided for ten and a half more jobs in SERM to do this very 
important work. We’re investing in the human resources that 
are crucial to the process of maintaining clean drinking water. 
 
The members opposite voted against this budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial lab does the actual testing of water 
samples sent in by communities. Since Walkerton, additional 
staff in the lab has permitted the laboratory to process almost 80 
per cent more tests. The increased demand for testing is a result 
of several factors. There’s greater compliance by licensed 
communities under regulations that are enforced by SERM. 
There’s an increased submission of water samples from public 
water supplies under the jurisdiction of Sask Health. And 
there’s greater public awareness of drinking water quality 
issues. 
 
The turnaround time at the lab for testing has also been 
improved. Mr. Speaker, test results are given to SERM and if 
there is a problem, the local medical health officer is also 
notified by the provincial lab. Further testing is done and a 
judgment is made whether to alert the community by issuing a 
precautionary boil-water advisory which advises residents that 
there may be a problem with their water and until the problem 

has been identified water should be boiled, or by issuing a 
boil-water order which tells people that they must boil their 
water for their own safety. 
 
The health district staff, including senior public health 
inspectors and medical health officers, work with the SERM 
eco-region staff at various stages of the monitoring and 
investigation protocol to determine if risks to public health 
exist. 
 
The health district staff will discuss the issuance of the 
emergency boil-water orders or the precautionary drinking 
water advisories. They’ll discuss that with the eco-region staff 
of SERM. 
 
The health district staff also attend meetings with waterwork 
owners and operators to discuss the required actions associated 
with these boil-water advisories or orders. And the health 
district staff work in consultation with the region staff when 
considering rescinding the orders. 
 
Mr. Speaker, precautionary drinking water advisories have been 
issued to those communities whose treatment systems don’t 
meet SERM’s minimum requirements. This does not mean that 
the water is contaminated but it does mean that the systems do 
not meet the approved standards. 
 
Water samples taken from a number of municipal water 
treatment systems in the province may show the presence of 
bacteria from time to time. Positive bacteriological samples in 
many cases do not necessarily mean that there’s a serious 
problem with the drinking water. It can be an isolated event 
caused by such a thing as a sampling problem. 
 
However, when a test result indicates the presence of bacteria, 
action should be taken to ensure the drinking water is safe for 
consumption. And that is what happens, Mr. Speaker, with 
SERM, Health, and municipalities all involved in the process as 
I’ve outlined. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 28 communities that have been issued 
boil-water advisories have been aware of their water treatment 
deficiencies since December of 2000. SERM is working with 
each community to resolve the issues on a case-by-case basis. 
There’s not a cookie-cutter solution for all communities. Each 
has unique problems and SERM has been in each community 
working with the on-site people to put in place the most 
effective and appropriate solution to that community’s water 
treatment needs. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s been some suggestion that those 28 
communities have been outed by the leaked document of last 
week. Nothing could be further from the truth. As I’ve said 
before, each community has had ongoing assessment, 
consultation, and support from SERM for several months as 
they work through the best fix for that individual community. 
 
The citizens of each community have been aware of the 
boil-water advisories that have been in effect for the last few 
months. There’s been no hidden agenda in dealing with these 
communities. Boil-water advisories are a very public alert about 



1140 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

the safety of drinking water in a community. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 2001/2002 budget increased jobs at the 
provincial lab to deal with increased testing and shorter 
turnaround time for reporting results. The budget also included 
money for the lab to attain national accreditation. Funding was 
put in place to acquire a new laboratory information 
management system. The members opposite voted against the 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities have responsibility for ensuring 
safe water for their residents, safe water that meets SERM’s 
quality objectives. This is done through sound operation and 
maintenance of their water treatment plants and distribution 
systems and through the collection and submission of samples 
as required by SERM. 
 
SERM requires municipalities to submit samples to the 
provincial lab to test, and the number of samples and the 
frequency of submission depends on the population served by 
the system. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this government has made significant 
investments in municipal infrastructure. We have also partnered 
with the federal government and municipalities to make money 
available for more water treatment and sewage initiatives. We’ll 
elaborate on this, including investments in the North, in a few 
moments. Again the opposition voted against this budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sask Water was asked to undertake an 
assessment of the more than 500 water treatment plants in the 
province to provide government with an overview of the issues 
and an estimate of the cost to ensure safe drinking water. 
 
Sask Water is working with SUMA (Saskatchewan Urban 
Municipalities Association) and SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and has sent surveys to all 
communities with questions about their plants and their 
concerns for their operations. 
 
Sask Water is currently undertaking a technical assessment of 
Saskatchewan municipal drinking water systems. The study will 
provide a ranking and assessment of all 560 Saskatchewan 
municipal drinking water systems. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, Sask Water has a rural water quality 
program designed to assist individual rural water users to ensure 
their water is safe to drink. This year’s budget added money to 
expand this program to provide advice on the suitability of 
drinking water and how it can be treated. 
 
Money was also added for collaboration with Sask Research 
Council to provide scientific testing of private water treatment 
technology and equipment. The members opposite voted 
against this budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this overview of the extensive initiatives 
undertaken by our government underscores how seriously we 
view the issue of safe drinking water. 
 
After Walkerton, we quickly mobilized the appropriate 
government departments to gather information and make 
assessments for immediate action and recommendations for 

longer-term strategies. Many initiatives were started using 
existing resources last year, but more needed to be done. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this year’s budget started to address the 
most pressing of the problems. Strategic investments in 
increased manpower for testing and follow-up shows that our 
commitment is to provide safe and high quality drinking water 
to the people of Saskatchewan. Investments into accreditation 
and a water information system, as well as support for 
individuals with privately owned water systems, were also part 
of this year’s budget. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as I have said repeatedly, the opposition 
voted against all of these initiatives that would provide safe and 
high quality drinking water by voting against the budget. 
Apparently their solution for everything is a tax cut. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as my colleague from Saskatoon 
Northwest pointed out in the House the other day, the 
opposition recently argued that we should amend legislation to 
give municipalities the freedom to deliver local services with a 
minimum of provincial government interference. 
 
Apparently our testing of water is seen as government 
interference, and yet the opposition continues to say we have 
not done anything to address the issue of safe water. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I will close by saying that we may 
not have done enough, but we are making significant progress 
in an open and responsible way. This progress will be aided by 
the new initiatives in this year’s budget. So it is with all of this 
in mind that I am compelled to move the motion to: 
 

. . . condemn the opposition for voting against the 
provincial budget which contained important actions to 
improve Saskatchewan’s drinking water. 

 
The motion is seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
Wakamow. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: —  
 

That this Assembly condemn the opposition for voting 
against the provincial budget which contained actions to 
improve Saskatchewan’s drinking water. 

 
I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, this is a very important motion that we are here to 
debate this afternoon. We all are guilty, I am sure, of taking our 
water for granted. We turn on a tap, use whatever we need, and 
don’t give it a second thought. 
 
We live in a province that can boast over 90,000 freshwater 
lakes, and we hear talk often in the media about exporting our 
plentiful water supplies to other countries. Water is essential to 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1141 

 

our very existence. An element, Mr. Speaker, that we simply 
cannot do without. An element that our province cannot do 
without. 
 
And as I rise to enter this debate . . . And, Mr. Speaker, this 
isn’t really a debate because what I rise to do is to help inform 
the members opposite with the facts on the many projects and 
programs that this government has researched, developed, and 
implemented to provide safe, clean water to communities 
throughout our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government’s commitment to providing clean, 
safe water to our municipalities really goes back to a program 
that began in the early 1990s and continued until 1998 when the 
federal and provincial governments participated in a tripartite 
infrastructure program. Over $167 million was provided over 
the life of that infrastructure program to Saskatchewan 
municipalities. 
 
During the same period of time, Sask Water utility development 
program was intensified. Sask Water investigated 
improvements to water supply and treatment systems for 
communities throughout the province, resort communities, and 
for industrial users. Sewage treatment facilities were 
investigated and were completed for a number of communities. 
They provided . . . This government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
provided ongoing support and technical advice. 
 
In 1999-2000 this government funded the provincial-municipal 
infrastructure program on its own. Mr. Speaker, $10 million 
was provided to upgrade municipal infrastructure each of these 
years. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, add to that the 2000-2001 commitment by 
our government to the municipal component of the Centenary 
Fund to provide $5 million per year over a four-year period, 
again for municipal infrastructure programs. 
 
What I have given here are only a few examples of the 
programs and inputs into municipalities that have been ongoing 
over the last decade. Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a clear 
indication of our government’s commitment to clean water 
supplies for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
In May of 2000, as we all are well aware, the tragedy at 
Walkerton, Ontario was in the news. This government acted 
quickly to guard against such an occurrence here and to 
reinforce existing regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many steps were taken by SERM. In May 2000 all 
communities were advised of the importance of conducting 
regular, bacteriological monitoring and proper operation of 
waterworks. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, an increase in 
submissions at the provincial lab was seen as a result of this 
notification. 
 
Over the summer, SERM, Sask Health, and Sask Water 
gathered detailed information to identify areas requiring 
improvements or attention regarding drinking water 
management and short- and long-term actions to address these 
areas. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this report identified all areas of possible concern. 

Mandatory certification for operators was implemented at this 
time by SERM along with new protocol to allow quicker 
response and action when water samples with bacteriological 
contamination were detected. 
 
The case of North Battleford is a perfect example of how the 
new protocol implemented by SERM allowed for a very quick 
response and action when water samples with bacteriological 
contamination were detected. This government takes pride in 
the quick action taken in regards to North Battleford, Mr. 
Speaker. We acted, Mr. Speaker, while the opposition played 
politics in front of this Hon. Assembly, putting their own 
interests in front of those interests of Saskatchewan people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, opposition members have said that this 
government was trying to hide the threat to public health as a 
result of deteriorating infrastructure. One word comes to mind 
when I hear such allegations, Mr. Speaker, and it’s definitely 
not accountable, but instead, opportunistic. 
 
Not once, Mr. Speaker, before May 4 did the opposition ever 
raise the question of water or water quality. What that tells me, 
Mr. Speaker, is that the members on that side of the floor are 
opportunistic and do not care about the well-being of the people 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
In 2000, SERM issued 69 precautionary drinking water 
advisories and 10 emergency boil-water orders because of its 
increased testing and investigations, and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
relayed this information to the communities involved. 
 
Now the opposition can say we’re trying to hide but it’s very 
hard to hide when you’re offering public advisories and 
boil-water orders. We issued public orders. We relayed the 
information to the affected communities and worked with those 
communities to correct the situation. 
 
As well in March, this government announced an investment of 
$720,000 for ten and a half full-time positions devoted to 
improving drinking water management. We also announced an 
increase of $520,000 and 4.5 positions for the provincial lab to 
allow quicker turnaround for water-quality tests. 
 
These are examples of a government that is proactive and not 
reactive like the members opposite are even displaying now as 
we speak. 
 
We voted for a budget that contained all of the new programs 
and funding for safe drinking water, while the opposition, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, voted against it. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the opposition introduced a motion 
in this very House, to eliminate 570 new positions created in 
this year’s budget to improve services to Saskatchewan 
residents. What they wanted to eliminate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
was also the 50 new positions that were created to enhance 
water quality in this province. 
 
In March of 2001, the provincial budget addressed a number of 
drinking water concerns raised during the previous months. An 
increase in ongoing and one-time funding, and an increase in 
staffing to enable environmental sciences section of the 
provincial lab to attain national accreditation to ensure that 



1142 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

quality standards and protocols for drinking water testing meets 
nationally acceptable standards. Also funding for acquisition of 
new laboratory information management systems to support 
water quality sample tracking — they voted against it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The budget also announced that Sask Water, rural water 
advisory program, would expand to provide advise on the 
suitability of drinking water and how it can be treated. 
Additional funding will also be used to promote the service. 
There was also dollars designated to provide scientific testing 
for private water treatment technology and equipment. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, over $650,000 was designated in SERM’s 
budget to develop a compliance review schedule for water 
treatment facilities and to develop drinking water standards. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, leading up to the March budget, the 
province successfully negotiated with the federal government to 
bring back the provincial/federal agreement that would support 
municipal infrastructure renewal. The agreement was signed at 
a provincial-municipal roundtable with SUMA and SARM 
present. This program emphasizes local input and involvement. 
 
SUMA and SARM have had significant input into the program 
criteria and guidelines. This program was announced in the 
March budget. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this program will 
provide over 113 million federal and provincial dollars to 
municipal infrastructure over the next five years. 
 
This year the province will match the federal contributions 
providing 24 million to infrastructure investment in 
communities. Green infrastructure which includes water and 
waste water systems, water management, solid waste 
management, and recycling will be the first priority of this 
program and will receive 50 per cent of available funding. 
 
(14:45) 
 
The highest priority for project approval was given to applicants 
from communities that had received precautionary drinking 
water advisories. Every community that has applied in this 
fiscal year, with precautionary drinking water advisory, has had 
its project approved. 
 
Safe drinking water, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is definitely a priority 
with this government. Capital investments to improve water 
treatment facilities in these communities will help to enhance 
the quality of local water. It will also continue the good work 
that this government has done and will continue to do in coming 
years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was proud to support our government’s March 
2000 budget — a budget that enhanced services to all areas of 
Saskatchewan’s population. I am pleased to second the motion 
put forward by the member from Saskatoon Eastview. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. As I 
rise to debate the motion as proposed and presented by the 
member from Saskatoon Eastview, I would like to indicate that 
at the conclusion of my remarks I will be amending the motion 

to more accurately reflect the concerns of Saskatchewan people 
and the manner in which this government has attempted to 
deceive them about the state of drinking water supplies in this 
province. 
 
And what is that reality, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well all you 
have to do is look at the headlines: 
 

Government knew of bad water for years. Leaked 
documents suggest coverup. 
 

And a little further into the column, Mr. Deputy Speaker: 
 

Despite knowing for nine years that 121 communities 
lacked adequate water treatment, a leaked cabinet 
document told government officials to reassure people their 
drinking water was safe. 
 
That same document also advised cabinet to “avoid 
criticism of former cuts to program(s) and lack of 
provincial action” . . . 

 
Another headline, Mr. Deputy Speaker, “Another Walkerton 
feared.” 
 
And why, why did we have these headlines, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? Because we have another example of this government 
deliberately trying to blame others for its own incompetence 
and deception — typical of this government over the course of 
its entire tenure in office. Blame others. Blame someone else. 
Find anyone. Just blame somebody. 
 
The blatant hypocrisy that we see in this motion just about sets 
one back on your heels. The motion they should be putting 
forward today is an apology. An apology for their own 
incompetence and an attempt at deception. 
 
The information contained in the documents we brought to the 
attention of the public goes back to 1992, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And in these documents, as we now have learned, there was a 
strategy to tell the public that everything was fine with their 
water when that government, Mr. Deputy Speaker, according to 
their very own document, knew very well that there were very, 
very serious problems. 
 
And what was the Minister of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management’s response when the Leader of the 
Opposition asked him if cabinet had been warned about a 
possible Walkerton-type situation occurring in Saskatchewan? 
His first response, once again, was to deny. And even though it 
was there in black and white, his first response was to deny and 
say no. Even denying existence of the very document that we 
tabled that very same day, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Then that same minister had the audacity to stand over and over 
again in this House and talk about how he and his government 
were going to be open and transparent. If it wasn’t such a 
serious situation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it would almost be 
laughable. And on one occasion in question period, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I actually remember the minister, in response to a 
question, indicating that he was going to only be open and 
transparent on some of the strategies of the government. 
 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1143 

 

There’s no doubt that the government had no intention 
whatsoever of coming clean with the Saskatchewan public, and 
it was only because the Saskatchewan Party was able to bring 
the information forward to this House that the people of this 
province found out the truth and found out how this government 
tried to deceive them in terms of the state of the water supply in 
this province. 
 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we have a 
number of backbenchers over there howling and complaining 
about the fact that a cabinet document that they themselves 
were never privy to, they should probably be aware of the fact 
that cabinet intended to keep it secret from them as well, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some really interesting information in this document, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. According to some of the statistics that are 
part of the document, it’s indicated in here that there’s an 
approximate cost to the province, to the Department of Health, 
of $8 million per year related to poor quality water. Now if the 
government has known for 10 years — remember they’ve 
known about these difficulties since 1992 and they’ve known 
about these difficulties for 10 years — and there was an annual 
cost to the health care system of $8 million because of poor 
water quality in this province, that is $80 million. Mr. Speaker, 
$80 million that could have gone a long ways to helping clean 
up the mess and in the end saving health care costs in the long 
run. 
 
I find it absolutely amazing that this government would accept a 
situation where it cost the health care system in this province 
annually $8 million because of poor quality drinking water. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to turn my attention a bit to the 
budget, as was referred to by the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview. And I think it’s interesting that this new-found 
interest in water quality that we see on the opposite side 
translated in the last budget into a lower budget for the 
environmental protection branch and SERM. This is the branch 
that regularly monitors water; that does regulate water quality in 
this province. That budget this year, Mr. Speaker, was reduced 
by $92,000. 
 
And perhaps while we’re talking about budgets, I would like to 
point out to the members opposite that this budget did pass. 
They are quite correct in that the members of the official 
opposition did not support it. But at the end of the day it did 
pass. It passed, and yet what happened? Water quality has 
gotten worse and they’ve deliberately tried to hide that fact 
from the public. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member to be very 
careful about the phrases he uses. He’s bordering on being 
unparliamentary when he talks about a member or the 
government deliberately misleading or deliberately hiding. It’s 
rather unparliamentary and I would just caution the member on 
those phrases. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Very quickly, I 
would like to move on to the issue of water inspection. This 
CDI (cabinet decision item) cabinet document also speaks about 
that and what happens here in Saskatchewan compared to 
Alberta. 

In Alberta, there is an annual inspection of plants. As well, 
inspectors provide technical assistance for the safe operation of 
those plants. 
 
In Saskatchewan, in the cabinet decision item, Mr. Speaker, it 
indicates that inspectors rarely visit plants and that they offer 
very little technical assistance. So if one was to actually follow 
through and hire more water quality inspectors there, you can’t 
stop at that, Mr. Speaker. Because it’s clear from this cabinet 
document that the water inspectors we currently have aren’t 
providing much in the way of guidance and protection for the 
citizens of the province. 
 
Let’s look at the comparison of the document from the drinking 
water standards as they are in Alberta. In Alberta, the latest 
edition of the Canadian drinking water quality guidelines has 
been legislated. In Saskatchewan, the minister is given the 
discretion to set water quality standards, and according to the 
cabinet decision item once again, the minister has not specified 
any standards to date. 
 
We also see in this document the disturbing contemplation of 
getting rid of this legal problem by downloading on to the 
municipalities again. And at the very same time, what were they 
doing? They were hacking and slashing the revenue sharing of 
those very same local government budgets and municipalities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve seen municipal budgets cut over the last 10 
years. Once again in this last budget, again not one single penny 
for revenue sharing. Is it any surprise that the municipalities 
themselves have had difficulty in keeping up with the demands 
around water quality over the last 10 years? 
 
And now what we see is the members opposite riding in with a 
last minute band-aid solution to try and mitigate political 
damage. Well, it’s too little a little too late and people are 
starting to pay the price, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this point I would like to move the amendment 
as seconded by the member from Canora-Pelly, and the 
amendment would be: 
 

That all words after “condemned” be deleted and the 
following be substituted: 
 
That the government be condemned for its deliberate 
strategy to deceive the general public about the state of 
water safety in Saskatchewan as outlined in the 
communication strategy contained in the cabinet document 
brought to the attention of this Assembly by the official 
opposition. 

 
The Speaker: — I’ll just pause for a moment to allow the 
member to reword his motion, because the motion that’s been 
submitted is out of order. 
 
I would ask the member to read the amendment into the record. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The 
amendment would read as follows: 
 

That all words after “condemned” be deleted and the 
following substituted: 



1144 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

the government for its planned strategy to keep information 
from the general public about the state of water safety in 
Saskatchewan as outlined in the communication strategy 
contained in the cabinet document brought to the attention 
of this Assembly by the official opposition. 

 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — I recognize the member for Moose Jaw North. 
What is your point of order? 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask you to find the 
amendment out of order. When we look at the amendment that 
is before us, I suppose it can be debatable as to whether the 
most germane topic of the amendment is the action of the 
opposition or if it has to do with the provincial budget. 
 
But in the amendment that the hon. member has moved, Mr. 
Speaker, he has made reference to neither and it is not in order 
to move an amendment which is not germane to the original 
motion. And I would ask you to find that the amendment is 
simply out of order. Debate should proceed on the original 
motion. 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, I have read the 
original motion and the motion. And we’ve always allowed a 
great deal of latitude in the debate in this legislature and I find 
that what is . . . Order, order. And I find that the, to me, the 
essence of the first motion was about Saskatchewan’s drinking 
water with relation to the provincial budget. This amendment 
also deals with the state of the water safety in Saskatchewan. 
 
I find the motion in order. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pleasure to enter into the debate on both of the 
. . . not only the motion, but the amendment as well. And I’m 
going to limit my remarks to the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program that the member for Moose Jaw raised, 
as far as the amounts of money that are being expended; but 
more specifically, Mr. Speaker, the budget that has been 
presented and how it deals with the budget for Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management and more specifically, 
what it puts in place for the environmental protection. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week the document that was presented to the 
cabinet as a working document was released to the public, and I 
want to read into the record again, very clearly, the response of 
the minister when asked the following question. 
 
The question that was asked, and I’m quoting now from 
Hansard of May 10, says: 
 

Prior to the current crisis in North Battleford, was cabinet 
ever warned that there is a high potential for a 
Walkerton-type crisis here in Saskatchewan? And was 
cabinet ever given a specific action plan to prevent this 
from happening in Saskatchewan? 

 
The response: 
 

Mr. Speaker, the answer is no. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that document was a working document that was 
presented to cabinet. It was discussed by cabinet, and it had a 
number of recommendations about how we should deal with the 
problems facing people in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as indicated, the conditions are not new; those 
conditions have been related to this government for the entire 
decade of the ’90s. In fact as early as 1992 it was pointed out 
that there were deficiencies, and that there have been over the 
course of time a need to deal with those deficiencies. 
 
How did this government respond, Mr. Speaker? By reducing 
the amount of municipal revenue sharing, by reducing that now 
to the point where the revenue-sharing pool for urban 
municipalities sits at a low of $27 million. 
 
Is it any wonder, Mr. Speaker, that the urban municipal group 
began with a slogan in their campaign prior to this budget that 
said, sharing the gain after sharing the pain. They made 
presentations to the cabinet, they made presentations to the 
Minister of Finance where they said, we simply cannot exist as 
a body involving urban municipalities and function properly, 
being able to provide the correct services that are necessary. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, those concerns were brought to this 
government’s attention. They were brought to this 
government’s attention by the president of SUMA, by villages, 
by cities that said, we need to deal with this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last fall a number of communities received a 
boil-water order — small communities who had received the 
boil-water order after having their supplies tested and checked. 
Mr. Speaker, two of those communities are in the Canora-Pelly 
constituency, and they are struggling. 
 
Not only those two communities that specifically have been 
given the boil-water order, but many other communities around 
— Good Spirit Lake, the farm families that exist between 
Canora and Mikado, and Canora and Rama, — all of those 
communities, Mr. Speaker, are very concerned about their water 
supply. They need to address the provision of better quality 
water. 
 
So there have been attempts not only to address this concern 
with the province, but also to address this concern with the 
federal government. And you know, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting how in the budget the Minister of Finance 
announced that there was going to be an expenditure of $170 
million for infrastructure, almost suggesting that that 170 
million is a provincial commitment. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have a document that breaks down the 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure allocations, and it is a 
five-year plan, Mr. Speaker — 170 million over the course of 
five years. 
 
The current provincial commitment, according to the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program, is that the 
provincial government will commit $12 million for this fiscal 
year — 12 million out of the total of 36 million. The other 24 
million, Mr. Speaker, come from the communities themselves 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1145 

 

and the federal government on an equal share. Many 
communities have responded by saying, you know it’s fine to 
look at the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program but 
you have to remember that we still must commit one-third of 
the responsibility for a particular project. 
 
And I’ll use an example, Mr. Speaker, of a pipeline project 
proposed in the Canora-Pelly constituency. The initial estimates 
are that we might be looking at a cost of somewhere around 
$2.4 million. And there are many such projects, as the member 
from Moose Jaw Wakamow identified. In fact, hundreds of 
projects have been put forward to try to get their share of the 
$36 million that is not just for water enhancement and water 
quality projects, but it’s for transportation projects and it’s a 
whole host of things under this particular program. 
 
So as a result, the local municipalities are now wondering how 
they’re going to fund it. They can’t come up with nearly a 
million dollars to be able to fund their particular portion of the 
project. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the other startling things about today’s 
motion made by the government members and the actual 
information contained in the budget document, their response is 
that — as we’ve heard from the minister — we’re moving 
forward, we’re putting forward a plan. 
 
I want to share with the people of Saskatchewan, the actual 
numbers that are contained in the budget document. And I refer 
to page 55 under the section entitled, environmental protection, 
vote (ER11). I’m going to read the first paragraph, Mr. Speaker, 
and it says this: 
 

Provides environmental protection and upholds 
environmental standards by monitoring compliance with 
environmental regulations in various sectors concerning air 
and water quality. 

 
And then there’s a number of other responsibilities as well. It 
very specifically says that this department is responsible for 
water quality. 
 
Mr. Speaker, do you know what the budget contains as far as 
the amount of money that this government has committed to 
dealing with water quality? In fact, Mr. Speaker, there is a 
reduction. And I’m going to share those numbers with you. Last 
year, the year 2000-2001, for environmental protection and 
support for environmental programs the government has 
indicated that they spent $2.932 million — just a little over 2.9 
million. 
 
This year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, for dealing with water quality, 
for dealing with the Walkerton-type crisis that has been raised 
to this cabinet, the cabinet is now going to spend — through 
this budget — is going to spend 2.738 million. It has reduced 
the amount of money it is spending on dealing with water 
quality by nearly $200,000. 
 
Isn’t that ironic, Mr. Speaker? That the government would state 
right now that the budget is something that was going to be in 
place to deal with water quality, when in fact they have reduced 
the amount of money that they are putting forward to dealing 
with water quality by $200,000. 

Now, members opposite, Mr. Speaker, chirp from their chairs 
by indicating that we would now, you know, fire the people, 
etc. No, the question that has to be understood — and it’s 
understood by the people in the province — is that this 
government is putting in place numerous employees in all kinds 
of departments. 
 
And I’ll deal with one, Mr. Speaker. You know, the Executive 
Council is increasing by four people. A staff of over 80 people 
in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, at a time when 
the province’s population is declining, when we are in fact 
getting smaller. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, instead of transferring people, they 
should have transferred funds. They should have transferred the 
funds where they’ve allocated people to non-needed areas like 
Executive Council, and put in place additional funding for 
water quality. That’s what was needed. 
 
It’s not a matter of saying, were 500 employees needed? The 
question that has to be asked by the cabinet ministers opposite 
is whether or not existing staffs are there, existing positions, 
and existing monies. Because that’s the way to deal with it. 
 
It’s not a matter, Mr. Speaker, of suddenly looking at the budget 
and saying, well, we’re not going to deal with water quality 
even though we’ve been informed for the last decade that there 
are problems, that there are 121 communities in the province of 
Saskatchewan that have systems that are in need of 
improvement, need of repair; that we have 38 boil-water orders 
that were issued that are still in effect, and they have been in 
effect since last fall, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So the question has to be asked: how is this government 
providing assistance to these communities? Well it’s providing 
assistance by repeating the same numbers, by repeating the fact 
that 170 million is going to be suddenly the answer, when in 
fact this is municipal funding on a third share, this is federal 
funding on a third share, and in fact, yes, over five years, it is 
provincial funding. 
 
But it is only $12 million for this year that is supposed to be 
taking care of all of the problems of the province of 
Saskatchewan. Whereas the members opposite try to indicate 
that this is a huge amount of money. 
 
Well, you know, Mr. Speaker, yesterday the house was 
informed that they spent $15 million on two dot-com 
companies. And today they are telling us . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to get into 
the debate today and to vote against the amendment. And also, 
to support the original motion which basically talks about 
condemning the opposition for voting against the provincial 
budget which contains action to improve Saskatchewan’s 
drinking water. 
 
Now those members across are, of course, getting worried about 
the truth that I will be speaking in regards to the debate. 
 
Number one, I would say this. I was listening to the words used 



1146 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

by the member from Carrot River Valley, and I heard the 
member from Canora in regards to the words that were used 
originally, that there should be an apology as well, as the word 
that they used was deception. 
 
And I must say that it’s strange to hear those words coming 
from those people when I looked at the history of this 
legislature and when I was in opposition and I saw that Grant 
Devine people work as a government, and seeing what they did 
in regards to the province of Saskatchewan and the tremendous 
mess that they made in regards to this whole province including 
the lack of sewer and water in this province as well as the 
North. 
 
I’d like to focus my remarks in regards to the North because 
one of the things that’s very important of the Grant Devine and 
the right-wing mentality, and that’s the fact that they will 
simply never deal with the North except in regards to not doing 
anything in the North and having at that period in history, the 
Devine neglect. 
 
Now when I looked at the record therefore in my debate, I will 
be dealing about the North as well as dealing with the budget 
and what’s included in the budget. 
 
Now for the North, it is very important to look at the history. 
It’s very true what the member from Carrot River Valley talks 
about when he talks about the report that came out in 1992. But 
that was not a condemnation of the NDP government. That was 
a condemnation of the Grant Devine government for the 
neglect, the nine years of neglect, that they did in rural 
communities and in northern communities. 
 
When I looked at the northern communities, they did nothing or 
very little in regards to the northern development. So what they 
did was absolutely nothing in regards to jobs that come in 
regards to the sewer and water development, nothing in regards 
to the training. 
 
And when we come into government, Mr. Speaker, this is what 
happened. As we come in, we looked at the report in 1992 and 
we started making some decisions as to where the critical areas 
were. And in regards to my debate, I will stick to my comments 
on the North. 
 
We looked at the northern area and in our first two terms we put 
in approximately $22 million. And it was not only a question of 
putting $22 million helping the communities, over 20 
communities in the North; what it was, was a respect for the 
people of the North. 
 
(15:15) 
 
I remember the time when Grant Devine was around and I was 
in opposition. Not only did they not do anything in regards to 
the North, they had complete disrespect for the people of the 
North. They didn’t even bother meeting with the people of the 
North. 
 
I noticed one time they went flying around for a period of two 
days. And I remember the Grant Devine government going 
there, doing a big expenditure to try and do fundraising where 
hardly anybody showed up in regards to La Ronge. But they did 

very little, and many times when I talk to the members from 
across, they wonder why they get no support politically in 
regards to northern development. It was because of the Devine 
neglect. 
 
When I look at the North, we had an organization called the 
Saskatchewan Association for Northern Local Governments. 
And by the leaders over there, they talked to the Grant Devine 
government that something needed to be done in regards to 
sewer and water and housing. And do you know what? Nothing 
was done. 
 
Not only did Grant Devine do nothing in regards to that, they 
did not do anything in regards to meeting with the people of the 
North. They did not respect the people from the North. They 
didn’t even meet with the political organizations that 
democratically elected leaders of the North. They just bypassed 
them and did what they wanted to do from their control element 
here in Regina. 
 
And I might say this, Mr. Speaker. This question is therefore 
not only in regards to the respect of the people of the province 
and in this particular instance the North, but it’s also the action 
that needs to be taken. 
 
So the first thing was, yes we did action as a government. 
Starting in 1992 and after, we put $22 million in regards to 
improving sewer and water right in the North. We helped out in 
regards to the housing issue because there was houses needed. 
We had 7 million, our first program, 8 million, and then 9 
million, for $24 million in regards to housing. 
 
But the big, important thing was that we still were as a 
government concerned on the sewer and water question in the 
North, so we commissioned a study. And the study did come in, 
and it was called the Northern Water and Sewer Infrastructure 
Study. This was done by the steering committee, the final report 
of which was in March 2000. This was last year, Mr. Speaker, 
last spring, when this report came out. 
 
Guess what? This government paid due respect to the leaders of 
the New North. We sat with the New North. We had done the 
joint study with UMA Engineering from Saskatoon. And we sat 
with the people on the needs in regards to the issue of sewer and 
water and the issue in regards to the housing. 
 
When the report came down, it came to recommendations 
saying that approximately 25 places in the North needed to be 
improved, plus 9 communities that required . . . because of 
Devine neglect, they had no sewer and water. We needed to 
build on the 9 communities. 
 
Now what happened is this, from March when the report came 
out to July, we had an action plan. We did a news release on 
July 13 on the year 2000 as a response to this report. 
 
And I might say this, that the Northerners were very, very 
happy not only with the respect that we gave them and to their 
leadership, they were very happy of the concrete action that we 
took. The concrete action is this, that we will have in northern 
Saskatchewan 25 communities that will have their sewer and 
water upgraded. We will also have 9 communities that will have 
sewer and water in the Far North for the first time. That is very 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1147 

 

important in terms of a historic record. 
 
I went to a meeting in Labrador earlier on . . . well later on last 
fall and when they were talking about the sewer and water 
problems in northern Ontario, northern Quebec, and northern 
Alberta, and all through northern BC, they were very impressed 
with the strategy that we laid out in regards to sewer and water. 
 
They said you have probably done more than anybody else, you 
know, across Canada. That indeed the action you’re taking in 
making sure that the people of the North are not left out, you 
know, other decision making has now come to reality, not only 
in regards to the sewer and water but in regards to economic 
development. 
 
And I might say that this strong action by the NDP coalition 
Liberal government is that we had got a study. Sometimes when 
there’s a study, a person says is the government going to do 
something about it? And yes, we acted immediately to get that 
action going. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — I would like to say in conclusion, that I 
would like to put on the record those communities that will now 
have sewer and water for the first time, something that the 
Grant Devine never knew anything about in the North when 
they were around. Because I know that right-wing mentality is 
this, whereas social democrats balance taxation and also 
bringing down the debt and also getting programs out to people, 
all we hear from there is that the Truscott message was all we 
do is cut taxes. 
 
Well how are you going to deliver programs if all you do is cut 
taxes? You have to do . . . cutting taxes, but you got to get the 
programs as well so it’s got to be a sustainable taxation 
strategy, which is what our government does. 
 
In that regard, Mr. Speaker, I was pleased to see the records 
improved for the communities of the sewer and water: Stony 
Rapids — you’ve heard it on the news quite a bit — Brabant 
Lake, Sled Lake, Southend, Camsell Portage, Black Point, Bear 
Creek, Descharme Lake, and Garson Lake. 
 
These communities were very, very happy with the provincial 
government in the fact that the provincial government took 
action to make sure that indeed their sewer and water problems 
and their housing problems were taken care of. And they were 
very proud as well that we took time to give them the respect, 
the respect where we sat with them as fellow leaders and we 
made the decision jointly. 
 
It was a good day on July 13, the year 2000 when we made that 
decision. We took a leadership, you know, across Canada, and 
that’s the essence of it. 
 
And when I look at the budget 2000, that’s the same thing. And 
my other member will be talking about that. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’m glad to 
have the opportunity today, Mr. Speaker, to respond to the 
75-minute debate. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve been involved in a lot of 
75-minute debates since I’ve been elected. Without a doubt, this 
is the most ridiculous motion that I have ever had the 
opportunity to speak to. 
 
But I’d also like to comment on some of the comments made by 
the member for Cumberland. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard this government in the 
last 10 years — since they’ve been elected — blame Grant 
Devine. How many times we’ve heard it’s Grant Devine’s fault. 
In fact, they’re still stuck in that rut. I think the member for 
Cumberland used Grant Devine’s name three times that I heard, 
and maybe even more. It’s still Grant Devine’s fault. 
 
Then other times we’ve heard them blame the federal 
government. It’s the federal government’s fault. And then the 
last month, you know who they’re blaming now, Mr. Speaker? 
It’s the official opposition’s fault that this problem is in . . . 
province is in such bad shape, including our water problems. 
 
And I wonder about the member for Cumberland, Mr. Speaker, 
when he talks about what this government, the NDP 
government has done for the North. If they’ve done so much for 
the North, why do we still have so many problems with water in 
the North? Why do we have health care problems in the North? 
Why are all the problems in the North still there as they were 
when they came to power as they said? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this motion that is presented today, if it wasn’t 
such a serious problem in this province, would be laughable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re here today to talk about the budget that was 
presented this year and the problems we have with water in 
Saskatchewan. And I believe, Mr. Speaker, it comes down to a 
few things. 
 
The priorities of this government, rather than give the 
municipalities in this province dollars to fix the infrastructure, 
including water and sewer, they saw fit to hire 570 more 
government workers. That’s their priority. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, SERM alone is going to hire I believe, if my 
numbers are right, in excess of 100 more employees. Now what 
would be better, Mr. Speaker — giving that money to 
municipalities to spend on infrastructure or to hire another 103 
government workers. And possibly, I think the minister had said 
they’d hired 10 more people to sample water. And we’re not 
arguing with that, Mr. Speaker. They may have been needed. 
 
But why can’t they do what every business does in this 
province, every municipality does in this province, is when they 
need people in one area and you can’t afford to hire them, you 
restructure. You move them from this area, put them in that 
area. I’m sure at the size of that government workforce over 
there, they could find people in one area to move, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also let’s look at the problems North Battleford 
had. And you know what the biggest problem North 



1148 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

Battleford’s had in the last 10 years? I’m going to tell you what 
the problem is, Mr. Speaker. The funding, the revenue sharing 
that North Battleford got in 1991 . . . and I hope the members 
opposite will listen to this. That was when Grant Devine got 
removed from power. But revenue sharing for the city of North 
Battleford was $1.199 million. That was under Grant Devine. 
 
Well let’s see where we’ve gone since then. 1992 — oh, oh, it 
was cut back $200,000. Oh, oh, 1993, cut back another 60,000; 
1994, another 100,000 less. Mind you, Mr. Speaker, this is all 
for just the city of North Battleford. 1995, down we go again. 
Every year it keeps . . . 1997 we go down another $110,000. 
 
I added it up, Mr. Speaker. You know, actually if this 
government had to come in and not increase 1 cent for the city 
of North Battleford, if they’d have froze the revenue sharing, do 
you know how many more dollars the city of North Battleford 
would have had in the last 10 years? — $5.4 million in revenue 
sharing. 
 
Can you imagine what they could have done for their water 
system? Can you imagine what they could have done for their 
sewer system? Mr. Speaker, do you think we’d have a problem? 
Do you think we’d have a problem in North Battleford? I don’t 
think so. 
 
These municipal officials out there, had they of had the luxury 
of spending these dollars, probably would have had one of the 
first-rate systems in this country, Mr. Speaker. You know . . . 
And I think what it boils down to, and again as I said, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s priorities of this government. What do we want to 
do? Do we want to grow government? Do we want to make 
government bigger? Or do we want to do what’s right and build 
the infrastructure for the people of Saskatchewan? 
 
What this government seems to have lost sight of, Mr. Speaker, 
is that the reason governments are put in place is to provide the 
basic necessities of residents of Saskatchewan, being possibly 
health care. And what have they done in health care? Well they 
closed 53 hospitals. 
 
Providing education for our kids in Saskatchewan. And what 
have we seen in education? We see a number of schools closing 
every year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another basic necessity is roads and highways. And what have 
we seen in this province, under this NDP government? We see 
the worst highways in Canada. Let me repeat that, Mr. Speaker. 
We see the worst road system in Canada, Mr. Speaker, because 
this government has its priorities all backwards. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another priority we have is to provide the social 
fabric for the people of Saskatchewan. Instead, what we see this 
government doing is trying to play entrepreneurs and business 
people which they have no idea what they’re doing. What they 
like to do is make foreign investments, buy companies in 
Ontario, to compete with Saskatchewan business and try and 
run them out so that the public sector can override the private 
sector and replace them, and then everybody can work for the 
government, Mr. Speaker. And that seems to be the agenda of 
this government. 
 
Isn’t it time, Mr. Speaker, this government called an election, 

got the intestinal fortitude to call an election? And I would say, 
Mr. Speaker, they will be exactly where the BC NDP are going 
to be at the end of this week. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — We will now commence with the 10-minute 
period of questions to the debate participants. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Mr. Speaker, I have a comment. When the 
member from Carrot River stood up and read the headlines 
around the water situation, it disturbed me that the headlines, 
the media headlines, are going to determine the truth of the 
matter. 
 
And when the other member from . . . sorry, was talking about 
boil-water advisories and boil-water orders, there are only two 
boil-water orders in the province. They seem to be using them 
interchangeably. 
 
And the answers were tabled today of the communities that do 
have boil-water advisories and boil-water orders. So I’d like to 
actually have people realize that there are only two 
communities that are under boil-water orders. The rest are under 
boil-water advisories, and there is a difference. I think we 
should try and keep our facts straight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Question to the member for Carrot River, 
Mr. Speaker. I’d like him to stand up and tell his constituents 
why he would not support, why he would not support the 
additional $20 million that this government put into the 
Centenary Capital Fund, why he would not support the 
additional 10 people that we are going to hire to look after 
water quality. I’d like him to defend that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Since the member for Carrot River seems 
unable to say that, I’d like to ask the member for Canora, who 
had a great deal to say in this debate. Why will he not pay credit 
where credit is due, for the $20 million that this government is 
putting into the Centenary Capital projects which will go to 
help, go to help communities increase and improve their water 
system? Why will he not give credit for the 10 additional people 
that we have hired to look after water quality? Why is that 
member so stuck on fixing the blame and not fixing the 
problem? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
was using the budget document in my remarks, I’ll refer to the 
budget document for the member’s benefit. 
 
On page 55, Mr. Speaker, it very clearly states that for water 
quality, for dealing with water quality in this province, the 
government has reduced last year’s budget to this year’s budget 
by nearly $200,000 — they’ve reduced it. 
 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1149 

 

So I’m not sure whether the members realized that when they 
put this motion forward, because I bet the members opposite 
wouldn’t have supported this budget if they really would have 
known what is contained on page 55. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the member 
for Saltcoats. My question is, why will he not give credit where 
credit is due when we have increased the revenue sharing to the 
city of North Battleford by $181,317 . . . (inaudible interjection) 
. . . Sorry, not revenue sharing, but the overall grants — overall 
grants to the city of North Battleford which will address, which 
will help address water quality issues. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d be delighted 
to answer that. The minister of Municipal Government has been 
talking for the last two weeks about all the infrastructure 
money; I believe it’s 200-and-some thousand dollars they put in 
for North Battleford. But unless the member was dozing, he 
would have caught my numbers for North Battleford. 
 
That’s a far cry less than if your government, that government, 
Mr. Speaker, had of just froze the revenue-sharing money in 
1991, because the city of North Battleford would have $5.4 
million more than they’ve received from your government 
because, Mr. Speaker, because your cutbacks have caused many 
of the problems that are out there in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Would you just rephrase that, 
please, through the Chair, member for Saltcoats? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I’d be delighted, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
many of these problems are caused because of the cutbacks of 
that government, Mr. Speaker, over the last 10 years. Had these 
cutbacks have not continued on the backs of municipal 
government, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we’d see the problem 
with our water and sewer works that we have today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Thomson: — I’m amazed by the nonsense I hear from the 
member for Saltcoats. 
 
The question I have to ask very clearly is how can that member 
— that member who supported Grant Devine — how can that 
member vote against the budget? A budget that increased the 
number of water quality officers by 10. A budget that, yes, 
unfortunately, has to continue to pay $2 million a day for the 
debt that those members opposite built up. How could he vote 
against this budget? 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, for the member’s information — and I know I look a 
little older than I probably am — I’m not sure I was even born 
when Grant Devine was in power. I know I wasn’t political, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 

my question is to the member for Cumberland. Mr. Speaker, the 
member . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the 
member from Cumberland. Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Cumberland talked about Grant Devine ignoring northern 
Saskatchewan and the problems that arose from there. 
 
I’d like to read a list for you. This is a list of water-advisory and 
boil-water orders from northern Saskatchewan — 
Deschambault Lake, Garson Lake, Sled Lake, Spruce Lake, 
Bear Creek, and Black Point dated May 6, 2001. 
 
My question, Mr. Speaker, to the member, is how can he 
continue to support a government that continues to ignore the 
plight of northern Saskatchewan in his constituency and in the 
constituency of Athabasca? Mr. Speaker, his government is the 
same government as Grant Devine’s. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, it is absolutely . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, this is the same member 
who worked with Grant Devine, and all those people worked 
for Grant Devine. And I think that it is outrageous for him to 
say so. 
 
When Grant Devine was around, Mr. Speaker, he did absolutely 
nothing in the North. When we come into government, that 
study, that 1992 study was a direct aspect of saying how terrible 
Grant Devine was in his government. We improved it by $22 
million as direct action, Mr. Speaker. Over 20 communities 
were involved. 
 
This latest study, he quotes from the May term figure. The 
study itself was done in March; he talks about May. July 16 we 
did a strong report and action with $25 million. And the $25 
million impacts this year and they will continue to do the work 
in regards to all of the northern communities. Twenty-five 
communities, nine . . . 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
when the member, the minister for the Environment, was sitting 
on this side of the House, he used to complain bitterly about the 
lack of inaction of that government in supporting the North. 
 
Again I read, Mr. Speaker, from the list: Deschambault Lake, 
Garson Lake, Sled Lake, Spruce Lake, Bear Creek, and Black 
Point. While the Minister of Northern Affairs complains, Mr. 
Speaker, about the inaction of the previous government, he is 
responsible for this area of the province. And again, Mr. 
Speaker, we have nothing but boil-water orders in those 
communities and the government failed to do anything. 
 
Mr. Minister, when will you do something about the water in 
these communities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1150 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, my question is again to the 
member for Saltcoats. I would have to . . . well I can’t speak to 
whether he was born while Devine was here. I know many 
thought he may have been born yesterday. Because he is not 
giving any credit whatsoever to this government for the amount 
of money that we’re putting into infrastructure. 
 
The question I have for him is, why did he vote against a budget 
that provided almost an additional $10 million in the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program that will assist 
communities, assist communities in terms of dealing with water 
quality? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, if the information — and we know it to be true now — 
that this government, Mr. Speaker, knew September 22, last 
fall, that there was a problem with a number of areas in this 
province with the water systems . . . In fact, Mr. Speaker, it 
even goes back as far as 1992, when it was brought to this 
government’s attention that there was problems with the water 
in this province. What did this government do, Mr. Speaker? 
Absolutely . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order. The mike is having difficulty 
distinguishing which speaker they are supposed to pick up. I 
think the mike would like to recognize the member from 
Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — I thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as I 
said before, this government knew from the documents we 
received September 22 last fall, that there was problems in this 
province with the water systems in this province. They also 
knew in 1992 that there was problems if they weren’t 
addressed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one has to accept responsibility for what’s 
gone wrong with our infrastructure except this NDP 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Time has expired. 
 

PRIVATE BILLS 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 301 — The International Bible College 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I have some questions I 
would like to ask pertaining to this particular Bill. Having 
friends and acquaintances who have attended the International 
Bible College that exists in Moose Jaw, I’m wondering if the 
mover of this particular Bill could tell us what is different about 
this particular amendment from what existed as a result of 
legislation brought forward in 1948? 
 

I’m assuming at one time they were able to offer diplomas, but 
is this going to extend their ability to offer university degrees 
that are accredited? 
 
Ms. Higgins: — I’d like to thank the member for his question. I 
was approached by the International Bible College, and their 
intent of this private members’ Bill was to bring their charter in 
line with their mandate, which allows them to award diplomas, 
certificates, and theological degrees only. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — So may I take it, Mr. Deputy Chair, from the 
response, that the element of theological degrees is the change 
that is being addressed by this particular Bill? 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Yes, that’s the only change. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(15:45) 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Our Lady of the Prairies 
Foundation Act, 2001 

 
Clauses 1 to 25 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Providence Hospital, 
Moose Jaw Repeal Act 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I just 
have a couple of questions. I wonder if the member from Moose 
Jaw Wakamow can really tell me the purpose of this Bill. I 
can’t seem to find much in it which really caused the Bill to 
come into effect. So I’m wondering if the member can give me 
a quick explanation as to the rationale for this Bill being 
proposed. 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. This Act and 
also Bill No. 305 are tied together in that in Moose Jaw, as you 
may be aware, there was two facilities, St. Anthony’s Home and 
also the Providence Hospital, that were run by the Sisters of 
Charity. Now both facilities closed down in 1994 and were 
amalgamated into one facility that is now the Providence Place 
for Holistic Health Inc. 
 
So what this does is basically clean up the last details of those 
two facilities that are either closed or transferred into private 
hands. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Again 
a question. I guess I’m putting both of these Bills together as 
you suggested. Will they be incorporated into one Bill? And I 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1151 

 

guess one of my fundamental questions is who generated this? 
Was it from the hospital — St. Anthony’s Home — themselves, 
or what was the drive to have this particular Bill enacted? 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Part of the problem with these facilities now 
being defunct, it has to deal also with bequeaths. These were 
initiated by the Providence Place itself through their lawyer so 
that any bequeaths that were left in wills or through whatever 
means to Providence Place or St. Anthony’s Home or the 
Providence Hospital would now be transferred to Providence 
Place. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So I take it then that any monies for 
either one of these facilities then are now going to be 
amalgamated into the new facility and that’s what both of these 
Bills are going to do. So my questions are basically the same for 
both Bills and so the answers will be the same then I gather? 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Yes, they are the same but what these Bills do 
is repeal the Act so that it brings to a close those two facilities 
and moves everything to the new facility. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 304 — The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I just only have a 
couple of questions, Mr. Chair. I just wonder if the member 
would explain what we’re trying to change, from what to what 
here, and what is the purpose of the Bill? 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. SARM was limited in its ability 
to invest and this just broadens the scope where they can invest, 
but is limited by where any prudent investor would invest. They 
were earlier restricted in what they could invest in. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Well thank you. I just maybe have one 
caution here, Mr. Chair, is that if the member could inform me 
as to a prudent investor could also go out and buy farmland and 
farm. Is this part of what we’re doing here is allowing them to 
do this? 
 
Mr. Wartman: — A prudent investor cannot go out and invest 
in farmland. This is primarily in investments that would be 
regulated by exchange. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 and 3 agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 305 — The St. Anthony’s Home Repeal Act 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair of Committees. 
It’s actually with a wee bit of sadness that I sponsor this Bill. 
The Sisters of Charity and St. Anthony’s Home has provided a 
wonderful service in Moose Jaw for Moose Jaw and the 
surrounding areas for a number of years. It is indeed a landmark 
in Moose Jaw. It sits up on the hill above the Wakamow Valley. 
 
So it is with a little bit of sadness that we repeal this Act and 
end the service of St. Anthony’s Home. But I just would like to 
say that the service to Moose Jaw was appreciated and it will be 
a memorial and landmark in Moose Jaw for a number of years 
to come. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 6 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 306 — The St. Thomas More College Act, 2001 
 
Clause 1 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair of 
Committees. A few questions. I realize in this proposed 
legislation there is a replacement of a prior bit of legislation to 
incorporate St. Thomas More College with this new Act that is 
cited The St. Thomas More College Act, 2001. Can the member 
sponsoring this legislation outline the main differences between 
these two pieces of legislation? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. St. Thomas 
More College is a federated college with the University of 
Saskatchewan and it provides generally liberal arts education. 
And this has not been changed for many, many years. 
 
And so what the St. Thomas More College had been doing was 
going a little bit beyond what was in the Act. And so this is 
generally housekeeping amendments that bring it up to the 
standard of what it’s actually been doing for the last number of 
years. So there’s not any major changes; it’s just generally 
housekeeping. 
 
And I’m very pleased to be sponsoring the Bill as I attended the 
University of Saskatchewan and St. Thomas More College as 
well, and it’s a fine college. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I certainly agree it’s 
a fine college and has provided a very significant contribution 
not only to the University of Saskatchewan’s milieu, but also 
towards the whole of the province. 
 
Are there any structural changes in the members of the 
corporation? I see that they’re outlined, very detailed. Is there 
any structural changes that deviates from the past structure of 



1152 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2001 

 

the membership compared to what’s outlined now? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Could the member be more specific in what 
he’s referring to as to structure and . . . 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Under Part III, the 
“Members of the Corporation,” the members are listed under 
section 5 and includes people from the congregation that the 
college serves; the Roman Catholic diocese, the eparchy of the 
Ukrainian Catholic Church, etc. Have any of that membership 
structure been changed? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. 
Unfortunately I’m not familiar with what the original, the Bill 
was. I was approached by the college to sponsor this particular 
Bill. So I basically have been studying this Bill. I’ve not gone 
back to the 1940s, what the legislation was there. 
 
So I don’t have an answer as to what was done in the previous 
one. I was looking at specifically the Bill that’s being presented 
in the House today. And I think it matches very closely or 
matches exactly with what the aims and objectives of the 
college is today and so that’s basically what we’ve been 
concentrating on. So I’m very happy to sponsor this Bill. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Chair. Member, you know, I am 
surprised that there wouldn’t be some comparison or at least 
that the leadership of St. Thomas More College might not have 
outlined to you in requesting that you sponsor this Bill, what the 
motivation is for them to require the new legislation. 
 
If everything is the same as it was before, it would strike me as 
you don’t need to change anything. But there must be some 
changes or alterations to the membership or to the powers or to 
the transitional factors or things of that nature that motivated 
the college to request this renewal of their legislation. And 
that’s why I asked the question: what are the substantial 
changes between the two bits of legislation? 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I did not say 
that what is being done today is what was proposed in the 
original Bill, but the Bill that is being proposed today matches 
with what is being done today. Now if the member would like a 
detailed analysis of the comparing and the contrast, I’m sure we 
could provide that for him. 
 
Unfortunately there was no questions raised in the committee 
while we brought . . . the president and the Chair actually took a 
specific trip to be in Regina just last week to answer these types 
of questions. So I guess it’s unfortunate that we were not asking 
the people that were actually presenting the Bill and presented 
to the committee to answer these very specific questions. But if 
the member would like me to bring back those specific analysis, 
I’m sure the president and the Chair would be more than happy 
to do so at St. Thomas More College. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and member. I think 
it would be useful if there was at least a bit of an explanation by 
the governor or whatever of St. Thomas More College who has 
requested this change to outline the need for it. 
 
I am certain that there is very suitably drafted in terms of 
meeting the current needs of the college and in a go-forward 

basis. So we’d be pleased to allow this legislation to go 
forward. We have no problem with it, but it would be helpful to 
understand what the changes are. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I will ensure 
that the St. Thomas More College will receive a Hansard of 
these proceedings so that they can answer these questions. And 
if there are any additional questions that the member would like 
answered, I would suggest that he put them on record in 
writing. And I’ll ensure that they are answered in due course. 
So I thank the member for his questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clause 2 agreed to. 
 
The Acting Chair (Mr. Thomson): — Members, I note that 
there are, if my knowledge of Roman numerals serves me 
correctly, eight parts to this Bill. And I would seek leave to vote 
this Bill by part. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clauses 3 to 15 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 301 -- The International Bible College 
Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Ms. Higgins: — I move the Bill No. 301, The International 
Bible College Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a third time 
and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 302 — The Our Lady of the Prairies 
Foundation Act, 2001 

 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
302, Our Lady of the Prairies Foundation Act, 2001 be now 
read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 303 — The Providence Hospital, 
Moose Jaw Repeal Act 

 
Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill No. 303, The Providence 
Hospital, Moose Jaw Repeal Act be now read a third time and 
passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 



May 15, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 1153 

 

Bill No. 304 — The Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities Amendment Act, 2001 

 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 304, The Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities 
Amendment Act, 2001 be now read a third time and passed 
under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 305 — The St. Anthony’s Home Repeal Act 
 

Ms. Higgins: — I move that Bill No. 305, The St. Anthony’s 
Home Repeal Act be now read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 306 — The St. Thomas More College Act, 2001 
 
Mr. Addley: —Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill No. 
306, The St. Thomas More College Act, 2001 be now read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:14. 
 
 


