















































Hansard: March 28, 2001


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 197 
 March 28, 2001 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me pleasure 
this afternoon to rise in the House to present a petition on behalf 
of a number of people in the communities of Gull Lake and 
Tompkins who have expressed their concern with the 
implications of the Saskatchewan EMS (emergency medical 
services) development project report. 
 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I too have a petition to present 
today: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
to affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are all from Naicam, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in Swift Current and southwest Saskatchewan concerned 
about their regional hospital. 
 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners will humbly pray that your 
Hon. Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to carefully consider Swift Current’s request 
for a new hospital. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from the city of 
Swift Current, from Waldeck, from Shaunavon, and from Gull 
Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the people of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 

concerned about ambulance service. 
 
And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And this is signed by the good citizens of Gladmar and Minton. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Clerk: — According to order the following petitions have been 
reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby read and 
received. 
 
Of citizens of the province petitioning the Assembly on the 
following matters: 

 
Opposing the centralization of ambulance services; 
 
Requesting a new hospital for Swift Current; 
 
Setting aside plans to revert highways to gravel. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Friday next move first reading of The Justice System 
Review Act. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of The Sex 
Offender Registry Act. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that on Friday next I wish to move first reading of 
The Recall of Members of the Legislative Assembly Act. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet I also give notice that I 
shall on Friday next move first reading of The Balanced Budget 
Act, 2001. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Friday next move first reading of The Health Care 
Commissioner Act. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of The 
Children’s Law Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on Friday next move first reading of The Fire-fighter Protection 
from Liability Act. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on Friday next move first reading of The 



198 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan Property Rights Act. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on Friday next move first reading of The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Amendment Act, 2001. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Friday next move first reading of The Regulatory 
Reform Act. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have notice of a 
written question. I give notice I shall on day no. 12 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Crown Investments Corporation: how 
much money did SaskPower give to Ducks Unlimited in 
the 2000 fiscal year. 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 12 ask the government the following question: 
 

In the past fiscal year has SaskEnergy president, Ron Clark, 
and/or any other SaskEnergy officials attended any 
conferences in the Middle East on behalf of SaskEnergy; if 
so, which conferences did they attend and what was the 
total cost to SaskEnergy including: airfare, accommodation, 
meals, conference registration fees, and any other costs 
related to attending the conferences. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Hon. Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I should like to draw your attention and 
that of the members to a group of visitors who are seated in the 
west gallery. These visitors are grade 4 students from St. 
Andrew School in the constituency of Regina Victoria. I look 
forward to meeting with them after the question period. 
 
I do hope that their visit will be an enjoyable and an informative 
one. And I want to thank St. Andrew School for encouraging 
these visits to the Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would ask all members to please join me in welcoming the 
students and their teachers here today. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a number of people I would like to introduce this morning 
. . . or this afternoon, if I could. First of all, in your gallery, Dr. 
Bill Silver, who is an orthopedic surgeon here in the city of 
Regina and also a member of the Saskatchewan Medical 
Association Board of Directors. 
 
I notice in the gallery opposite here a number of individuals that 
I recognized. Lily Krause is the president of the Saskatchewan 
Registered Nurses’ Association, and Donna Brunskill is the 
executive director, as well as Rosalee Longmoore of SUN is 
over there. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, back in your gallery. I’d like to 
acknowledge Carol Carson who is the former mayor of Melfort 
and member of the Legislative Assembly who is also visiting 

here today. 
 
And I’d like the Assembly to welcome all these people 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to introduce Mr. Michael Tymchak who is seated in your 
gallery, accompanied by my ministerial assistant, Marv Shulz. 
 
Dr. Tymchak is Chair of the provincial task force on public 
dialogue on the role of the school, since its establishment in 
1999. He is currently a professor in the Faculty of Education at 
the University of Regina. He completed an eight-year term as 
dean of the faculty in June, 2000. Prior to that he was director 
of the northern teacher education program, (NORTEP) for 
many years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Tymchak and the task force he chaired 
recently completed a review of the role of the school. The task 
force’s final report was publicly released this morning and I 
would ask all members to join with me in welcoming Dr. 
Tymchak to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
the minister in welcoming Dr. Tymchak to the Assembly, 
recognizing that he’s had many accomplishments in his life. But 
I’m sure that this latest one, being the Chair of the task force on 
the role of the school, will have the biggest impact on the 
people in this province of anything that he’s done. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
with the member from Melfort in welcoming back to this 
Assembly, Carol Carson. No stranger to this Assembly, Mr. 
Speaker, as members will well know, Carol served with great 
distinction in government serving as, for a period of time, 
Minister of the Environment and for a longer period of time as 
our Minister of Municipal Government, and is held in wide 
regard throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with Carol today I’m also very pleased to be 
introducing Carol’s son, Paul, and his wife, Marion, and their 
two daughters — Carol’s granddaughters — Tiffy and Becci. 
These four are currently from Berlin, Mr. Speaker, but we are 
very pleased to announce today that they are returning to make 
their home in Saskatchewan. Welcome back. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and 
through you to all members of the Assembly, I’d like for us to 
welcome two members from Prince Albert — Steve Smith and 
Wayne Roznowsky. They’re here from Weyerhaeuser. And I’d 
like all members of the Assembly to welcome them here to 
view the proceedings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 199 

 

to also add my welcome to the members of the nursing 
profession who are here. And it’s Lily Krause, who’s the 
president of the SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ 
Association), and Donna Brunskill, who’s the executive director 
of the SRNA; Rosalee Longmoore from SUN (Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses); as well as Cecile Hunt from the North 
Central Health District, and Joyce Still and Lois Berry. They’re 
all here today to be part of the first reading of The Registered 
Nurses Amendment Act. 
 
And while I’m on my feet I’d also like to welcome my 
constituent, Dr. Bill Silver. Welcome to the Assembly and I 
know that he has made many contributions to the medical 
community of Saskatchewan. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
rise this afternoon to welcome Mr. Steve Smith and Mr. Wayne 
Roznowsky to this afternoon’s proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you’re probably well aware the constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers is highly dependent upon the success of 
Weyerhaeuser. And we surely hope they enjoy the proceedings 
this afternoon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m also on my feet there’s someone 
else I’d like to ask the Assembly to welcome this afternoon and 
that would be Mr. Ray Funk. Now some of you maybe know 
Ray fairly well. Ray has had quite an illustrious career. Many of 
you may know he has served as a Member of Parliament for the 
Prince Albert constituency for five years and he is now a 
constituent of mine, and a very good constituent I might add. 
Welcome Ray, and all members please welcome these 
gentlemen. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join my 
colleague from Regina Victoria in welcoming the students from 
St. Andrew School and in particular to welcome the son of a 
good friend, Blair Therian who . . . maybe he’ll just stand up 
and take a little bow and embarrass himself a little. 
 
And also to join in welcoming my former colleague in the 
House of Commons, Ray Funk. We shared . . . we spent five 
years together fighting the good fight. Ray Funk was a terrific 
MP (Member of Parliament) for the constituency of Prince 
Albert-Churchill River and continues to do great work for, for 
in fact the whole north of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’d ask my colleagues to join me in welcoming Ray Funk. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I would like to join with my colleagues in the 
legislature in welcoming Steve Smith and Wayne Roznowsky 
to the legislature. We had the opportunity — along with a 
number of my colleagues this morning — had the opportunity 
to meet with them. 
 
We talked about the future of forestry, some of the pressures 

that are on with respect to the American actions as it may result 
to Canadian lumber. But I’m sure that we have all a good 
understanding of the opportunities of the future of the forest 
industry. Weyerhaeuser is such a big player in our community 
and I want to take an opportunity to welcome them here today. 
 
I also want to make mention of former MP and my friend, Ray 
Funk. Welcome Ray. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to join with other members in welcoming two 
friends to the Assembly. Lois Berry, who in addition to her 
contribution to the health field also makes a very active 
contribution to the Caswell neighbourhood in Saskatoon. And 
Ray Funk, who I’ve had the pleasure of working with on very 
many environmental issues over the years, has made a great 
contribution to this province. 
 
And I want to ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
these two very fine people to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to give a 
strong northern Saskatchewan welcome and to say Ta wow to 
these people, including a former colleague, Carol Carson. But 
also Steve Smith and Wayne Roznowsky in regards to forestry 
development in the North, and throughout this province. And 
also to Ray Funk, in regards to being an outstanding member, 
MP, for northern region. 
 
I would also like to say thank you to Dr. Michael Tymchak. 
What a lot of people don’t know about Michael is that he also 
wrote the history of northern Saskatchewan on the schools in 
relation to the time that he worked with the department in the 
’70s, and as well, has done a lot of work with them in the 
development of the northern teacher education program. 
 
So welcome Mike and a special Ta wow to you as well. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, along 
with the students from St. Andrew School is their teacher 
Heather Leask, who is a member of the congregation that I used 
to serve, and also has been a very active part of youth 
parliament. And one day, if she keeps up with her interest in 
politics, may end up sitting in this House and representing a 
constituency. 
 
So I’d like all members to welcome Heather to this gathering. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Comments on Agriculture Assistance 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



200 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

Saskatchewan’s Agriculture minister is looking through NDP 
(New Democratic Party) rose-coloured glasses. 
 
He is quoted in The Leader-Post on Tuesday as saying, there 
are a lot more than let on that have received benefits from 
AIDA (Agriculture Income Disaster Assistance). Mr. Speaker, 
the minister goes on to say that his office is flooded with calls 
from farmers that have received AIDA benefits. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here are the facts, and by the way, if the minister 
would know . . . would know this if he went and checked out 
his high-speed Internet connection in his office. The facts, 
straight from AIDA’s head office, state that less than 30 per 
cent of Saskatchewan producers have received some sort of . . . 
(inaudible) . . . from AIDA. Maybe the minister has been 
spending too much time living on a cloud with the member 
from Melville, where everything seems to be going just peachy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the numbers from AIDA also show that 
Saskatchewan producers received almost the lowest average 
payment in all of Canada. The members on this side of the 
House feel that our province is a great place to live with great 
potential filled with many bright and talented people, but we are 
run by bad government. 
 
If the minister’s officers would get off their clouds or executive 
butts for five minutes they would know that there are serious 
challenges that the people of Saskatchewan are facing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Business Builder Awards 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Last night in one of the best cities of 
definitely the best province of indisputably the best county in 
the world, the North Saskatoon Business Association hosted its 
fourth Business Builder Awards banquet attended by over 600 
people. Our handsome minister in charge of Crown Investments 
Corporations attended on behalf of the government. 
 
And I wish to point out how entirely appropriate that is because 
our Crown sector is such a major player in the thriving 
economy our province is experiencing at the moment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NSBA (North Saskatoon Business 
Association) consists of more than 650 companies — 
companies, I remind the members opposite, that are staying and 
growing here in Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact in a recent survey of businesses in Saskatoon, 40 per 
cent said they intended to expand and more than 60 per cent 
said that their business is stable. Clearly, Mr. Speaker, 
Saskatoon is filled with business builders. 
 
I want to congratulate both the winners and nominees for the 
awards presented tonight: Northland Properties for the Job 
Creation Award; Healthserv Sask for the New Directions 
Award; Canada West Truck Centre, for the Team Building 
Award; Kocsis Transport for the Management Quality Award; 
Centennial Plumbing, Heating, Electrical for the Business 
Builder Award; Ecol Laser for the Small Business Award; and 
finally, Mr. Wayne Wilson, of Business Furnishings was named 
Member of the Year. 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Facility Opens in Davidson 
 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise in the House 
today to speak about the new health facility that was just 
officially opened on March 5 in the town of Davidson. It 
replaced the old Davidson Union Hospital, which was a hospital 
in its truest sense: babies were born there and surgeries were 
performed there. 
 
The new health care centre now provides . . . includes some 
emergency, X-ray and some laboratory service, plus a 
community care wing and residential care services. This new 
centre goes to the hard work and dedication of area residents 
who along with local municipal government contributed $1.4 
million to this project. 
 
Opening day was very successful with many Davidson area 
residents coming out to see the grand opening. The dignitaries 
included the hon. minister for Saskatchewan Health, as well as 
the Davidson mayor, Jim Cross. 
 
I want to personally thank the organizers of the grand opening 
ceremony whose warm hospitality was greatly appreciated. On 
behalf of the citizens of the Arm River constituency, I want to 
offer my best wishes to the community of Davidson on a fine 
accomplishment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Seniors’ Housing Project in Shaunavon 
 
Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we are 
building this province from the roots up and a new seniors’ 
housing project taking place in Shaunavon is a great example. 
 
A group of dignitaries gathered at the site of the seniors’ 
housing project in mid-March for a special sod-turning 
ceremony to kick off construction of this $2.3 million project. 
Construction on this new 26-unit facility has already begun and 
the building is expected to be finished by this fall. The 
province’s contribution to this project is approximately $1.8 
million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As Shaunavon mayor, Sharon Dickie, said, I believe we have an 
obligation to provide safe and comfortable housing for those 
who wish to retire in our community. 
 
Our government agrees, Mr. Speaker. This project is another 
example of our government’s commitment to working together 
with communities to provide better housing and standards of 
living for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Theatre Production in Alida 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to congratulate Act One Productions of Alida, my 
hometown, on another very successful theatre run. Their play 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 201 

 

this year was How the West was Fun. Their show dates were 
March 8, 9, 10, and 11. 
 
And reading the news release, Mr. Speaker . . . or the news 
report of it, it says that guests dined strictly by candlelight on 
Saturday night due to the SaskPower power outage. I’m told it 
was very romantic though, Mr. Speaker, with just the candles to 
light the room, the theatre. But thankfully, SaskPower managed 
to get their act together to turn the lights back on again for the 
actual play. 
 
The reviews, Mr. Speaker, were very good for this act. In fact, 
Mr. Jeff Heil of Burlington, North Dakota stated, I’ve attended 
the drama for the last three years; it just keeps getting better and 
better. This year was spectacular. We were served like kings 
and queens — what hospitality. 
 
Congratulations again, Mr. Speaker, to the actors and to the 
community of Alida for putting on another excellent theatre 
season. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Regina Food Security Project 
 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This morning, 
a very significant celebration took place in Regina to celebrate 
March as Nutrition Month and, more importantly, to highlight 
an innovative and important project in Regina. 
 
The Regina Food Security Project promotes nutrition and food 
security for Regina residents who might otherwise have to 
depend on emergency food programs. Now it’s been doing so 
since 1998 and, this morning, there was a celebration and our 
Minister of Social Services took part, as did Regina’s mayor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Regina Food Security Project has four partners 
of which I don’t think any of the members opposite are one of, 
but it’s the Regina Education and Action on Child Hunger, the 
Regina District Food Bank, the City Social Development 
Division, and Saskatchewan Social Services. 
 
Now this project is not charity. It’s provides an opportunity to 
purchase a good food box and purchasers help in this way to 
provide food security for their families. 
 
And I have to tell you, I’ve seen these food boxes, Mr. Speaker. 
They are just brimming with the most delicious, fresh food. 
You just want to start eating right out of the bin there. 
 
And at the gathering this morning, the Canadian Pacific 
Foundation donated a five-ton refrigerated truck which will be a 
great assist in the delivery of the new program and it’ll see 
meals delivered to seniors, shut-ins, and discharged hospital 
patients. 
 
And I also understand that a group calling themselves Culture 
Kidz donated a mural. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s these acts, great and small, that contribute to 
the success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Regina AA Bandits 
 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, three 
accomplished young ladies from the community of Hodgeville 
in my constituency — Chelsea Ebel, Kirby Ebel, and Kyla 
Deobald — play ringette for the Regina AA Bandits. 
 
The Bandits have won the provincials in Saskatchewan and will 
be advancing to the nationals in a month, and in fact I think 
they’re leaving tomorrow morning. 
 
I hope all members will offer Chelsea, Kirby, Kyla, and the 
Regina Bandits their congratulations for their efforts in the 
provincials and best wishes in the nationals. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Hotels Association Annual Convention 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
70th Annual Convention of the Hotels Association of 
Saskatchewan took place earlier this week. 
 
This association has about 500 members accounting for almost 
85 per cent of the hotels and motels in the province. That makes 
the Hotels Association a major stakeholder and partner in our 
economic development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Hotels Association took in 160 million in room rental rates 
in the year 2000 and another 120 million in food and beverage 
sales. This sector, Mr. Speaker, employs 4,000 people and paid 
wages and salaries exceeding $58 million. 
 
A strong Hotels Association, Mr. Speaker, equals healthy 
tourism spending. This spending in the year 1999 was estimated 
to be 1.2 billion in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hotels are important actors in our economy and our 
communities. They provide food, shelter, entertainment, and 
hospitality. 
 
Congratulations, Mr. Speaker, to the Hotels Association and 
their members for their contribution to our hospitality and 
tourism industry. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Utility Rate Increases 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
even more confusion in the ranks of the NDP. The Minister of 
Health doesn’t know how many nurses there are, the Minister of 
Gaming doesn’t know how much SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian 
Gaming Authority) owes, and the Minister of Agriculture 
doesn’t know if he’s in or out of the Canadian Farm Income 
Program. And now the minister responsible for SaskPower 
doesn’t know how much SaskPower’s rate hike is. 
 
Yesterday the minister told reporters that the SaskPower rate 
hike was only $27 a year so the $25 rebate would almost cover 
it. But it turns out, the rate hike is actually anywhere from $36 



202 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

for urban customers to $96 for farm customers. Once again, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a minister that doesn’t seem to know what’s 
going on in his own department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is the minister confused or is he trying to fool the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Oh, Mr. Speaker, this is going to be fun. 
Mr. Speaker, the average increase, Mr. Speaker, is $3 a month, 
Mr. Speaker. And this is going to show how the opposition does 
calculations when it comes to math — $3 a month. The 
increase, Mr. Speaker, starts April 1, and April 1, if you figure 
it out, there’s nine months — nine times three is 27, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, not only are they confused 
with all these issues, they think in Saskatchewan a year is only 
nine months long. What’s wrong with these guys? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s now clear that the NDP’s 
measly $25 a year energy rebate is long gone and so is their 
so-called historic tax cut. It’s all been eaten up by higher 
SaskPower bills and higher SaskEnergy bills. And, Mr. 
Speaker, there’s more on the way. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Finance nearly dislocated his arm 
patting himself on the back for cutting taxes. But the fact is any 
tax relief for Saskatchewan families will be wiped out by higher 
SaskPower and SaskEnergy rates. Saskatchewan families will 
wind up with less money in their pockets, not more money in 
their pockets, and all the NDP is offering is the $25 one-time 
energy rebate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of Finance put more money in 
the . . . back of the hands of Saskatchewan families by either 
cutting taxes or increasing the energy rebate in Friday’s budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the only 
confusion in this House, Mr. Speaker, is over there. And I want 
to tell the House and I want to tell the people of the province, 
Mr. Speaker, that I attended a meeting of the Regina Chamber 
of Commerce on January 29, 2001, and the Leader of the 
Opposition was there too. 
 
And the incoming president of the Regina Chamber of 
Commerce had this to say, Mr. Speaker. He said that the tax 
reduction plan of this government was a good plan that would 
mean lower taxes for Saskatchewan people and would add to 
the growth and prosperity of Saskatchewan. 

That’s what the Regina Chamber of Commerce said and you 
know what the Leader of the Opposition did, Mr. Speaker? He 
sat on his hands and he said nothing, Mr. Speaker, because he 
knows it’s true, he knows we’re headed in the right direction. 
And taxes in Saskatchewan are only going in one direction and 
that’s down, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If we handed out 
Oscars, the Minister of Finance would get an award for that 
wild performance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on one hand the NDP is moaning about the high 
energy prices driving up SaskPower and SaskEnergy rates. But 
on the other hand, this government is also reaping the benefits 
of high energy prices. In the mid-term financial report, resource 
revenue was up nearly $400 million over budget. That’s a $400 
million windfall, a direct result of high energy prices. 
 
And how much is the NDP giving back to the people of 
Saskatchewan? $10 million. $400 million for the government 
and $25 for Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP is benefiting from higher energy prices 
and at the same time families are being hurt by higher energy 
prices. What relief will the Minister of Finance be providing to 
Saskatchewan families in his budget? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the provincial budget 
will be delivered in this House on Friday and I know the 
member opposite will be interested to listen to what will be 
presented in the provincial budget. But I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that in addition to what is in the provincial budget, we 
introduced a plan for personal income tax reductions in this 
House last year which, Mr. Speaker, for a one income family 
with two children and two adults will by 2003 cut their 
provincial income taxes by $1,974, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — And I want to say to the House and to the 
people of the province, Mr. Speaker, that what we will not do 
when it comes to increasing their costs is what the member 
opposite would do which would be to privatize the Crown 
utilities — SaskPower, SaskTel, SaskEnergy — deregulate and 
let happen what has happened in their fantasyland of Alberta 
where utility prices have doubled, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 
going to adopt that agenda, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I could tell you that a 
minister that doesn’t even know there’s 12 months in the year 
has no idea what a Saskatchewan Party government’s going to 
do. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP family of Crown corporations got their 
increase covered and the NDP has sheltered them, but 
Saskatchewan families are left on their own. Mr. Speaker, 
according to last year’s budget the net effect of last year’s tax 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 203 

 

changes will be about $107 million. But the SaskPower rate 
hike was $14 million, the SaskEnergy rate hike was about $90 
million, and now SaskEnergy says it will be looking for at least 
that much of an increase again, and probably more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the tax cut is gone, snatched away from the people 
of Saskatchewan. Meanwhile the NDP is sitting on hundreds of 
millions of dollars of windfall revenues but they refuse to share 
this with Saskatchewan families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why doesn’t the NDP provide some meaningful 
relief to families who are hurt by these high energy costs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s very odd to listen to 
the Leader of the Opposition because today he’s saying that the 
tax cuts will be gone. Yesterday he was in the House saying that 
there were no tax cuts, Mr. Speaker. So I think the Leader of the 
Opposition is a little bit confused, Mr. Speaker. We know that 
this is not a new allegation coming from the Leader of the 
Opposition. This is the sort of snake oil that he pedals all across 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that these are the largest tax 
cuts in the history of our province. And by 2003 personal 
income taxes in Saskatchewan are going down by $430 million, 
Mr. Speaker, which even taking PST (provincial sales tax) 
expansion into account, is a tax cut to the people of 
Saskatchewan of approximately $260 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care Staffing 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Yesterday the minister stood in the House and bragged about 
hiring 800 new health care administrators. And, Mr. Speaker, 
the minister said that that’s what the NDP meant when they 
promised to hire 500 new health care workers during the 1999 
election platform. 
 
Mr. Minister, is this the NDP’s plan for rebuilding the failing 
health care system — to hire 800 more administrators while 
doctors and nurses are leaving the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think I want to reiterate a 
very important point. All of the workers in the health system are 
part of the health team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — They’re all crucial to what happens in the 
health care system, whether it’s in an acute care setting or 
whether it’s in health promotion or prevention of disease. All of 
those kinds of work are very important. 
 
We know, for example, that the laundry in Regina processes 6 
million pounds of laundry a year for the health system. All of 

that is crucial. But we also know that we have a big task in 
recruiting people to come and work in Saskatchewan, in 
training people in Saskatchewan — all of those things are 
important. 
 
And the kinds of questions, the kinds of perception that the 
people across the floor bring to this, just bring all of it into 
negativity, and that does not help us at all. So I would ask them 
to lighten up a bit and see what they can do to help us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
another question for the Minister of Health. 
 
It’s a little difficult to lighten up on asking the questions of the 
minister when in fact there’s not a single new position that has 
actually been filled by nurses. 
 
According to the Registered Nurses’ Association, there are 160 
fewer registered nurses practising in Saskatchewan now than in 
1999. According to the Registered Psychiatric Nurses 
Association, there are 147 fewer psychiatric nurses practising in 
Saskatchewan. And on top of it all today, Mr. Speaker, we hear 
that there are two doctors leaving the Saskatoon cancer clinic. 
 
Get the picture, Mr. Minister? How in the world can we lighten 
up when in the last two years you have hired 800 administrators 
instead of front-care workers that are needed so badly in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the member to state his question 
through the Chair to the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, we are working together 
with the nursing profession. Some of them are here today 
because we are bringing some legislation forward which will 
assist in providing new ways of providing medical care, nursing 
care within our province. 
 
These are things that we do together with the people who are 
working in this area. We know that there’s a demand for nurses 
right across North America and we’re part of that market and 
we’re working together with the people in the nursing 
profession so that we can have good jobs for people here, we 
can train more people to work here, and we can also make sure 
that we have the best care possible for all of the people who 
require medical care in Saskatchewan. 
 
And so what I would say is, let’s all do this together. I would 
appreciate some of the . . . I appreciate some of the comments 
that the member opposite has made around this issue but what 
we don’t need is the kind of negative atmosphere that seems to 
exude from that side. It just doesn’t help us at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
again for the Minister of Health. Yesterday the minister 
confirmed what everybody in Saskatchewan has been saying for 
years. The NDP’s health reform plan has resulted in more 



204 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

administration and less front-line workers in this province. 
 
The nurses’ associations have clearly shown that there are fewer 
nurses practising in Saskatchewan now than in 1999, but the 
minister stands up in the House and brags about the fact that the 
bureaucracy has increased by 800 administrators. Meanwhile, 
we have hospital beds closing in regional centres across this 
province. We have the cities of Saskatoon and Regina health 
districts struggling to cope, and nurses on the wards are 
exhausted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we hear that the Saskatoon cancer clinic is 
losing physicians. Yesterday Dr. Pierson complained about the 
future of the College of Medicine. Mr. Speaker, does the 
minister not understand the gravity of the decisions he’s 
making? And asking us for help is not going to get him out of 
his responsibility. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I think that this government 
has a good record of looking at all of these issues and dealing 
with them in a very reasonable fashion, working together with 
those people who are within the system and attempting to solve 
some of their problems. 
 
This Friday we have a budget coming forward and I think you’ll 
see that health care continues to be a very high priority of this 
government. 
 
Probably a few weeks after that we’re going to be getting a 
report from Mr. Fyke around the whole situation and trying to 
give us advice on where we go from here. 
 
I know that we’re all going to be part of a discussion at that 
point and I look forward to comments from all of the people in 
Saskatchewan, but specifically the people within the whole 
health system because we all have to work on this together. If 
we don’t, we’re going to lose something that is very valuable 
for our people and we will continue to fight for what we have, 
which is a publicly funded and run system. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Assiniboia Seniors’ Home 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, my question is also for the 
minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is also for the Minister of Health. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Pioneer Lodge is a long-term care facility in 
Assiniboia that’s home to 30 senior citizens. Actually, Mr. 
Speaker, there used to be 60 there until the NDP closed half the 
beds. Now the NDP is closing the rest of the long-term beds and 
booting out the seniors who live there. 
 
And what do they plan to do with the space? They’re going to 
turn it into office space for health district bureaucrats. That’s 
the NDP priority. Seniors forced out of their homes to make 

room for office space for bureaucrats. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tonight in Assiniboia there’ll be a town meeting to 
discuss the NDP’s closure of this facility. I’m going to that 
meeting. The minister has already said he would work with 
people. Will the Minister of Health join me at this meeting? 
Will he come to Assiniboia and explain why he is converting 
senior beds into office space? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the people who work in that 
area, who work with the health district, are working with all of 
the people in the community to look and see what is the most 
appropriate use of the dollars in that area for the best service for 
all of the people. And what we know is that the health district 
down there has been looking at a number of choices. And so 
what they do is actually meet with the people and see what their 
plans are. 
 
(14:15) 
 
What we have to do is also recognize that the whole issue of 
providing care on a province-wide basis is part of what Mr. 
Fyke is going to review. And we know that over the last year 
there have been a number of discussions around various 
facilities and all of those discussions have been put on hold 
until we hear what Mr. Fyke has to say. We assume that that 
district will also be waiting for Mr. Fyke’s recommendations 
and a response before they make any decisions. 
 
So we thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, since the minister 
obviously has no intentions of coming to Assiniboia to listen to 
the speaker . . . to the people tonight, I’d like to ask the Premier. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the Premier who was going to get in touch 
with rural Saskatchewan. He was going to get himself a bus, 
load up the cabinet, and tour around Saskatchewan. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I think it’s about time the Premier saddled up the bus, 
loaded up the Minister of Health, loaded up the Minister of 
Rural Revitalization, anyone else on that side who’s interested 
in rural Saskatchewan, anybody he can find, come to Assiniboia 
and listen to the people. And explain why the NDP is turning 
their seniors’ home into office space. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier come to the meeting tonight in 
Assiniboia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a very rarely that I quote 
from a document provided by the official opposition, but I’d 
like to quote from a document submitted by the official 
opposition to the Fyke Commission. This document is dated 
February 15, 2001. One of the key points made by the critic for 
Health across the way, in his brief, after talking to all of his 
caucus members, when he talked about health district reform, 
was to say: 
 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 205 

 

Provincial micromanagement of health district operations 
must be avoided. 
 

What we’re saying on this side of the House is, we are going to 
work with the districts. We don’t want to step in and make their 
decisions but we also reserve the right, in this particular 
situation that relates to the response to the Fyke Commission, 
we’ve told the districts that various operations should continue 
until we have made an official plan for the whole province. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Forestry Plan for Northern Saskatchewan 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Economic Development. Two 
years ago the NDP went to Saskatoon and announced a new 
forestry plan for northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, then NDP Premier Roy Romanow proclaimed it 
would be, and I quote: 
 

The biggest single announcement of job creation in the 
history of the province. 

 
Mr. Romanow bragged the NDP’s forestry plan would double 
the size of forestry industry and create 25,000 new jobs. Mr. 
Speaker, here’s a headline that ran in the Prince Albert paper a 
few weeks ago. And it says: 
 

Promises dying in the forestry. 
 
It’s the Herald’s obituary for the NDP’s forestry plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister admit the NDP’s forestry plan is 
a failure and that it is actually driving jobs and businesses out of 
the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to preface my remarks by saying I will not 
admit that the forestry plan is a failure. It is going to create 
thousands of jobs in this province. It will be creating 
opportunities for Saskatchewan people in sawmills, in OSB 
(oriented strand board) plants, in tree harvesting, in support, 
technological support to that industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there will be hundreds of millions of dollars of 
investment. It will take place in Prince Albert. It will take place 
in Meadow Lake. It will take place in Hudson Bay. And it will 
take place across the northern part of the province, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s a sound program that will work for all of the people in 
Saskatchewan in spite of the fact that that member would 
choose to believe that this province can’t do anything. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is 
a failure — a pure failure. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what we just heard from the Economic 
Development minister is the same thing we’ve been hearing for 
a number of years from this NDP government. This is pure 
hogwash. 
 
Mr. Speaker, maybe the minister would be interested in what 
one of the constituents thinks about the NDP’s failure for 
forestry plan. 
 
Here’s what Peter Zuck of Prince Albert wrote in a letter to the 
local newspaper on March 23. And I quote: 
 

Only government and its flacks would have the nerve to try 
and spin the story . . . (that’s) driving away up-and-running 
forestry businesses with proven track records . . . as a 
success story. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that’s what the people of the NDP forestry plan 
thinks. And it stinks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister come clean with Saskatchewan 
people and admit the NDP’s forestry plan has been a dismal 
failure? And will the minister explain to the House what he 
plans to do to fix the mess the NDP government has created in 
the forestry industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me say that the 
forestry plan that has been put together by the people of this 
province working with their government is one that is inclusive 
of Aboriginal people, and it will create job opportunities for 
many people who otherwise would not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my response to that member opposite is that when 
this government and members of this government travel to the 
northwest corner of this province in a few days, we’re going to 
bring back some crow and we’re going to send it across to him 
on a silver platter and he should eat it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Support for Small Business 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is also for the Economic Development minister. 
 
The minister’s performance in the House today says it all when 
it comes to this NDP government — pure arrogance, disdain for 
small businesses, no concern for the jobs of Saskatchewan 
people, and absolutely no plan for how to fix the mess the NDP 
has made for the forest industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the president of Ainsworth Lumber says his 
company is pulling out of Saskatchewan because, and I quote, 
Mr. Speaker: “It’s too difficult to do business in 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the NDP so-called 
historic job creation plan for forestry is actually chasing jobs 
and forestry businesses out of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



206 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, let me respond by 
saying that there are businesses who find Saskatchewan a very 
good environment to do business. And I want to say that in spite 
of the fact that the member opposite quotes from a senior 
official in Ainsworth, the fact is that that company is having 
some difficulties in other areas doing business as well, Mr. 
Speaker, but I won’t comment on that. 
 
I want to say that if that member is interested in looking at what 
is actually going on around this province, just read a few of the 
headlines: “Home markets strong,” “Saskatoon job prospects 
bloom for spring,” “Wholesale rises,” “Retail sales up.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province has led this country in the last 10 
years with respect to GDP (gross domestic product). We have 
created more wealth per person in this province than any other 
jurisdiction in Canada and it is a record, Mr. Speaker, that we 
are — and should be — proud of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this province is moving forward. We’re creating 
jobs and we’re creating opportunity for Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Role of Schools Task Force 
 

Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
I’m very pleased to rise in the House this afternoon in my 
capacity as Minister of Education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this morning I publicly released the Role of the 
School Task Force final report. 
 
Chaired by Dr. Michael Tymchak, the 12-member task force 
represented a cross-section of the province geographically from 
rural, urban, and northern areas and professionally from 
backgrounds in social services, health, farming, First Nations 
government, police service, parent groups, post-secondary and 
K to 12 education. 
 
I want to thank Dr. Tymchak, Chair, and the Role of the School 
Task Force members for their tremendous dedication. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Their efforts for a thorough dialogue 
on the issue of the changing role of schools took them to over 
60 communities all across this province. The result, Mr. 
Speaker, is a report that provides us with inspirational 
challenges that are the very heart of our education system. 
 
Our schools in Saskatchewan have served us very well and 
continue to serve us very well, but the role of the school has 
indeed changed. Teachers and boards of education are 
increasingly being challenged to meet society’s growing 
expectations for our schools. 
 
Guided by the spirit of this report and in keeping with the vision 
of the Role of the School Task Force, we are very excited that 
we will be able to respond on budget day with a significant 
expansion of the community schools program as indicated in 

the Throne Speech. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — A community school is a school that 
involves and provides additional support to students, families, 
and communities that work together to overcome obstacles. But 
we recognize more needs to be done. 
 
We are distributing the report widely and will continue to seek 
input and feedback from all stakeholders and citizens of this 
province. Mr. Speaker, we will work closely with other 
government departments, education stakeholders, and 
communities to develop a collaborative response to the task 
force recommendations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report stimulates action and signals an exciting 
transformation of our education system for the new millennium. 
 
In conclusion, Mr. Speaker, I ask all members of the House to 
thank Dr. Tymchak and his Role of the School Task Force for 
their dedication to the future well-being of Saskatchewan 
children and youth. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I was honoured to be at the 
presentation of the Role of the Schools Committee final report 
and its recommendations. At this time I would like to take this 
opportunity to commend Dr. Michael Tymchak, Chair of the 
committee, and the rest of the task force members for providing 
an open forum to debate and discuss the many issues and 
concerns that came forward. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan schools are facing enormous 
challenges and increasing pressures. With the release of this 
report, the Minister of Education and his department now have 
a plan — a comprehensive, concise, and well-documented plan 
that tells them the direction education should take in 
Saskatchewan; a direction that has been clearly indicated to 
them by the residents of this province. 
 
There are a hundred recommendations in the task committee’s 
final report. The major change, Mr. Speaker, will require the 
Department of Education to implement integrated services, an 
initiative that has not only been discussed by educators but also 
by many other government departments. 
 
Open collaboration between departments is the key to success. 
Doing so, quite simply, will allow teachers to once and again 
become teachers. Health, justice, and social services issues will 
also be dealt with inside the integrated system. 
 
Other recommendations from the report include making family 
involvement in education a priority and addressing the vast, 
cultural diversity and community issues facing our education 
system. 
 
This is the future of our province that we’re talking about. The 
gauntlet has been dropped at the feet of the Education minister. 
All of Saskatchewan will be waiting and watching to see if he 
takes up the challenge. 
 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 207 

 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 4 — The Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2001 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4, The 
Registered Nurses Amendment Act, 2001 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Dietitians Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 5, The 
Dietitians Act, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall, 
and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Hermanson. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And you 
didn’t get a chance to know that I congratulated you yesterday 
on your new position and certainly urged you to do, as I’m sure 
you will, continue the excellent program in the schools; visiting 
and teaching the young people of the province about 
democracy. 
 
And I’ll just create a bit of a separation there because I wouldn’t 
want to involve you in this next comment, Mr. Speaker. But it’s 
too bad that the members opposite didn’t have the benefit of 
these kind of programs when they were in school because they 
are so afraid of honest debate and an honest exchange of ideas 
that they continually misstate the facts. 
 
Today, 800 new health care providers were turned into 800 
administrators. Now the member knew that that wasn’t accurate 
but accuracy doesn’t matter when your only goal is power. And 
accuracy doesn’t matter when you have no ideas to put forward. 
All you’re trying to do is tear down the work of others. 
 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday at the close of my marks . . . my 
remarks, I mentioned that they had been citing an election 
promise that we made where there would be 500 new nurses 
provided. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m reading from original text 
here. It says: 

We will hire another 500 health care providers. 
 
And I would have to say that, again, I don’t know why the 
opposition would continue to do this when clearly it said health 
care providers. It didn’t say nurses. And I would urge the 
members opposite to get on the high road of democratic debate 
in this House based on fact, based on giving voters the choice in 
the future between two different visions for this province. And I 
hope that they’re ashamed of themselves for their conduct in 
this regard. 
 
But on to happier notes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit about economic planning and prosperity 
in the province, because this is a record-setting province in a 
number of regards. And in our Partnership for Prosperity 
document, we have set out targets to increase the average 
disposable income for Saskatchewan families by 25 per cent. 
We set out targets to make sure that Saskatchewan has a 
well-educated workforce by increasing the number of people 
that have a post-secondary education by 5 per cent. We’ve set 
targets of a 20 per cent increase in research and development, 
including to value-added exports by 20 per cent. And an 
increase in 40 per cent of the families and businesses connected 
to the Internet. 
 
And certainly the Throne Speech, and the budget that we’ll be 
seeing in the next couple of days, certainly will take us in those 
directions. 
 
But I do want to spend just a little bit of time on the Alberta 
comparison because we often hear about the surpluses. Now we 
know that through no good skill of the government in that 
province that they have an oil bonus that actually exceeds our 
total provincial budget. And this is certainly easy money from 
the perspective of what that province has to do to receive that 
oil benefit. And I don’t begrudge our neighbours their success; I 
think it’s wonderful that they are able to do the things that they 
do. 
 
But I do want to point out a little bit of fact again. I know it’s 
troubling to have to deal with facts. And even through Alberta 
has no sales tax, they do have an annual health premium of 816 
per family, which is more . . . it’s more than the yearly tax paid 
by Saskatchewan families on the sales tax. So what’s the 
difference? They pay more in their health premium than people 
here pay in sales tax. 
 
Automobile insurance rates. I presume that most of the folks 
there drive cars. Well they’re nearly double the rates in Regina. 
A 1998 Taurus is considerably . . . it’s almost double the 
insurance rates in Alberta that it is in Saskatchewan. And a new 
house in Calgary is 188,000 compared to one in Regina at 150. 
Well, I say, Mr. Speaker, that those increased mortgage 
payments again are eating in to whatever benefit people think 
might be available. 
 
And when you add all of those things together, a family earning 
75,000 in Saskatoon has $17,010 that goes towards the support 
of all the services they receive, and in Calgary it’s more. So 
what we have to say that in Alberta the only advantage there is 
there is for the privileged. It’s more expensive for students to go 
to university there. And they spend less per capita on important 



208 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

social programs including health care than we do in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So I just want to say that the low-end jobs in Alberta pay less 
than they do in Saskatchewan. Their minimum wage is less. 
And I don’t know, Mr. Speaker, why a wealthy province 
wouldn’t share some of that wealth with the young people that 
it employs in its service industry jobs. 
 
Women fare better in Saskatchewan. The wages of women in 
Saskatchewan are generally at a higher level. And, again, I 
don’t know why they don’t share some of that wealth with the 
women of their province. 
 
And I’ll just say in closing on this point, Mr. Speaker, that child 
poverty is also higher there. 
 
So I guess it depends on what you want to measure. But by the 
things that I measure, Mr. Speaker, and the things I consider 
important, I have to say that I think they could do a little better 
job at distributing some of that oil bonus that they have in that 
province. 
 
The next thing I want to just mention, you may know, Mr. 
Speaker, that I get quite involved in music and because of that 
have a chance to meet a lot of young people. 
 
And I encountered a bit of a phenomenon last summer where 
there was young people moving back from BC (British 
Columbia), moving here from Ontario. And I said to them, I 
said, well, I’m kind of curious. I know why I like 
Saskatchewan, but I’m curious why you’ve chosen to come to 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And one of the young people said well, you can afford to live 
here and I have some money left over to pursue your interests. 
He said it’s so expensive to live in these other places that 
there’s no way that I can pursue my other interests, my whole 
income goes just to living in these places. 
 
I met a young person recently who is an urban young person 
who grew up right in the heart of Vancouver and he’s chosen to 
get involved in agriculture in Saskatchewan, which I found very 
interesting. He’s made a career choice to do that. But the area 
he’s interested in is new generation co-ops and the ability of 
farmers to group together to provide value-added products. And 
the area he’s particularly interested in is he’s part of a company 
that’s been making things like lotions and whatnot from hemp. 
And he feels that there’s an opportunity for people to get 
together to produce the raw materials needed for the product 
that his company produces. 
 
So I think that when you look at people who have been 
elsewhere, have seen what’s going on, they see there’s a lot of 
opportunities. 
 
I apologize — it escapes me — but there’s a young person in 
Gravelbourg who talks about all the business opportunities that 
are there for people in rural Saskatchewan because of the 
affordable investments. And certainly, Gravelbourg is one of 
those communities that’s moving along the same path that 
Moose Jaw has in terms of building on its natural advantages. 
And there’s a young restaurateur there who has recently put his 

grubstake into a small restaurant in Gravelbourg. And if it’s 
successful — who knows — he may decide to continue there or 
he may decide to buy a larger restaurant. But the fact of the 
matter is that enabled that person to use their talent to get a start 
in an affordable way in Saskatchewan. So I think that those are 
the kind of people we want to be spending our time with. 
People who understand that there is opportunity. 
 
Now there is one problem that Saskatchewan faces. And part of 
that is that agricultural employment in this province represents 
10 per cent of our workforce. In other provinces it’s as low as 
3.5 per cent to a high of 4.9 per cent. So double the people in 
Saskatchewan depend on agriculture for employment than they 
do in other areas, and this is of course why we’ve spent so 
much effort on diversification and value added. And again, by 
all reports from various financial houses they feel that the 
diversification needs to continue but has been going well and 
making a difference in the stability of our economy overall. 
 
Now I just want to reiterate a few facts from yesterday about 
our record-setting province. We had 485,000 people working in 
Saskatchewan in the year 2000, which was 5,000 more than the 
previous record. The year 2000 was a record year for potash, a 
record year for drilling natural gas wells, a record year for oil 
production, and overall in Canada 80 per cent of our wild rice 
comes from Saskatchewan. We have award-winning musicians, 
filmmakers, athletes, writers. 
 
But it’s not enough for the opposition, Mr. Speaker. It’s not 
enough to set records in debt reduction and credit rating 
improvements and reduction in child poverty. I’m not quite sure 
what would be enough but I think power is the only thing that 
will satisfy those guys because most other things are getting 
done quite nicely without them thank you. 
 
I want to speak briefly about the role of the Internet in our rural 
economy. Many provinces across Canada are understanding the 
role that the Net will play in provision of services to rural and 
remote areas for many reasons. If you think, for example, of a 
farmer who’s looking for technical information how much 
simpler to get on the Internet to look for that information and 
having to drive miles to a library where they may or may not 
have the up-to-date technical information that that farmer 
requires. In this instance they could connect directly with the 
agricultural college, with the most up to date research institutes 
that are doing research on the particular matter that they’re 
interested in. 
 
The fact of the matter is recently at Agribition they were talking 
about being able to sell breed stock on the Internet. I think you 
can actually dial up and have a look at your bull there and see if 
that’s the bull that you want to buy, and . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . I think the Sask Party has a Web site that 
enables you to do that as well. 
 
But I also want to mention the strong role it plays in education. 
A couple of years ago when I visited the agricultural college in 
Saskatoon, nine of their students were taking their agricultural 
program at a distance from the campus through use of 
information technology — whether it’s medical information, 
educational, whether it’s e-business. 
 
We have people like the Saskatoon berry farm who are selling 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 209 

 

their products over the Internet. This is a huge new opportunity. 
And I think we may even see opportunities for some of our 
public sector work to be done through telework in the future, 
which will give people the choice of being able to live in 
affordable communities throughout this province rather than 
being confined to urban centres merely for the receipt of 
services. 
 
There was one critique by one of the members opposite that I 
want to speak directly to about medium-speed Internet access in 
Saskatchewan. And I know that they have a thirst for facts, Mr. 
Speaker, so I’m going to just explain a bit — and the member 
who raised this question will know who they are. But they 
asked, why does northern Saskatchewan receive medium-speed 
Internet access today. 
 
Well today the fact is that the vast majority of northern 
Saskatchewan schools receive their Internet access from 
DirecPC, which is a satellite service provided nationally 
through Telesat Canada. The service has proven to be 
unsatisfactory — it’s slow, it’s got difficulty in dial-up, it’s 
unreliable. And under CommunityNet, northern Saskatchewan 
schools will be provided with satellite services through the 
Saskatchewan Communications Network. The SCN service will 
be ten times faster than what’s currently delivered by DirecPC. 
 
Now it’s very inescapable to get around the fact of having to 
deliver some services in the North through satellite. I know that 
the members opposite would have us dig through the Canadian 
Shield, but this is more difficult than they understand 
apparently, not having tried to dig a trench through the 
Canadian Shield. But we thought that satellite would be a good 
solution to this. And due to the forward-looking planning of the 
government we do have the SCN network that provides us with 
these facilities. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And soon we’ll see high speed Internet spreading out to 
communities around the province because of the way we’ve 
co-operated on bringing all of our sectors together in 
Saskatchewan around broadband Internet service. The fact of 
the matter is, is that we’re managing to deliver this service at a 
higher level of service for a smaller cost per capita than any 
other province in Canada. 
 
And I think what we’ll see is a huge expansion of the 
opportunities that communities have to participate both in the 
knowledge economy but also to pursue whatever area of interest 
it is that they have once this is all in place. And we have a fairly 
short time horizon to put this in place — over the next two to 
three years we’ll see a very rapid expansion in this area. 
 
I’m going to also spend just a minute talking about tax reform 
in the province. I don’t know if you know, Mr. Speaker, but 
Saskatchewan’s personal income tax rates had been going up 
since the introduction of the flat tax in 1985. And I might 
mention that of course we weren’t the government in 1985 
when this happened. 
 
And if I can just digress for a moment, Mr. Speaker, one of the 
things I note about the members opposite is that money burns a 
hole in their pocket. They remind me of the kid that found 10 

bucks on the street and just can’t wait to get to the candy store 
to spend it. No thought for the future. And that’s why under 
their previous administration we had programs that gave away 
cheap gas and then had to raise taxes to recoup the money they 
lost on the cheap gas. 
 
We’re not going to do that, Mr. Speaker. Whatever tax cuts you 
get from this government will be permanent. We will not have 
to follow the kind of feast and famine policies that were 
followed by the members opposite. 
 
In 1992 an average family was paying the highest income tax in 
all of Canada, but this is no longer the case. Our income tax 
rates have come down four times in the last seven years and 
they’re coming down again in 2002 and 2003. So that’s six 
times that there will have been income tax reductions. And the 
fact of the matter is, that reduction will reach an estimated 442 
million per year by 2003. 
 
At 6 per cent, Saskatchewan’s rate is the lowest of the nine 
provinces with a sales tax. And we know anyway that Alberta 
cheats, because instead of charging a sales tax they charge you 
health care premiums. So I guess if you want to play that game 
you can do that, but a little more transparent here. 
 
In 1992 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . I would ask the member 
opposite what it is about 6 per cent he doesn’t understand, but 
anyway. In 1992 the total tax bill for an average Saskatchewan 
family was the second highest. By 2000 it was the fourth 
lowest. 
 
And I just say, Mr. Speaker, as we enter the budget debate, I 
urge the members opposite to look at the long term and not just 
want to run out and spend everything in one year, leaving no 
ability to continue to add improvements in the out years . 
 
I want to mention just a little bit, some of the people who are a 
little more supportive of Saskatchewan. For example, the 
president of Bridon Cordage — a twine manufacturer based in 
Alberta . . . Albert Lea, Minnesota, pardon me — Tim Mason 
stood up in front of the Canada-Minnesota Business Council to 
extol the virtues of doing business in Saskatoon where Bridon 
Cordage has a branch plant. The key factors for Bridon Cordage 
were transportation and the availability of a quality labour 
force, said Fraser. 
 
Now these are people from outside the province who have 
chosen this country and this province as the place to do business 
because of what they see as being the very positive qualities. 
And perhaps we can arrange for the members opposite to sit 
down with these folks and understand what’s going on here. 
 
The other — and I apologize to my Regina colleagues that a 
couple of the examples I picked today are both Saskatoon; I 
don’t know how that could be but here we are — but this is a 
comment about Tourism Saskatoon developing an e-commerce 
portal. And this should be very exciting to people interested in 
cultural tourism because whether it’s festivals, annual events — 
anything that people book tickets for — signature events that 
take place in the province, they’ll be able to provide people 
with event calendars, audio and video downloads, archive 
photos, maps, weather information. And they are planning to 
add a central reservation system in the future. 



210 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

So these are people who are taking what we’ve got and are 
working hard to build it into some new areas of economic 
development for the province. 
 
But you know I can say whatever I want, Mr. Speaker, but 
what’s important is what the communities say about our Throne 
Speech. And I just want to read a few quotes. SaskCulture sent 
out this press release after the Throne Speech. 
 

By creating a new Department of Youth, Culture and 
Recreation, the Premier acknowledged that Saskatchewan 
has a rich, cultural diversity and that culture is a central 
component of community life throughout Saskatchewan. 

 
They were pleased to hear that the Throne Speech recognized 
the important economic contribution cultural industries make to 
the province’s economy. 
 
As well they eagerly anticipate the release of the Partnership for 
Prosperity report where the initial consultation document named 
culture among Saskatchewan’s key economic growth areas. 
 
As well Gilks noted that other good news for the cultural 
community was found in the commitment to extend high-speed 
Internet through rural Saskatchewan over the next six years. 
With the Internet being such an important way to showcase 
Saskatchewan culture around the world, it’s vital that all the 
residents have a chance to access on-line resources. 
 
There’s one community viewpoint. We have another one here 
from the Saskatchewan Association of Recreation Professionals 
. The members of the association know that a focus on 
recreation will benefit individuals, families, and communities, 
and look forward to working with the new minister in the newly 
created Department of Culture, Youth and Recreation, as well 
as the related departments such as Health and Justice. 
 
The association endorses the following statements. Recreation 
and active living are essential to personal health. Recreation is 
key to balanced human development. Recreation and parks are 
essential to our quality of life. Recreation reduces 
self-destructive and anti-social behaviour. Recreation and parks 
build strong families and healthy communities. Pay now or pay 
later — recreation reduces health care, social service, police, 
and justice costs. Recreation and parks are significant economic 
generators in your community. Parks, open space, and natural 
areas are essential to ecological survival. 
 
I could go on, Mr. Speaker. I have other quotes from many 
other people who have written in since the new portfolio was 
set up, but the point I’m making is although the opposition has 
difficulty understanding the importance of culture, youth, and 
recreation, the community has no difficulty understanding it and 
have been very forthcoming in their positive remarks. 
 
This e-mail that I got the other day was particularly interesting, 
and it says here, forward-looking communities and their leaders 
are looking for leadership in feel-good, pragmatic action to 
celebrate the vitality of their community and, at the same time, 
look to the future potential of that community. I haven’t yet 
encountered anyone, Mr. Speaker, who’s looking for feel-bad 
support in their communities, and I would say that I certainly 
welcome optimistic people being on board. 

One of the things that this person referred to is that 50 years ago 
when the government said it would electrify every home in the 
province, that electrification created all kinds of spinoff 
opportunities for business in the province. And today that same 
opportunity exists with information technology, Mr. Speaker. 
It’ll provide our rural communities with a huge advantage in the 
kind of choices they will be able to make. 
 
But, there’s no question that Canadian values are in flux. We 
sometimes have a situation where people decide to retreat into 
their own personal foxhole and pull the dirt in over them. But 
the fact of the matter, Mr. Speaker, is anything really 
worthwhile that’s happened in this society has happened 
because we’ve worked together. 
 
And one of the programs I just want to comment on — and I 
thank the member for Last Mountain-Touchwood for 
mentioning this one and understanding what it was all about — 
when Premier Lorne Calvert announced that . . . Excuse me. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would just remind the member if 
they’re referring to another member they should do by his 
riding or by title only. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I was quoting the news clipping, so I 
apologize for that. 
 
But the Premier iterated that the province needs to start building 
its future by helping young children before they enter school. 
And we will be devoting $73 million over the next five years to 
early childhood development, and that will include targeting 
money at strengthening families, curbing fetal alcohol 
syndrome, but also knowing that when we build strong children 
we build a strong future. And the Saskatchewan school trustees 
as well were encouraged to hear that this is going to be the 
forward-looking focus of the government. 
 
So in summary, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say that in our 
Throne Speech . . . It was a very forward-looking speech about 
connecting people to the future of prosperity; a thriving 
economy; healthy citizens, families and communities; 
responsive and effective government. And there will be large 
investments in technology for government, for business, for 
educational institutions, for health care. In community 
infrastructure we’ll see new investments through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan infrastructure program. And rural 
Saskatchewan will see increased spending on agricultural 
research and development to help farmers take advantage of 
new opportunities. Transportation will see the largest 
investment in highway renewal that we’ve ever seen. And in 
economic planning we’ll see the province moving forward with 
its economic blueprint for prosperity. 
 
I have to say, Mr. Speaker, that I’m excited about this. And, Mr. 
Speaker, clearly the bus is rolling and I, for one, am excited 
about our journey under our new leader and Premier. And in 
closing, Mr. Speaker, I say to the opposition, get on the bus, 
Gus. 
 
And I will be supporting the Throne Speech but not the 
amendment. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 211 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am pleased to enter 
the debate this afternoon and to say that at the conclusion of my 
remarks I have an announcement to make about my personal 
political future. 
 
But I am pleased to rise in the debate this afternoon. And first 
of all to offer my congratulations to you, Mr. Speaker, on your 
election. I also want to mention two former members who have 
left us since the end of the last session. And I want to extend my 
own personal best wishes to former Premier Romanow and 
former Deputy Premier Lingenfelter in all their future 
endeavours. 
 
I want to pay tribute too, to my constituents of North Battleford. 
The city of North Battleford, including the communities Meota, 
Cochin, Prince, and the First Nations reserves of Saulteaux and 
Moosomin, comprise one of the most scenic and historic parts 
of our province. And I’m proud to represent this beautiful 
region and the fine people who live in it. 
 
I want to congratulate the government on the decision to 
proceed with the construction of a second bridge across the 
North Saskatchewan River this year. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the twinning of the Yellowhead, 
like the twinning of the Trans-Canada, is a top priority which 
will give this province a modern, safe highway system that will 
pay for itself in saved lives and fewer accidents. I am pleased 
that the government has decided to twin the Yellowhead along 
the existing route rather than to bypass the Battlefords, as 
several prominent members of the Saskatchewan Party are 
advocating. 
 
Fortunately the government has not listened to a number of 
Saskatchewan Party activists in the Battlefords who are 
determined to bypass the Battlefords. Instead the government 
has listened to the elected people of the Battlefords — the city 
council, the town council, the chamber of commerce, and 
myself as MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) — who 
have said that the route should go through the Battlefords rather 
than bypass us. The Saskatchewan Party activists who are 
determined to bypass the Battlefords have not and never will be 
elected there. 
 
Another local issue of importance to the Battlefords I want to 
touch on is that of old Government House. Mr. Speaker, in 
1874 Battleford was chosen as the capital of the then Northwest 
Territories. Under Governor Laird three-quarters of the land 
mass of present day Canada was ruled from Battleford. 
 
Unfortunately a few years later, Governor Dewdney purchased 
a large tract of land in the Pile of Bones area and promptly 
decided that the capital should be moved there. 
 
The former capital building at Battleford overlooks the forks of 
the Battle and Saskatchewan River from an impressive hill. And 
I can think of no more important project with which to mark the 
centennial of Saskatchewan in 2005 than the preservation and 
refurbishment of old Government House in Battleford. 
 
(15:00) 
 
I want to congratulate the Provincial Secretary on the new 

Historic Properties Foundation Act that will aid in raising 
money for the Government House project. 
 
Before I leave the very important task of advising members of 
this House of all the advantages and features of my home 
constituency, I want to also inform hon. members that North 
Battleford will be bidding to host the 2004 Saskatchewan 
Summer Games. I’ve been asked by the city council in North 
Battleford to chair the bid committee, and I encourage all 
members of the House to join with me in supporting the North 
Battleford bid to host this important event that will give all 
members and, indeed, all citizens of our province a reason to 
visit the Battlefords in 2004. 
 
I now want to discuss the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. A first 
Throne Speech is an opportunity to set out a new vision for the 
province. I listened carefully for some words of hope, some 
words of hope for the 13,000 fewer people working in this 
province than a year ago. I instead heard that the province is 
booming. In the debate, I actually heard one government 
member claim that our growth is outstripping that of Alberta. 
 
I listened for some hope for our grain producers caught in the 
grip of rising input costs and the collapse of commodity prices. 
Instead the only grain industry I heard mentioned was the boom 
in wild rice. 
 
I listened for hope for our young people who want an 
opportunity to live and work, a strategy to re-energize this 
province, a strategy for young people who want to stay here. 
Instead the only measure I heard for our young people was the 
creation of a new government department. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I was first running in the North Battleford 
by-election, the then Social Services minister and now Premier 
visited the Battlefords to announce a number of initiatives for 
our constituency. What we heard at that time was a recitation of 
several government grants for various organizations, many of 
which dated back literally for years and included grants that had 
expired two years before. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech was very much in that 
vein, as a series of government programs that had been 
announced months ago were re-announced. Even some federal 
programs were re-announced in the apparent belief that 
Saskatchewan voters are so gullible they would think that they 
were NDP initiatives. Mr. Speaker, we desperately need 
renewal and fresh ideas and energy. Sadly we did not get it 
from a Throne Speech that was a tired recitation of old 
announcements; so stale that some of them had been made by 
myself when I was a minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I also want to register my objections, in the 
strongest terms, to the tendency of government members to 
accuse opposition MLAs of disloyalty for saying this province 
is not doing well enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year we lost 13,000 jobs; yet the government 
says we’re booming and only traitors would suggest otherwise. 
No one — no one — is being disloyal to this province when 
they say we’re not satisfied with a loss of 13,000 of our 



212 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

brightest and best young people who have had to leave this 
province to find work and opportunity elsewhere. 
 
The NDP say they are proud of the fact that we are the only 
province that saw a decrease in child poverty last year. They 
less frequently mention that we still have the highest poverty 
rate of any province in Canada. We have the highest percentage 
of senior citizens and the second highest percentage of children 
in the country. Unfortunately the number of working and 
economically active citizens form a smaller percentage of our 
population than that of any other province in Canada. 
 
We have the highest crime . . . youth crime rate in Canada. We 
have the highest youth crime rate in Canada. Is it unpatriotic to 
point that out or is it unpatriotic to stick your head in the sand 
and say we don’t need to deal with this problem, we don’t need 
to give our young people new hope? Yet the NDP says 
everything is great and only unpatriotic individuals would 
express disappointment with some of the statistics we face. 
 
The attitude of the government reminds me of the old western 
song, “I’ve Been Down So Long (It Looks Like Up To Me) .” 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker . . . the 
hon. member for Regina Centre, I’m coming to you. I’m 
coming to you. Okay. 
 
Over the next 15 years Alberta expects $40 billion in new 
energy and thermal projects — $40 billion in investment. Just 
think of that, Mr. Speaker. Think what even a fraction of that 
amount would mean to the Saskatchewan economy. The 
projected investment in Saskatchewan at present is zero. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not just disloyal people who are leaving our 
province. It is not just Saskatchewan Party MLAs who will 
envy the opportunities to the west of us. May I say it is not just 
former NDP MLAs who are leaving for the bright lights of 
Calgary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s our Crown corporations which are choosing to 
invest in Alberta instead of Saskatchewan. SaskPower is 
building a coal generation plant in Fort McMurray. Despite the 
fact we’re facing energy shortages here in Saskatchewan, 
SaskPower wants to build in Fort McMurray, Alberta. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can be and should be a world leader in clean 
coal electricity generation. We should aggressively pursue 
ethanol generation, and we should selectively reduce the 
provincial fuel tax on ethanol blended fuels in order to ensure 
that ethanol blended fuels are economically viable. 
 
It is not unpatriotic to say things need to change. It is not 
disloyal to give our people a new sense of hope. Perhaps the 
truly disloyal people are those who look at our present state of 
affairs and say it’s good enough for them, it’s good enough for 
Saskatchewan. Well it’s not good enough for Saskatchewan, it’s 
not good enough for me, it’s not good enough for Liberals, and 
it’s certainly not good enough for the young people of this 
province. 
 
I want to talk for a minute, if I may, Mr. Speaker, about the 
farm crisis. As we all know, agriculture was the cornerstone of 
our province when it was created and it remains so today. 

AIDA was a very flawed program. I had hoped that the 
provincial government would have been in on the early 
planning of its replacement so that we would have a program 
that was less bureaucratic and more responsive to the needs of 
producers. 
 
Well our farmers are under enormous pressure as a result of 
circumstances totally beyond their control. And despite their 
best efforts to diversify and modernize, they have been let down 
by their governments. The governments of both Canada and 
Saskatchewan seem more interested in their own positioning 
and squabbling than in helping farmers deal with the crisis. 
 
I find it totally unacceptable that the federal Minister of 
Agriculture has said that Saskatchewan producers will not get 
their fair share of the new program unless the provincial 
government follows through and does participate. If the 
Saskatchewan government does not participate in the new 
program, he says, Saskatchewan producers will be disentitled 
their share of a national program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan producers cannot be deprived of 
their rights as Canadians because their provincial government is 
squabbling. 
 
I am also concerned that the Government of Saskatchewan 
agreed to participate under the CFIP (Canada Farm Income 
Program) when this agreement was made by former Agriculture 
minister and Deputy Premier Dwain Lingenfelter. Now with his 
resignation, the new minister claims that he is in no way bound 
by that commitment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how would we function and what chaos would we 
be in if every time we changed ministers, all previous 
commitments were cancelled? 
 
I also ask: what happens to the $75 million of Saskatchewan’s 
share of the Canada Farm Income Program? Will that money 
still be dedicated to the farm crisis or will it be funnelled off 
into other areas? 
 
I also want to say, however, that I agree with the NDP 
government commitment of SaskTel to provide high-speed 
Internet throughout the province. If baffles me that the 
Saskatchewan Party is opposed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if our farmers are going to diversify, going to be 
part of the global economy, and if they are going to operate 
without the Canadian Wheat Board as the Saskatchewan Party 
advocates, then they will need up-to-the-minute market 
information. 
 
The Internet allows rural people to be just as connected with the 
modern world and economy as someone living in Toronto. I 
think that the Internet is vital for the survival of farming and 
other business in rural Saskatchewan. It is an example of the 
perversity and lack of forward thinking on the part of the 
Saskatchewan Party that they ridicule the idea. 
 
I now want to talk about the position of our Crown 
corporations, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Last November the Leader of the Opposition stated in a speech 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 213 

 

that the government, through the Crown corporations, plans to 
invest 500 million — one-half a billion dollars — outside the 
province of Saskatchewan. The government refuses to confirm 
or deny that figure. 
 
May I first of all say, Mr. Speaker, I find it incomprehensibly 
arrogant for the government to refuse to tell the people of 
Saskatchewan — the shareholders of these Crown corporations 
— what is going to be done with their money. 
 
The question is not whether it is a good investment to buy an 
energy distribution company in Chicago, an insurance company 
in Prince Edward Island, a home security system in Winnipeg, 
an energy company in Concepción, a telephone company in the 
Philippines, a cable company in Australia, or a power plant in 
Alberta — that province above Alberta that the NDP are forever 
telling us only traitors consort with or look to. 
 
The question, the question, Mr. Speaker, is whether using half a 
billion dollars outside this province is the best use of our 
resources. 
 
Mr. Speaker, half a billion dollars would go a long way to 
hiring those 500 nurses the NDP promised in the last election. 
Half a billion dollars would go a long way to fixing up our 
highways, instead of turning some of them back to gravel. Half 
a billion dollars would allow us to have a tax rate competitive 
with our neighbours. And half a billion dollars would go a long 
way to reducing the burden of property tax in this province. 
 
I’m confident that if our population were to be asked what 
priority they place on foreign investments by their Crown 
corporations, they would overwhelmingly say, little to none. 
 
If the government thinks I am wrong in this, then I challenge 
the Premier to set out his foreign investment plans before the 
people of Saskatchewan, before the shareholders of the Crown 
corporations. Tell them how much money he plans to invest 
external to Saskatchewan. Tell them if it is half a billion dollars, 
and see what response he gets from the people of this province. 
 
The final subject I would like to deal with this afternoon is the 
state of the Liberal Party. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the founding convention of the Saskatchewan 
Liberal Party was held in August of 1905. The significance of 
this is that the province of Saskatchewan did not come in to 
being until September of 1905, two weeks after the Liberal 
convention. 
 
Walter Scott, the leader of the Liberal Party, became the first 
premier and, later that year, the Liberals won the first provincial 
election. It was that Liberal government which laid the 
foundations of the new province by building the roads, the 
schools, the university and this legislature. 
 
Later it was the Liberal Party under Jimmy Gardiner that fought 
against the rising tide of bigotry, threatening the social peace of 
this province in the 1920s when the Orange Lodge and the Ku 
Klux Klan were active. Our Liberal forbearers built well. 
 

For my part, I’m convinced that not all the contributions of the 
Liberal Party to the development of this province are in the 
past. I am persuaded that never before in our history has there 
been a greater need for a progressive centrist party committed to 
bringing us together and moving us forward. 
 
My decision to resign from cabinet is well-known and the 
reasons need not be repeated here. Suffice it to say that I 
became convinced that our Liberal membership was so 
overwhelmingly opposed to our participation in the coalition 
that we, as MLAs, would have to make a choice between our 
participation in government and our membership in the Liberal 
Party. 
 
The Liberal Leader told me he had no faith in the future of our 
party and, accordingly, we would be best advised to remain in 
cabinet. I respect his decision. I respect it, but I do not agree. 
 
Instead, I say we must respect the decision of the Liberal 
membership who want an independent future for our party. 
Liberals are not prepared to accept that we can do nothing more 
than be an adjunct of another party. Nor do I personally accept 
that I have no role to play in the public life of this province 
other than to enjoy a cabinet position as long as fate may allow. 
 
Yesterday, I listened with interest as the hon. member for 
Regina Centre paid tribute to the Liberal coalition. May I say I 
appreciated being her seatmate and I appreciated her generous 
comments. Nonetheless I must point out the obvious — the fact 
that our party in the coalition had become invisible with no 
recognizable identity and practically no measurable support was 
not something to concern her as a loyal member of the NDP. 
 
I say to my elected colleagues, the membership of the Liberal 
Party has spoken clearly and unequivocally. They do not want 
us in the coalition. They want a strong, independent Liberal 
Party. Mr. Speaker, this is not a dispute between elected Liberal 
MLAs. The question is simply whether we will listen to Liberal 
members throughout the province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, in reply to the hon. member from 
Regina-Qu’Appelle, I say that I do not accept that I had 
anything more than an marginal role in the vote which occurred 
in Prince Albert recently for a leadership convention. The 
motion to demand a leadership convention had already been 
placed on the Liberal agenda before I resigned from cabinet and 
would unquestionably have been cast regardless of where I was 
presently sitting in the Saskatchewan legislature. To suggest 
that the vote would have been different had I not resigned from 
cabinet is giving me far too much credit or blame, depending on 
one’s point of view. 
 
May I also say before closing this subject that I appreciated the 
support, advice, and kind words from so many of my 
constituents in North Battleford as I struggled with my decision. 
I regretted that I had joined the government without 
consultation. I regretted that I did not talk to my constituents 
before I accepted cabinet appointment. And I’m pleased that 
before I resigned from cabinet, I was able to do the correct thing 
and talk widely with my constituents. 
 
Hon. members will recall that after I announced my decision, 
TV news cameras visited the Battlefords to assess local 



214 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

reaction. They were unable to find anyone who disagreed with 
my decision. Later at our Liberal convention, the North 
Battleford News-Optimist was incorrectly quoted at the 
convention as having expressed opposition and disappointment 
with my move. 
 
I know that many members and some of the viewers who may 
be watching this afternoon wonder what lies in store for me. 
With that in mind, I wish to make an announcement. I don’t 
know. I do not know what the future holds, but I want to say I 
am committed to continuing to serve my constituents, my 
province, and my party with integrity and to the best of my 
ability. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Before I go into my 
reply to the Throne Speech, I’d like to congratulate the member 
from Prince Albert Carlton, and also the Deputy Speaker, 
Regina Sherwood, on their election as Speaker and Deputy 
Speaker. And I look forward to working with you throughout 
the rest of this sitting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Throne Speech unfortunately lacks vision. It’s 
a Throne Speech from a tired, old government without any new 
ideas, just rehashed ideas and announcements from past . . . last 
year’s Throne Speech. 
 
The Leader-Post, Regina, Wednesday, March 21, Mr. Speaker, 
it reads: 
 

Calvert missed an opportunity. 
 

And it goes on to read that the Premier: 
 

. . . already suffering from a less-than-dynamic image and 
criticism that his premiership is devoid of ideas and 
innovation — didn’t take this opportunity to make some 
bold signature of announcement is puzzling. A throne 
speech (Mr. Speaker) is one of those rare opportunities to 
tell the world what you are about. 
 

And the new Premier and the Liberal-NDP coalition missed the 
mark, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It goes on to say: 
 

Consider the purported highlights of this address: 
 
The $170 million during the next five years to create 6,000 
seasonal jobs is (just) an extension of an announcement 
made (a few weeks ago by the Premier) . . . 
 

Another one: 
 

The new initiatives to create 10,000 jobs in the forestry 
industry by 2005 through an integrated forestry 
development plan. 
 

And again, Mr. Speaker: 
 

(Ironically, Ainsworth Lumber of B.C. announced just 
(that) Monday that it was pulling out of three deals worth 

$210 million because, according to the company’s 
president, it’s just too difficult to do business in this 
province.) 

 
Another proposal: 
 

. . . amendments to The Labours Standard Act during this 
session to increase both maternal and parental leave to 50 
. . . from 30 weeks (was another previous announcement) 
. . . 
 
Devoting approximately $73 million (was another 
announcement) during the next five years to Early 
Childhood Development (also another previously 
announcement) . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, the Speech from the Throne had nothing to say 
about job growth, nothing to say about health care reform, and 
nothing on the agriculture crisis. It lacked a vision; it lacked a 
plan. There are no plans in the Throne Speech to create new 
jobs. No plans for a stronger safety net. No plans to strengthen 
regional hospitals, and no plans to reduce hospital waiting lists. 
 
No commitment, Mr. Speaker, to follow through on the 
promises made in last year’s Throne Speech. Last year the NDP 
promised to create jobs in Saskatchewan. But Saskatchewan has 
lost 13,000 jobs in the past 12 months. They had promised 
30,000 new jobs in the previous Throne Speech. 
 
Last year the NDP promised to reduce high input costs facing 
farm families. They promised a long-term farm safety net 
program, but that never happened either. Last year, Mr. 
Speaker, the NDP promised to reduce surgical waiting lists in 
Saskatchewan, but the surgical waiting list times are growing, 
and today Saskatchewan has the longest waiting list in Canada. 
 
Both the NDP and the Liberals promised to strengthen regional 
hospitals, Mr. Speaker. But in the Throne Speech we heard 
nothing about regional hospitals, while beds are closing and 
surgeries are being cancelled in Prince Albert and Swift 
Current. Once again the NDP made a promise and then failed to 
deliver. 
 
The NDP-Liberal coalition failed to deliver on any of its key 
election promises in the area of job creation, agriculture, and 
health care. The government is lacking leadership in 
government that Saskatchewan so desperately needs to stop the 
decline in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read a couple of resolutions from the 
Knights of Columbus of Saskatchewan. They’re going to debate 
these resolutions at their annual convention coming up in April. 
 
The Knights of Columbus in Saskatchewan have 11,000 
members, Mr. Speaker, and they are a Catholic men’s Christian 
fraternal organization. They hope to pass these resolutions and 
also to recommend to other councils and state councils in 
Canada to present them to the federal government as a united 
force. 
 
And I’d like to just to read them into the record, if I may, Mr. 
Speaker. The first one reads: 
 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 215 

 

Whereas the low commodity prices presently being 
received by Canadian farmers are beyond their control; 
whereas the current commodity prices are being set due to 
heavy subsidies by the European and United States . . . 
whereas the state of the family farm is now being eroded; 
whereas many Canadian farmers are forced to leave the 
land; whereas many Canadian farmers are forced to seek 
employment to help support their farming endeavours and 
their livelihood; whereas the farming economy is still a 
major backbone of the provinces and that of Canada. 
 
Therefore be it resolved that the State Board of the Knights 
of Columbus of Saskatchewan make it known to all levels 
of government, and particularly the federal government, 
that an injection of cash payments greater than was recently 
announced be implemented by the federal government 
immediately. 

 
Be it known that the Knights of Columbus of Saskatchewan 
seek implementation of a fair and equal subsidized program 
that sustains the farming economy by remaining 
competitive with that of other countries. 

 
The second resolution, Mr. Speaker, reads: 
 

Whereas current farm input costs are out of control and out 
of line with that of farming commodities; whereas much of 
the input costs are directly related to provincial and federal 
government programs as related to taxation and royalties. 
 
Therefore be it resolved that the Saskatchewan Knights of 
Columbus call on all levels of government, especially the 
provincial and federal governments, to review their current 
practices as they pertain to farming inputs in relation to 
taxation and royalties in view of obtaining a farm program 
for farmers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to go on and speak a bit about the news 
release concerning the Conservation Cover Program that was 
announced. Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this program is of little 
value to farmers in Saskatchewan. This is the opportunity that 
the government missed to really help with the diversification of 
this province into livestock. A minimum of 5 acres and a 
maximum of 50 acres at $50 an acre is just not adequate. 
 
And we realize that diversification must take place in this 
province, and when you increase the amount of land that’s 
seeded to grass will increase the number of cows and calves 
being raised in Saskatchewan, and the spinoffs there are 
tremendous, into feedlots and packing plants, hopefully a 
world-class packing plant in Saskatchewan, and in turn jobs and 
more taxpayers in this province which will put money in the 
government’s coffers to put into health care and building our 
roads and our highways, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government often says of the opposition that 
we have no plan. Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read our plan; 
I’d like to speak about our plan — the Saskatchewan Party’s 
plan — for agriculture. 
 
(15:30) 
 
The Saskatchewan Party’s plan for agriculture is really based on 

the emergency debate on agriculture that took place in the 
legislature on March 21. The NDP government proposed to 
write yet another letter to the Prime Minister of Canada calling 
for $500 million in additional agricultural support for Canadian 
farmers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the Saskatchewan Party strongly supports a 
significant increase in federal assistance for struggling farmers’ 
family farms, we believe the provincial and federal 
governments have an obligation to do more. And this is the 
Saskatchewan Party plan as follows. 
 
The governments of Saskatchewan and Canada must 
immediately begin negotiations on a long-term farm safety net 
program that would promote a strong and growing agricultural 
industry. This is something that has been promised to the 
Saskatchewan farmers for many, many years ever since the 
provincial government tore up the GRIP (gross revenue 
insurance program) program and took money out of the 
farmers’ pockets. And ever since then the farmers have been 
waiting for this long-term safety net. 
 
The second point, the Government of Canada must make the 
reduction of international grain subsidies a high priority 
because ending the subsidy war will strengthen the entire 
Canadian economy. 
 
And again, Mr. Speaker, this is fundamental to the health of the 
Saskatchewan farmer that these subsidies be done away with at 
the international level. The European Treasury and the 
American Treasury subsidize their farmers to a much greater 
extent than the Canadian and the Saskatchewan government 
does for our farmers and the farmers are really fighting the 
treasuries of the Europeans and the Americans. And as we see, 
the Saskatchewan farmer cannot continue to do that on its own. 
They must receive support from the governments of 
Saskatchewan and Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Thirdly, the Government of Canada should increase its share of 
the Canadian Farm Income Program, or CFIP, from its current 
level of $500 million to $1 billion to address the immediate 
crisis threatening to destroy thousands of family operations in 
Canada. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and the fourth item, all 58 members of the 
Saskatchewan legislature should take the unprecedented step of 
travelling to Ottawa to fight for the $500 million increase in 
CFIP funding for family farms. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government turned down that request and we 
believe it would be very important to go as a united front to 
Ottawa to put forward our concerns to the federal government 
and to the Prime Minister to tell about the plight of the 
Saskatchewan farmer. Saskatchewan is struggling. Agriculture 
industry has negatively affected almost every other industry in 
the province and a weak agriculture industry impacts the jobs of 
people across Saskatchewan, including the cities of Saskatoon 
and Regina. The poor agriculture economy affects all of 
Saskatchewan — both urban and rural. And even by the 
Premier Calvert’s own admission, the weakening farm . . . 
Sorry . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — . . . understands that we refer to other 



216 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

hon. members by constituency or title. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I am sorry. 
 
By the Premier’s own admission, the weakening farm economy 
is costing Saskatchewan jobs and forcing people to leave our 
province to work elsewhere. Yet the NDP has refused to 
support family farms with anything more than a letter of 
complaint to an uninterested Prime Minister. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party recognizes the importance of the 
agriculture industry to every family and business in 
Saskatchewan and we will continue to fight for the families and 
for the restoration of a profitable, sustainable agriculture 
industry in this province, Mr. Speaker. That’s the Saskatchewan 
Party plan. I believe it’s a good plan. 
 
And when we talk about rural Saskatchewan and the farm 
economy, we must remember that it affects all of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. The spinoffs from the agriculture 
industry is very vital to the Saskatchewan economy. Such 
spinoffs as buying inputs, fertilizer, chemicals, oil, fuel, repairs, 
buying equipment — new and used equipment. And in a time of 
a financial crisis the farmers of Saskatchewan naturally cut back 
on their expenses which affect the dealerships in this province 
as well as the short-line manufacturers and mainline 
manufacturers in the province. 
 
And when agriculture is struggling in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, it affects the whole economy in both urban and rural, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like to read to you some of the initiatives that are taking 
place in Redberry Lake constituency which I am so honoured to 
represent. There’s two groups. The first one is the Thick Hills 
Regional Business and Learning Centre. It takes in the 
communities of Blaine Lake, Marcelin communities. Access 
Program or CAP spearheaded the formation of the regional site, 
Thick Wood Hills Regional Business and Learning Centres. 
 
They have four primary objectives, Mr. Speaker: to help raise 
awareness within our rural communities of the benefits and 
opportunities of using information, technologies, and services. 
 
Number two, Mr. Speaker, to accelerate access to and the use of 
information highway related learning tools and services to help 
sustain jobs and growth in the rural communities. 
 
Number three, Mr. Speaker, to promote training opportunities 
for local entrepreneurs, employees of local business, educators, 
students, and others interested in improving their computer 
information management and network skills. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they are to foster conversion of existing 
government and other services to an electronic delivery as well 
as the development of a new service. They hope to provide 
public Internet access, e-mail services, adult education, 
community development, networking, business services. And 
the projects and other initiatives are creating business centres, 
income tax e-filing, student employment, job bank, tourism, 
community calendar, advertising, and building partnerships. 
The focus will be primarily on agriculture, tourism, community, 
and small businesses, Mr. Speaker. 

The second group that is doing a lot of work in the Redberry 
Lake constituency, Mr. Speaker, is a committee set up which is 
a spinoff of the Redberry Lake pelican project, which is an 
internationally recognized bird sanctuary. Chairman Larry 
Hawrish, secretary Peter Kingsmill, and paint contractor Sherry 
Sian has been hired to do sustainable community planning. 
 
And the committee plan in the Redberry Lake biosphere reserve 
has conducted a series of public workshops to discuss shared 
challenges to sustaining the local economy. The purpose of 
these workshops was to clarify local challenges and to identify 
a series of concrete community actions and strategies over the 
short-, medium-, and long-term to develop a sustainable 
community based on the principles of biosphere reserves. 
 
Biosphere reserves, Mr. Speaker, are the special regions 
recognized by UNICEF (United Nations International 
Children’s Emergency Fund) for UNESCO (United Nations 
Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization) for the 
commitment to pursuing sustainability. These special sites are 
essentially designed to serve three main functions: 
conservation, sustainability, development, logistics support for 
research, monitoring, education, and has a protective core area, 
but there is still much to be done to develop sustainable 
development options that meet the needs of the local people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, biosphere reserves are the shared responsibility of 
local people. The ability of the site to provide a meaningful, 
high-quality of life to local people requires input and 
involvement of everyone working and living in the region. All 
the people of the committee should be involved in one way or 
another to provide opportunities for young people to remain in 
their communities through the development of a new economic 
sectors and develop sustainable approaches to agriculture, 
health, recreation, industry, tourism, and waste management. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they held four meetings. The first one was to 
introduce the project to the community. The second saw 
speakers. They included the Ag Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan and the PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation 
Administration), who did the mapping and work on the land 
cover and watershed. The third was a planning session and set 
up goals. 
 
The fourth, Mr. Speaker, was to fuel people’s points of view. 
There were speakers at that fourth meeting as well, Mr. 
Speaker. The first was Jean Morrison, CEO (chief executive 
officer) of Parkland Health District, who discussed health trends 
for the Parkland district. 
 
Second speaker was from Tourism Saskatchewan who 
discussed various tourism options that are available in the area 
like agricultural diversification and attracting birdwatchers. And 
the third speaker was Leonard Piggott who spoke about holistic 
management as applied to agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a number of common threads that came 
out of these two groups who are trying to get the economy 
going in their area and all of them needed and wanted the 
government to basically to get out of their way and to provide 
the basic services necessary in the area that governments should 
be responsible for. And naturally one of the highest areas of 
concern was the discussion about the need for lower taxes on all 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 217 

 

areas in the Redberry Lake area, and improved infrastructure — 
as we all know, highways and roads, health care, services. 
 
And of course one interesting development was the lack of 
proper cellphone services. These groups are trying to encourage 
tourism and it is vital that they have proper cellphone services 
in the area. I know very well by my travels through the 
constituency that it’s very limited in that area, and everything 
from people living and working in the area to tourists going 
through that area rely on cellphone services. 
 
And also of course that spins off into the Internet services 
which they are trying to provide and encourage, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Just recently I had a phone call from the editor of The 
Riverbend Review — he also is a farmer; he and his wife farm 
near Blaine Lake/Hafford area — and he asked me to pass on a 
challenge to the Minister of Highways, and his challenge was 
for the Minister of Highways to come out to Hafford and Blaine 
Lake area and take a ride with him down Highway No. 40. 
 
Unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, this particular individual and a 
number of other people in that area have had a number of 
problems on Highway No. 40. Last year this individual had a 
few thousand dollars worth of damage on his stock trailer and 
truck, driving from Hafford to Blaine Lake, because of the 
treacherous roads and potholes. This year the same individual 
has had another mishap — this time on the other side of 
Hafford, running from Hafford to North Battleford on Highway 
No. 40. And he would just like me to express his concerns 
about the highway and issue that challenge to the Minister of 
Highways. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that area they also have considerable concerns 
about health care. And a draft proposal that the biosphere 
committee has put together has two areas that is of concern. 
They’re asking to have functional hospitals with adequate 
medical staff — doctors, nurses, and technicians to serve the 
needs of all people living in Redberry Lake biosphere reserve, 
especially the elderly. And also help the Parkland Health 
District to improve health care capacity throughout Redberry 
Lake biosphere reserve by establishing more personal care 
homes and attracting more nurses and doctors to the area, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s interesting, in the latest developments in the House and 
outside the House, the headline of The Leader-Post, Tuesday, 
March 27. The headline reads: 
 

Nursing members a surprise to Nilson. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, I’m just reading from the article. I hope I can 
do that. 
 

There were fewer registered nurses in Saskatchewan in 
2000 than the year before, despite (the) Health Minister’s 
. . . assertion otherwise. 
 
(In fact) It appears that the . . . (minister) didn’t know this 
until the Saskatchewan Party Opposition informed him in 
Monday’s question period. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the minister goes on to say: what we do 

know is that there are more nurses that are registered with the 
SRNA (Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association); that the 
Saskatchewan Party released information directly from the 
SRNA that showed that the numbers are down in 2000 from 
1999. There was a total SRNA membership of 9,506, and 8,987 
practising Saskatchewan registered nurses in 2000, both a 
decrease from the 9,552 membership and the 9,035 practising 
RNs in 1999. 
 
One hundred and sixty fewer registered nurses, Mr. Speaker, 
and 147 fewer psychiatric nurses. And also a concern about two 
doctors leaving the Saskatoon cancer clinic. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Unfortunately, all we’ve seen is that the government has 
increased the administrators and today we have less front line 
medical services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the NDP promised to reduce surgical 
waiting times in Saskatchewan. But today surgical waiting 
times are growing and, today, Saskatchewan has the longest 
waiting list in Canada. Again, strengthen the regional hospitals. 
Today, nothing about regional hospitals in the Throne Speech, 
but bed closings and surgeries cancelled, Mr. Speaker. 
 
A few comments on the economy as a whole. The agriculture 
crisis, as we know, is a concern to all of the province. And as 
we see, there’s no plan for job creation in this province, no 
safety net, no plan to go to Ottawa to fight for our farmers’ 
concerns, no plan to reduce world subsidies. 
 
What we’ve seen, Mr. Speaker, is the government, which 
announced last year only to spend $100 million a year, buying 
up and competing with businesses in Saskatchewan. That is not 
helping small businesses in this province whatsoever. 
 
Also the government’s labour laws, increasing the rules and 
regulations in that area, unfair labour laws concerning the 
freedom of speech, and the freedom of having a secret ballot in 
this province was a fundamental to our democracy. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, the student summer employment 
program, which is only for the Crown corporations of this 
province, is really a slap in the face to the small-business people 
in this province who are desperately out there trying to make a 
living, trying to create jobs in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote some numbers from the Canadian 
Federation of Independent Business which, upon polling their 
members, fully 60 per cent of members said that government 
regulation of paper burden is a high priority with them; 
workmen’s compensation is 58 per cent; provincial labour laws, 
56 per cent; and also, shortage of qualified labour is up to 40 
per cent. 
 
Comparing that 40 per cent to back in July of 1992, when a 
shortage of qualified labour was only at 20.2 per cent, it has 
doubled in that period and that is becoming a serious concern 
and problem for small businesses in the province. 
 
And also, Mr. Speaker, the provincial labour laws has gone 
from 40.3 per cent in July of last year to a concern of 56.2 per 



218 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

cent in this year. And it just shows that the government is on the 
wrong track and needs to make some changes in their policies 
to make this more of a friendly business environment. 
 
Small businesses is noted as the group that creates jobs in this 
province and we need to do more there to help them. 
 
Also it goes on to say some of the most harmful tax in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker . . . personal income tax — the 
concern is 67 per cent of the respondents had that as a concern; 
provincial sales tax, 62 per cent; gasoline and fuel tax, nearly 58 
per cent; and corporate income tax, 47.5 per cent. So taxes are 
definitely a problem with businesses in Saskatchewan and must 
be addressed. 
 
Last year’s budget, Mr. Speaker, there was a total cut of $106.5 
million in taxes. But unfortunately with the current rate hikes — 
SaskEnergy rate hike of $100 million, SaskPower rate of $14 
million, and a slight in the $25 rebate . . . energy rebate which 
totals $10 million is a total rate hike of $104 million, Mr. 
Speaker. So any decrease in taxes has been offset by an increase 
in rate hikes. And we understand there is more rate hikes to 
come in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this anti small-business philosophy hurts the 
provincial economy. Lost businesses means lost jobs; lost 
taxpayers means no money for health care, education, 
highways, and infrastructure. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I will not support the motion but I will be 
supporting the amendment put forward by the Leader of the 
Opposition, the member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to support 
the Throne Speech delivered by the Hon. Dr. Lynda Haverstock 
on March 20, 2001. 
 
Before I begin the main thrust of my remarks I would, however, 
like to extend my congratulations to the Premier on his recent 
decisive win in the Riversdale by-election. And it’s a pleasure 
and a privilege to serve with him as our leader. I also 
congratulate my colleague, the member from Elphinstone, on 
his election to this Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to add my congratulations to you on 
your election as Speaker of this House. You have already 
shown these first few days in the House your ability to be an 
excellent Speaker — fair and firm. My congratulations also to 
the member from Regina Sherwood on his election as Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am proud to represent the people of Saskatoon 
Eastview and the Government of Saskatchewan. My 
constituency has the highest proportion of seniors in the 
country. There are nine special care homes and thirteen seniors’ 
high-rises in Eastview. There are three high schools and many 
elementary schools in the riding. A variety of small businesses 
thrive in Eastview. This is a diverse constituency as you can 
see, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The people of Eastview as well as all people in the province 

will see a better life in Saskatchewan as a result of the direction 
that this Throne Speech lays out. The three broad themes of the 
Throne Speech — namely, a thriving economy, healthy citizens, 
families, communities, and responsive, effective government — 
commit our government to a path that will benefit all people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
As we listen to people — and we have recently had three 
significant opportunities to do that, specifically a leadership 
contest and two by-elections — we have heard the people’s 
priorities. These priorities are reflected throughout the Throne 
Speech. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a strong provincial economy and as a 
result of that economic growth, there were 485,000 people 
working in Saskatchewan in the year 2000. We continue to see 
more people joining the workforce as programs such as building 
independence reap results. Fewer families are on social 
assistance and we have seen a decline in child poverty in our 
province. Saskatchewan was the only province in Canada to 
achieve such an improvement. 
 
We are building long-term solutions to address priority areas 
such as health care, which I will speak about at length in a 
moment. Healthy communities are not built on or around 
facilities or professionals or treatments or procedures or drugs. 
Our health is largely determined by a strong family unit, access 
to a good education, a decent job with a decent wage, security 
in our homes and our communities, peace of mind, and even joy 
in our lives. 
 
When we talk about health care, most people immediately think 
it’s a hospital or the clinic or the doctor, nurse, or technician, 
the prescription or the diagnostic equipment that we need to 
deal with accidents, illnesses, and disease. However our system 
can do so much more to make and keep us healthy. 
 
Our government is taking the very broad determinants of health 
that I just mentioned and addressing them through coordinated 
programs like the early childhood development strategy. 
Components of such a program include early detection of 
problems that need early intervention to enable families to 
nurture strong, healthy children so that they become healthy, 
productive adults. 
 
Many of the increasing pressures on the health, social services, 
justice, and education systems can be traced back to poverty, 
unemployment, substance abuse and/or dysfunctional families. 
By including the broad social determinants of health in the 
design of health services, we can put in place more than just 
short-term measures that do little to provide solutions to 
problems that will continue to grow as the root causes are not 
effectively addressed. 
 
We heard the opposition health critic talk about their plan for 
health care that was submitted to the Fyke Commission, and I 
thank the member from Melfort-Tisdale for providing me with a 
copy of that submission. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with all due respect to that member, as I read 
through their submission, I was struck by the lack of awareness 
of how much of their vision is already being done under the 
leadership of our government. 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 219 

 

Primary health care is a good example. Eighteen sites are up 
and running and more are in the discussion stage. Our vision of 
primary health care has been recognized within Canada as well 
as internationally. Primary health care sites already serve rural, 
urban, and northern communities. There’s no doubt in the 
minds of many health providers like nurses and countless others 
that appropriate services should be accessible as close to home 
as possible. 
 
However, when we talk about what has the greatest impact on 
making and keeping people healthy, it is obvious that services 
should be available that contribute to those needs. As an 
example, we now have exercise classes offered in one primary 
care site. Nothing fancy and not costly, but it has been said that 
if you change your eating and exercise habits, even after the age 
of 60, you will live healthier longer and die quicker. And I think 
most people don’t get that, but we do all want to live healthier 
longer and we do not want to linger in dying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to see more integrated programs that 
bring together Health, Justice, Social Services, and Education. 
With this approach we are addressing issues like fetal alcohol 
syndrome, partnering not only with our government 
departments but also with our counterparts in Alberta, 
Manitoba, Nunavut, Northwest Territories, and the Yukon. This 
not only expands our capacity to deliver quality services, but it 
brings together the broader community to develop solutions. 
Fetal alcohol syndrome isn’t just a Saskatchewan problem, it is 
the same across the nation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s a huge challenge to think of health in this new 
way as well as the more traditional bricks, mortar, equipment, 
and personnel terms. It entails an attitudinal shift for all of us — 
providers, governments, and consumers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another challenge our government is addressing in 
a major way is that of recruitment and retention of 
professionals. Again this is not a problem unique to 
Saskatchewan. This is a national, indeed, an international 
phenomenon. Discussions at the national level between all 
Health ministers and then all first ministers last year encouraged 
the federal government to start to restore the federal funding to 
health care to at least what it was in 1994. This will not stop the 
need for change in the system or how we need that change to 
continue to offer the people of Saskatchewan and Canada a 
universal, publicly funded, and administered health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has put significant recruitment 
and retention initiatives in place that are unique in many cases. 
For example, we have established the position of principal 
nursing adviser to work with our nursing groups and address 
some of the workplace issues. 
 
The concept of magnet hospitals is being explored at the 
nursing council — another new initiative. Magnet hospitals 
create and support workplaces that recognize and value the 
level of responsibility and excellent practice of our health 
teams. 
 
Our government has increased the educational opportunities for 
nurses by adding 80 more seats to the nursing education 
program and making it possible for students to obtain their 
nursing degree in three, three-and-a-half, or four years. 

We’ve also added seats to other programs such as the licensed 
practical nurses program. We’re providing bursaries for nurses 
re-entering nursing practice. We’ve established a provincial 
nursing council, as I said before, where all organizations 
representing nurses are working together towards solutions to 
the very challenges facing nurses in the ever changing system. 
 
We’ve opened up opportunities for nurses to access advance 
practice in areas such as clinical specialties and geriatrics, 
pediatric intensive care, and cardiology, in primary care 
nursing, nurse first assist in the O.R. (operating room), and 
nurse anesthesiologist to mention a few. 
 
I haven’t even touched on the significant incentives for doctors 
to practice in Saskatchewan. Things such as the opportunities to 
learn, and financial assistance to set up practice in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government has commissioned the emergency 
services review. As most of us are aware, the commission has 
submitted its recommendations for improved emergency 
services throughout Saskatchewan. Discussions are ongoing 
regarding the recommendations and their possible 
implementation. Many of those recommendations, such as 
centralized dispatch, improved equipment, specialized training 
for service providers, and standardized response times and costs 
would mean significant improvement in the access to quality 
emergency services for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Fyke Commission is due to report to 
government and the people of Saskatchewan in the next few 
weeks. I anticipate a thoughtful and provocative report that will 
engage the citizens of Saskatchewan in determining the future 
of our health care system. 
 
We have the opportunity to redesign our system to deliver the 
most appropriate health care, by the most appropriate health 
provider, in the appropriate setting. These many and ongoing 
changes in the health system, not just in our province but across 
the country, have made it imperative for a cultural shift. 
 
These changes are not easy to embrace and some changes will 
be ongoing. This won’t be resolved quickly. This magnitude of 
change has been likened to turning a ship around by hand. It 
will take generations to see the benefits from some of the 
necessary changes and others may show results quicker. All 
will take that shift in how we think about health and health 
services. 
 
Many people are inclined to circle the wagons when change is 
anticipated and sometimes they start firing inward. However, I 
firmly believe that if people have good information they make 
good decisions. We need to make sure that that quality of 
information is available to the public as we debate these issues. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if we believe the opposition’s version of our 
challenges, it really does seem pretty hopeless to even remain in 
the province. Nothing is good enough here, and nothing is ever 
enough here. 
 
(16:00) 
 
I recently heard an excellent analogy that pretty much sums up 



220 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

our current situation in the health sector. If we had airline pilots 
on the news daily, reporting about the number of near misses in 
the air, the number of lost pieces of luggage, and the number of 
cancelled flights, how many people would continue to fly? We 
are very much at this point in Saskatchewan with our health 
system. 
 
Constant negative reports and comments by the opposition and 
a focus on every bad experience that’s carried by the media 
have begun to erode the confidence of Saskatchewan people in 
our health system. Pretty soon we start to believe our own 
rhetoric. It becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy and clearly 
destructive. 
 
Last year I went to Buenos Aires and I spoke on primary health 
care to the ministers of Argentina and Brazil. And I got to see a 
two-tiered health system. It was a very sobering experience. 
The people in Buenos Aires and Argentina, 40 per cent don’t 
pay income tax. They feel no obligation to support the public 
health system. This is what happens. When you can buy it for 
yourself you no longer feel obligated to buy it for someone else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this negativity is not just particular to the health 
sector. Chambers of commerce members are realizing that if we 
continue to talk the negative talk it turns away investment and 
that affects us all. 
 
My husband is a partner in a small business so I have some 
insight and exposure to the interests of this sector. Many of the 
men and women I speak to have a keen interest in fiscal 
responsibility; however, I don’t hear only tax cuts, tax cuts. It’s 
an insult to the intelligence of a community to suggest that all 
of our problems would be solved by tax cuts. 
 
Most people see the value of strong social programs, a quality 
education system, and a sustainable health system. A healthy 
community is built upon those services. A healthy community 
has educated people in good jobs, in secure homes and 
communities, and in strong families. A healthy community then 
has the financial resources to purchase goods and services and 
so the economy thrives. 
 
I also hear a distinct weariness with the constant whining of the 
members of the opposition about how we fall short of the 
wonderful province of Alberta. It doesn’t take good government 
to govern with a surplus of $7 billion. Our total provincial 
budget is less than that. 
 
It does take good government to govern when every decision is 
a delicate balance between reducing the tax burden and 
maintaining and enhancing our social programs and doing this 
under the shadow of an ever-present provincial debt. We cannot 
ignore the debt. We are reminded of it on a daily basis when we 
map out all of our financial endeavours. It is part of every 
decision as it limits our spending by the amount of interest we 
pay and the time we take to pay down the provincial debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker when we have open-line programs that set up the 
discussion with very few facts about the real situation, it’s no 
wonder that people phone in with negative responses. I can 
pretty much predict the calls when I hear the set up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are, as someone quipped recently, on TV time. 

We expect ever-quicker services, diagnosis and treatments. As 
on ER we think of helicopters, miracles, and one-hour 
resolution to all problems. We are definitely more informed 
consumers with Internet access to information about our 
particular interest or problem that rivals some medical 
professionals. This is a good thing, but our expectations are 
sometimes raised to an unreasonable level. 
 
I use my own son as a prime example of this. He recently called 
me and complained about a 50 — that’s 5, 0 — minute wait in 
emergency for treatment of a particularly virulent case of the 
flu. I reminded him of the time 16 years ago when he cut 
himself severely while horsing around with friends. I took him 
to emergency for stitches and we had to wait two hours before 
we were seen. My 10-year-old son was so disgusted with the 
wait that he declared loudly for all in the waiting room to hear 
that we should go home now as it was all healed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier on in my remarks, if people have 
good information they make good decisions. It is disturbing to 
see the limited information the people of Saskatchewan have 
access to. Unless the government pays to promote 
Saskatchewan and its remarkable programs and progress, we 
seldom hear of these very positive stories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite continue to ask for a 
value-for-money audit in the health sector. We do not need to 
look at paper clips and bedpans; what we need to do is base our 
decisions on evidence that what we do will benefit the people of 
this province, that our health will be improved. 
 
When we have experts review certain aspects of the system and 
give us their recommendations, we need to leave behind our 
individual interests and make decisions for the good of the 
whole province. To make good decisions, we need to have good 
information, as I’ve said several times already. Nowhere is it 
more necessary than in the health system. 
 
Unfortunately the health sector has been slow to enter the 
information age through no fault of the system itself. But as the 
Japanese say, fix the problem, not the blame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have spent most of our energies in the last 
decade responding to a system that not only lost a dramatic 
amount of federal funding but was seeing an explosion in 
technology, new therapies, new surgical techniques, and new 
drugs. There was truly no energy or financial resources to invest 
in information systems. But we can no longer function in the 
realities of globalization and changing demographics without 
current and cutting-edge information and the systems to access 
that information. 
 
Our government is leading the way and partnering with the 
federal government and our counterparts in other provinces to 
establish excellence in health information systems. 
Saskatchewan co-chairs the national committee — again 
recognition of our leadership in this area as evidenced by SHIN, 
the Saskatchewan Health Information Network. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have had the unique experience of being 
involved in the health sector for over 30 years as a registered 
nurse, a union activist, as president of a major union, as a 
government MLA, and Associate Minister of Health. 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 221 

 

It is crystal clear to me that it is far easier to lobby than it is to 
govern. As government the daily issues that need attention take 
up a major amount of time and energy. However we also as 
governments step back and take a broader look at the issues as 
we plan for solutions that will address the very needs of the 
whole province, not only in the short term but for the future. 
 
That is why, Mr. Speaker, I am proud to support the Throne 
Speech and its broad vision for the future of Saskatchewan and 
all of our citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me join with my 
colleagues who spoke before me in wishing both the Speaker 
and the Deputy Speaker the best of luck in your new roles. I’m 
sure the both of you can handle these important new 
responsibilities very well. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to begin my speech today by talking once 
again about some of the issues we are facing in my constituency 
of Battleford-Cut Knife. It’s certainly an honour to once again 
reply to the Speech from the Throne on behalf of the people of 
Battleford-Cut Knife. It continues to be my honour to represent 
the people of Battleford-Cut Knife, unquestionably the finest 
constituency in the entire province. And let me just take this 
opportunity to talk about the constituency for a few moments. 
 
All too often, like much of everything else outside of the cities, 
those members opposite seem to forget we exist. Not that they 
are listening to the people in the cities either — taking them for 
granted is more like it. That’s why people . . . that’s why the 
Saskatchewan Party support in larger cities in Saskatchewan 
has gone up by 60 per cent in the last year and a half. 
 
That’s a fact that should make a lot of members over on the 
other side very nervous. Like The StarPhoenix said recently, the 
cheering we hear coming from the NDP seems very much like 
someone whistling past the graveyard. And that’s probably 
appropriate, Mr. Speaker, since the government, this group has 
been walking dead for the last few years. As we all know, the 
NDP is where good ideas go to die, and their recent Throne 
Speech proved it. 
 
So give those members on the government . . . So given that 
most of the government members probably couldn’t find my 
constituency on the map, I would think at least once a year I 
should take the opportunity to remind the members opposite 
about the good people of Battleford-Cut Knife and the issues 
they’re concerned about. 
 
Battleford-Cut Knife is a little unusual that it has both a large 
rural component and a large urban component. This gives us 
good cross-section of people and lots of viewpoint. 
 
My constituency is also one steeped in the history of this 
province and I am proud to have the original territorial 
Legislative Assembly in my constituency. It’s a bit rundown, 
Mr. Speaker and in need of restoration, but it still stands as a 
symbol of where this province has been and where we’ve been 
and where we’re going. We continue to be proud of 
Government House and hope that the funding is obtained to 
fully restore it to its full glory. 

Mr. Speaker, of course, like many other parts of this province, 
people in my constituency are dreadfully concerned about the 
ongoing agricultural crisis, and, Mr. Speaker, it is a crisis. One 
farm auctioneer in the Battleford area says he has a farm 
auction booked every day for the next two months. Now that’s 
great for his business but it’s not a good sign for the economy 
as a whole. 
 
While the problems on the farms sometimes are thought of as 
rural Saskatchewan crisis, everyone knows by now that the 
problems are not limited to rural areas, because the downturn in 
the farm economy doesn’t just affect rural people. There’s not a 
man, woman or child in this province who does not feel the ill 
effects of a weak agricultural economy. It remains truer today 
than ever before. 
 
Mr. Speaker, during hard times like we’re going through right 
now in the farm economy, it is vitally important that this 
province stand together. 
 
Division like we’ve seen growing during the lifetime of this 
NDP government is harmful. While they deny it, the NDP 
strives on this type of division and encourages it through their 
own policy decisions. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, more and more people from throughout 
Saskatchewan; rural and urban, men and women, rich and poor, 
are becoming more and more united in the opinion that the days 
of this current government are numbered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — No matter what part of my constituency people 
are from — farm, village or town — there seems to be 
agreement on one thing: the current government’s time has 
come and gone. The former premier realized this. The former 
deputy premier realized this. The former Finance and Economic 
Development minister has realized this. 
 
The only ones who don’t seem to realize this are the members 
opposite who continue to hum the old song, “Don’t Worry, Be 
Happy.” 
 
With regards to the ag crisis, people in my area are expressing 
more and more frustration with all elected members over this 
situation — all members of this legislature, Mr. Speaker, as 
well as members of Parliament. 
 
People in my area see everyone talking a lot about the situation 
but they don’t see anything being done. I think all members of 
this legislature agree that the federal government’s handling of 
this situation has been disgraceful, and that includes the 
Saskatchewan representatives in the Chrétien government. 
 
Just the other day Ralph Goodale voted against Saskatchewan 
once again when he voted against a motion calling for an 
increase in farm aid to bridge us through this latest crisis 
brought on by an international trade war. 
 
So I think we can agree that the feds have to do more, and 
we’ve expressed this view in the legislature the other day. 
Though I must say, Mr. Speaker, I was a bit confused. At the 
same time the government moves a motion speaking about the 



222 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

ag crisis, nearly every speaker on that side of the House seemed 
determined to convince everyone listening, including the 
federal government, that there really wasn’t much of a problem 
out there at all. 
 
That’s why I’m not overly confident that this latest, strongly 
worded letter from the Premier to the Prime Minister will 
suddenly make the likes of Mr. Chrétien and Mr. Goodale see 
the light. 
 
But while we can all agree that the feds have totally abandoned 
their responsibility when it comes to farmers, members opposite 
have failed too. The province can do . . . the least the province 
can do during the crisis is to show the slightest bit of leadership. 
But we haven’t seen this. Absolutely not. Oh yes, they’re good 
at saying no, no, no to everything and every idea that comes 
before them; but when is the last time we’ve heard one single, 
solitary idea come from that side of the House when it comes to 
this ag crisis? 
 
Better yet, when have we heard a single, new idea come from 
that side of the House on any matter? Certainly we haven’t seen 
it in this Speech from the Throne that has nothing more than 
reheated versions of other speeches — except of course the 
commitment to a long-term ag safety net, something we 
desperately need if we’re going to avoid this kind of crisis in 
the future. 
 
(16:15) 
 
I think it’s a real shame that a year and a half can go by since 
the last election and they have no new ideas. I think it’s a shame 
that both the Premier and the Deputy Premier are replaced and 
we still have no new ideas, no vision coming from the NDP. 
This Throne Speech appears to have nothing more than 
recycling the past NDP promises, promises they keep making 
but never seem to honour. 
 
We’ve seen promises in agriculture simply disappear. We’ve 
seen commitments in health care quietly go away. We continue 
to watch as this tired, worn-out government simply lurches 
from one issue to another without seemingly any idea of which 
direction they’re headed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw this just the other day when, on one hand, we saw the 
Minister of Highways tell us that the government was a making 
a big, big commitment to highways and everyone will be happy. 
Then in literally the next breath she tells the government is not 
planning to put a decent highway in and around the 
Gravelbourg area even though not doing so will put several 
businesses and many, many jobs at risk. 
 
This, Mr. Speaker, is the Minister of Rural Revitalization, but 
it’s typical of the government — no forward planning; zero 
vision. When you speak of highways, there’s a number in my 
area that are virtually impassable: Highways 21 and 40. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, the west side of Battleford-Cut 
Knife has a large oil industry. Just a week ago, an oil truck 
rolled on Highway 21. The driver lost control of the truck 
because of the highway’s poor condition. The driver was 
removed from the truck with the Jaw of Life and he is still in 
very serious condition in hospital. That, Mr. Speaker, is the 

condition of highways right across the province — poor to 
poorer. 
 
And that’s about this government’s . . . And what about the 
government’s job commitment, Mr. Speaker? They know the 
numbers as well as I do. They don’t like to hear them. 
Saskatchewan has the worse job creation record in the entire 
country — 13,000 jobs were lost here in this last year while 
every other province was increasing their job numbers. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, 6,600 people moved from 
Saskatchewan to other provinces. We continue to lose our 
young people to other provinces. 
 
And the members opposite would rather turn a blind eye than 
make any concrete proposals as to how to expand this economy 
and create jobs. Their only ideas come in the form of direct 
government intervention in the economy through CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) which has served 
notice, Mr. Speaker, that it intends to get into as many 
businesses as it can, using the public purse to compete against 
already established business. 
 
If the history has taught us anything, Mr. Speaker, that is 
politicians should stay away as far from running businesses as 
possible. However, despite losses in NST (NST Network 
Services of Chicago), despite the embarrassment of SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company), despite 
the scandal of Channel Lake, the NDP is determined to plunge 
ahead and make the government become even more active in 
business than it already is, and in the process do its very best to 
drive away even more private investors. That is their vision and 
it’s very short-sighted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know as the opposition critic from SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation), I have 
listened with great interest to the remarks of the minister. And 
while the minister seems to have convinced herself that 
everything is fine, her department lacks as much vision as any 
other department. 
 
She held up as one of SPMC’s great achievements the new 
SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of Applied Science and 
Technology) facility here in Regina. And I’m sure it’s a fine 
facility, Mr. Speaker, but it doesn’t mean the people of 
Saskatchewan are going to forget the facility it replaced. I am 
sure many of SPMC minister’s own constituency won’t soon 
forget this government’s ill-advised decision to close the Plains 
Health Centre, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my constituency we have another example of the 
short-sightedness of the government and SPMC. Even though 
my area has lost hospitals and schools and has watched 
highways turn into potholes and patches, do you know what one 
of the biggest capital projects in the Battlefords was? A new 
liquor board store. 
 
And of course it had to be brand new despite empty government 
office space that existed in the Battlefords due to previous 
government service cutbacks. None of that space could be 
utilized for a liquor board store. Instead they had to start from 
scratch and the unused real estate still remains empty. That’s 
their forward-looking vision, Mr. Speaker. 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 223 

 

Mr. Speaker, today we hear the current government talking 
about gloom and doom. It seems to be part of their strategy, Mr. 
Speaker — if you can call that strategy. But the members 
opposite should not confuse criticism of the failings of this 
tired, worn-out government that’s bankrupt of ideas as criticism 
for the province. On the contrary, the Saskatchewan Party 
believes Saskatchewan can do much better with just a little 
vision and a whole lot better government. 
 
The NDP seems to accept the fact that jobs cannot be created 
here. It is convinced that private investment will not come to 
Saskatchewan. The NDP believes that we cannot prosper here, 
that Saskatchewan’s place at the bottom rung of the ladder was 
predetermined. 
 
Well I don’t agree with this. The Saskatchewan Party believes 
in this province and knows we can do even better — much 
better. The NDP believes that we can’t and therefore should not 
even try. I’ll leave it up to the people of Saskatchewan to decide 
what they believe. 
 
I will be supporting the amended motion put forward by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a pleasure 
to join in the debate on the Throne Speech on behalf of the 
constituents of Carrot River Valley. 
 
But before going on with respect to my comments, Mr. Speaker, 
firstly I would like to congratulate you on your election as 
Speaker of this Assembly. And I would like to congratulate 
your colleague, the member from Regina Sherwood, on his 
election as Deputy Speaker. And I am sure, Mr. Speaker, that 
both of you will acquit yourself in a manner that is befitting of 
the long and honourable traditions of this House. 
 
Firstly, Mr. Speaker, with respect to the Speech from the 
Throne and having listened to the debate over the last couple of 
days, I’ve been hearing the government members opposite refer 
to the official opposition and the way that they characterize our 
gloom and doom and the way that they think we are talking 
negatively about this province. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to assure you, there are no purveyors 
of gloom and doom on this side of the House; what we have, 
what we have is a group of individuals who believe very, very 
strongly in the province of Saskatchewan. A group of 
individuals who believe very strongly in the potential of this 
province. 
 
The problem however, Mr. Speaker, is is that with this 
government and virtually 50 years of uninterrupted socialist 
government, that potential has not been met. 
 
So what they see, Mr. Speaker, is what we’re reflecting on the 
part of our constituents — a very, very deep sense of 
frustration. We don’t see a plan for the future. There appears to 
be no vision on the part of this government whatsoever. 
 

And if they want specifics and they want to understand where 
those frustrations come from, Mr. Speaker, I am prepared to do 
that, to explain that to them. 
 
In the area of highways . . . And I know oftentimes it’s our 
colleagues in the southwest that think that they have the worst 
highways in the province but I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, 
that in northeastern Saskatchewan we have our share as well. 
And I think specifically of Highway No. 23. 
 
Highway No. 23, Mr. Speaker, a highway that has fallen into a 
horrible state of disrepair over the last 10 years. This highway, 
Mr. Speaker, is a highway that the minister and all previous 
ministers have received many letters and many phone calls 
about. But what have we seen to date? Virtually no effort put 
into that highway whatsoever. 
 
A couple of years ago I think there was about a four-mile 
stretch recapped, west of Porcupine Plain. But the rest of it, Mr. 
Speaker, is in the same state today as it has been for about the 
last seven or eight years. 
 
And I want to just tell a little story, Mr. Speaker. I think when 
one experiences some of the things that can occur as a result of 
highways being in a sad state of repair and it becomes personal, 
then it becomes something that is of a far greater concern to 
you. 
 
About three or four years ago my daughter, my second 
daughter, was riding in a vehicle, a private vehicle owned by an 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer who at the 
time, Mr. Speaker, lived with our family. About four miles out 
of Porcupine Plain they met a half-ton, a truck. A chunk of 
asphalt came up off of the highway, Mr. Speaker. It came 
through the windshield; it struck my daughter in the forehead. It 
then ricocheted up to the roof of the vehicle and back down 
onto the floor of the vehicle. 
 
My daughter was very, very seriously injured. She was taken to 
hospital and, thankfully, she recovered, and without any 
long-term effects. 
 
But the frustration around that, Mr. Speaker, is that everyone 
knew that something like that, and possibly something worse, 
could happen on that stretch of highway. But never at any point 
was there ever any indication of a plan of what was planned for 
that stretch of highway in the future. And I think that is where 
the root of the frustration is. 
 
People understand that all cannot be repaired magically 
overnight. But I’m sure they would take a great deal of 
satisfaction, Mr. Speaker, if they understood that at least there 
was a plan; that over the course of a year, or two years, or three 
years, or four years, perhaps even longer, that they were looking 
at that particular area being repaired. Then they could at least 
take some satisfaction in the fact that at some point that would 
be repaired and those kinds of things wouldn’t happen again. 
 
Another deep sense of frustration, Mr. Speaker, on the part of 
some of the communities in my constituency — I think 
specifically about the town of Hudson Bay — I think about how 
very little respect this government has for the small 
communities out there. 



224 Saskatchewan Hansard March 28, 2001 

 

When the Department of Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management, Mr. Speaker, decided that they were 
going to decommission and demolish rec sites in northeast 
Saskatchewan, they did that without consulting any of the 
communities that were going to be affected. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that was a particularly shocking surprise for 
me because last session the Minister of Environment and 
Resource Management took me aside and said, we’re thinking 
about perhaps doing something with rec sites in the northeast, 
but before we do that we’re going to give all of the 
communities a heads-up. We’re going to let them all know what 
we’re thinking of doing; we’re going to give them all an 
opportunity to help us maybe find some options in terms of how 
they can be operated. Perhaps we can even make an 
arrangement whereby the communities could assume the 
operation of those sites. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I will invite the member to continue 
his remarks after this procedure. 
 
I must inform the Assembly that under rule 14(3) it is my duty 
at this time to interrupt debate and put the question on the 
amendment. 
 
The division bells rang from 16:31 until 16:36. 
 
Amendment negatived on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 27 
 
Hermanson Elhard Heppner 
Julé Krawetz Draude 
Boyd Gantefoer Toth 
Stewart Eagles Wall 
Bakken McMorris D’Autremont 
Bjornerud Weekes Kwiatkowski 
Brkich Harpauer Wakefield 
Wiberg Hart Allchurch 
Peters Huyghebaert Hillson 
 

Nays — 30 
 
Calvert Kasperski Hagel 
Lautermilch Atkinson Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Goulet Van Mulligen MacKinnon 
Wartman Thomson Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Hamilton Junor 
Addley Jones Higgins 
Harper Trew Osika 
Lorjé Yates McCall 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 

reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, with thanks to the hon. 
member to take just a moment before renewing debate on the 
Speech from the Throne, I’d like to introduce to members of the 
House a group of students from the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College, bachelor of admin program, who are with us 
here today in the west gallery. 
 
Many of these people who are here today, Mr. Speaker, are here 
for the first time and several of them are going to be graduating 
just shortly. All of them graduating — I believe all of them — 
graduating this year. And I would ask all the members to show 
welcome to them and to express the greatest of enthusiasm that 
their careers will provide the rewards that they seek and that 
they will build their futures here in our province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave I’d like to 
introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would, 
on behalf of the official opposition, I would like to join with the 
Minister of Post-Secondary Education in welcoming our guests 
in the west gallery. I hope that they’ll find the proceedings that 
they see here today very interesting and informative. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Ms. Jones, seconded by Mr. McCall. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I’m in such shock, Mr. Speaker, that the government didn’t 
have the good sense to support that awfully excellent 
amendment put forward by the Leader of the Opposition, that I 
may not have the strength to carry on at the length that I had 
intended to. 
 



March 28, 2001 Saskatchewan Hansard 225 

 

But just to go back to the point I was making prior to, Mr. 
Speaker, but I was talking about frustration and the sense of 
frustration that we feel on behalf of our constituents when it 
comes to the way this government treats them. And I’ve been 
talking about the recreation sites, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When the Minister of Environment and Resource Management 
came to me last year and said, we’re thinking about doing 
something different with recreation sites, but I assure you that 
what we will do is, we will talk to communities, we will talk to 
the urban and the rural councils. We will ask them if there are 
options that we can look at. We will ask them if perhaps they 
want to assume the operation of these sites. 
 
I actually gave the minister the benefit of the doubt, Mr. 
Speaker. I thought, you know, at least the approach is right 
here. At least they are consulting with the communities. Well, 
in the end, Mr. Speaker, I found out about three or four months 
subsequent to that, that with absolutely no notice, without any 
consultation, they sent wrecking crews into a half a dozen rec 
sites in the Hudson Bay and northeast area, and just literally 
demolished — demolished them. 
 
The communities very understandably, Mr. Speaker, were very, 
very upset. These rec sites had been part of the landscape for 
many, many years. Their families had used these rec sites. 
Visitors, tourists — these were very, very much a part of the 
fabric of those communities. And they were very upset about 
the fact that they could just be removed overnight in such a 
arbitrary destructive fashion. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t until they realized that 
Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management had 
actually breached a partnership agreement that they have, and 
had, with the town of Hudson Bay and the RM (rural 
municipality) of Hudson Bay that called for any decisions that 
would be made by either party — Environment Resource 
Management and either of the municipalities — that through 
that agreement they would consult with each other on those 
decisions. 
 
(16:45) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they completely ignored their own partnership 
agreement that they had with those communities. And I think 
that that was what added insult to injury, in the sense that there 
was this agreement and they didn’t feel, the communities didn’t 
feel that the department respected that agreement with their 
communities now to at least abide by the conditions that they 
had all agreed to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are probably a number of other issues that I 
could pursue, but I will perhaps leave that for a later date. At 
this point I would like to move that we adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:46. 
 
 
 


