















































Hansard: April 09, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN  
 April 9, 2002 
 

 

565

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Development of Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Elhard: — As I was saying, Mr. Speaker, when we broke 
a mere two hours ago, I wanted to get into a comparison of the 
announcement by the provincial government on the ethanol 
strategy that they would be pursuing and the ethanol 
announcement that the official opposition made some time 
before that. 
 
I had brought both copies with me, and I was intending to go 
through the two press releases on a word-by-word basis so we 
could compare and contrast the two. But I think you would find, 
Mr. Speaker, there isn’t a lot of difference between the 
announcements made by both sides of the House here. There 
are a few exceptions, and we’ll maybe highlight them as we get 
on. But having taken on some sustenance and had a chance to 
catch my breath, we will do our best to carry this debate on just 
a little bit further, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I just want to, for the sake of the record, refer to the press 
release of September 19 issued by the official opposition. That 
was September 19, 2001. And it says here that: 
 

A Saskatchewan Party government would promote the 
expansion of the ethanol industry by introducing an 
environmental tax credit for ethanol blended gasoline and 
requiring all gasoline sold in the province to be 10 per cent 
ethanol blend. 

 
“Saskatchewan has the opportunity to lead the way in the 
production and consumption of environmentally friendly 
ethanol,” (according to Sask Party leader Elwin 
Hermanson). “Ethanol production has the potential to 
create new jobs, (to) diversify the struggling agricultural 
industry and (to) contribute to a cleaner environment but 
we must act now.” 

 
Hermanson also committed to cut the corporate capital tax 
in half on all new capital investment in the province. 

 
“Lower taxes on capital investment will stimulate 
expansion of ethanol production right here in Saskatchewan 
using Saskatchewan-grown wheat, feed grains and straw.” 

 
(Now) Hermanson warned that Saskatchewan doesn’t need 
another Crown corporation taking an ownership position in 
the financing, (the) construction or (the) operation of new 
ethanol facilities. 

 
Hermanson said private sector construction and expansion 
of ethanol production facilities is good news for 
Saskatchewan . . . 

 
I’ve heard that line somewhere before. Here are some of the 
reasons why it would be such good news: 
 

Ethanol is an environmentally friendly substitute or 
additive for gasoline so (that) burning more ethanol as a 

fuel means cleaner air and a cleaner environment for 
Saskatchewan families; 

 
Ethanol production would create a new market for 
Saskatchewan grown wheat, feed grain and straw; 

 
The construction and operation of ethanol production 
facilities would create hundreds of new jobs for 
Saskatchewan people. 

 
(And) ethanol production creates several valuable 
by-products including high protein cattle feed that could be 
used as a key input in large feedlot operations; and 
 
(finally) a significant increase in the number of feedlot 
operations could supply the . . . (meat slaughtering and 
meat-packing industries of this province.) 

 
Now I wanted to read that into the record because it’s very 
similar to the press release offered by the government on the 
same issue. And this particular press release came out on March 
21, 2002 — not even a month ago, just barely three weeks ago 
— and called a plan to develop the ethanol industry. This is 
what the provincial government released as part of their 
strategy: 
 

The provincial government has unveiled its plan to grow a 
vibrant ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
The Greenprint for Ethanol Production in Saskatchewan 
was released today by the Energy and Mines Minister, 
Andrew Thomson. The strategy, which is the result of 
extensive consultations, outlines several key actions the 
government intends to take to create an environment for 
private sector development of an ethanol industry in the 
province. (And) these actions include: 
 

effectively eliminating the provincial fuel tax on ethanol 
produced and consumed in the province by way of a 
rebate; 

 
approving legislation to permit the mandating of 
ethanol-blended gasoline to be sold in Saskatchewan; 

 
working with the federal and provincial governments to 
remove barriers on ethanol exports; 

 
calling on the federal government to legislate a 
mandatory blending of ethanol gasoline in Canada; 

 
working with ethanol producers to encourage the 
establishment of ethanol facilities in the province; and 

 
working with wholesalers and retailers to develop a 
market for ethanol-blended fuel in Saskatchewan. 

 
The press release goes on at substantial length. I don’t want to 
read the whole thing. But as you can see, Mr. Speaker, the 
similarities are quite specific, and there isn’t enough difference 
between the two press releases to draw any categorical 
distinction between the plan put forward by the government and 
our own plan, with one exception, and that is the reduction of 



566 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

the corporate capital tax by reducing it to one-half of its current 
level. 
 
Now we do know that there are other applications for these 
types of fuels and we do believe that the government needs to 
look at them. We’ve talked briefly about bio-diesel fuels in this 
House from time to time, and I think that that’s another area 
that we really need to encourage activity in on behalf of the 
industry generally, but also on behalf of our producers in this 
province. Bio-diesel is another idea whose time has come given 
the Kyoto agreement and the limitations being put on 
greenhouse gas emissions. I think that diesel fuel blended with 
different agents and maybe the creation of a whole new fuel 
through bio-diesel might be very appropriate at this time, and 
this province could benefit significantly by the introduction of 
that type of industry as well. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, the industry is being coached along 
slowly, but at least now we have the interest of several major 
manufacturers, organizations that do experimentation with these 
types of new fuels, and even the manufacturers. That’s right — 
even the manufacturers of heavy-duty equipment are looking at 
alternative fuels as a means of propelling their engines in 
particular. 
 
I know from my own experience in the farm machinery 
business that the manufacturer that I represented has spent 
many, many years using the variety of fuels available for 
different engines to fuel them in their applications on the farm. 
 
Now I digress, I suppose just briefly, to mention the fact that it 
was John Deere that I worked for but I think that they were one 
of leading companies in terms of looking at alternative fuels for 
the application in farm machinery. I know that at one time the 
company had looked at the development of an engine that 
would burn any — any — fuel of any kind; anything short of 
water possibly or maybe in addition to water. 
 
I know there was opportunity to test peanut oil, for instance — 
other types of blends of combustible fuels, sometimes with 
diesel, sometimes separate from diesel. But it takes a lot of 
effort and experimentation and development to create an engine 
that will work efficiently with all varieties of fuels. 
 
And you don’t want to, as a major manufacturer, rush to the 
market with a piece of equipment with an engine that could 
conceivably fail in a . . . or have too short a life when it’s 
applied to specific needs, whether it’s in the trucking industry, 
or the farm machinery industry, or industrial applications, 
whatever the case. 
 
Companies that manufacture those machines need to be 
convinced that the engines and the products used to fuel those 
engines would stand up to the kind of use and requirement that 
the industry would want to put them to. 
 
Nevertheless, having made a pitch now for bio-diesel as another 
option for this province, another type of product that we could 
produce in this province and benefit from and be a benefit to the 
producers of this province, I would like to draw my comments 
to a close. 
 
In doing so, I would like to be sure to second the amendment 

that was put forward earlier today by the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me a great deal of pleasure to enter into the debate at this 
time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we enter the next millennium we are becoming 
increasingly aware of the interdependence of our world 
community. Indeed, recent events in Saskatoon at the Jewish 
synagogue drew all of our attention to the compelling situation 
that is unfolding in the Middle East. I cite that as an example of 
the increasing interdependence of our world community. 
 
It is also interdependent at the environmental level, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Canadians are expressing, increasingly, 
concern about risks associated with hazardous pollutants, global 
warming, and environmental degradation. One of the results of 
the increased concern of Canadians has been an increased 
demand for renewable fuels as alternatives to conventional 
fossil fuels and as oxygenates. 
 
So it gives me a great deal of pleasure to rise in the House today 
to address the motion put forth by the government side. And I 
would like to point out that what we’re seeing here is a rare 
confluence of ideas as we hear the Saskatchewan Party in such 
glowing terms endorsing this government’s plan for ethanol. 
And I thank them for that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, although the concept of ethanol as a fuel began as 
early as the first Model T car designed by Henry Ford, in point 
of fact American usage of ethanol-blended gasoline didn’t 
begin until the late ’70s. In Canada, air quality issues have 
taken on a higher profile on the public agenda and our attention 
is being increasingly drawn towards alternative fuels such as 
ethanol. 
 
So that is why this debate this evening is so timely and so 
important and why I thank all members of the House for the 
opportunity for us to be able to turn our attention to the very 
important aspect of ethanol as an alternative fuel. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much has been said in the House today and this 
evening about the provincial strategy for the production of 
ethanol in Saskatchewan. I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that that 
strategy was developed only after extensive and careful 
consultations with business, industry, and residents of the 
province. 
 
On this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we believe very 
strongly in community consultations. We do not believe in 
simply taking some idea off the shelf and presenting it as if it 
were our own. 
 
Indeed, Mr. Speaker, a key cornerstone of our public policy 
development agenda is community consultations. So we went 
out, we consulted with business, with industry, with 
communities, and we developed what we know is a very sound 
ethanol policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in our ethanol policy the private sector will play a 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 567 

 

leading role in defining what this industry will look like and 
how it will operate. Government, of course, will establish the 
environment for the growth of the industry but, Mr. Speaker, it 
is key to note that it will be the private sector that will play the 
leading role in the development of the ethanol industry. 
 
And what, you may ask, will the Government of Saskatchewan 
then do to help grow the ethanol industry? Well I’d like to tell 
you. First of all, we will effectively eliminate the fuel tax on 
ethanol that is produced and consumed in Saskatchewan. 
Secondly, we will establish the legal framework for 
Saskatchewan to become the very first jurisdiction in Canada to 
mandate the sale of ethanol-blended gasoline. 
 
We’re very proud of that, Mr. Speaker. We have been leaders. 
We have been pioneers in so many ventures. I point out 
medicare as an obvious one, the child action plan, and now, Mr. 
Speaker, we will be the first jurisdiction in Canada to mandate 
the sale of ethanol-blended gasoline. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, we realize that Saskatchewan is not an 
island unto itself, so we will be working with other 
governments in order to open up new markets for ethanol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our strategy will create jobs all across 
Saskatchewan. It will add value to the agricultural industry and 
it will create a healthier environment. It will foster, most 
importantly, Mr. Speaker, a climate favourable to investment in 
order to grow the industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a vibrant ethanol industry in Saskatchewan will 
create meaningful job opportunities primarily for the province’s 
rural residents and also for the province’s First Nations 
residents. It will also create new marketing opportunities for 
Saskatchewan’s grain producers and wood product companies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, ethanol is very useful and will be very useful as an 
alternative fuel source for our vehicles, but ethanol also 
produces many useful co-products and by-products that I don’t 
believe other members in this House have spoken about as yet. 
So I just want to briefly mention some useful products and 
co-products from ethanol will include packaging and coatings 
for food, a stain removal and stabilizing ingredient in laundry 
detergent, a moisturizing agent in cosmetics, and a component 
of biodegradable cat litter. 
 
Well I have to say, Mr. Speaker, as a woman who does wear 
cosmetics, who does have cats, who does do laundry, and who 
does eat food on occasion, I am very pleased to know that there 
are that many by-products and useful by-products for ethanol. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as Minister of the Environment, you would 
naturally expect me to stand before you this evening and talk 
about the environmental aspects of the ethanol industry. So I 
want to talk for a few moments about ethanol as an 
environmentally friendly compound. 
 
And just how environmentally friendly is ethanol, Mr. Speaker? 
Well let me tell you. Environment Canada estimated in the late 
1980s that the replacement of a litre of gasoline by a litre of 
ethanol means a 40 per cent reduction in net carbon dioxide 

emissions — a 40 per cent reduction, Mr. Speaker. Just imagine 
that. In these days when we are so concerned about the 
greenhouse effect, it is really important for us to, as well as 
talking about the agricultural industry and the importance that 
our ethanol strategy will have on the agricultural industry, it is 
also important to focus on the carbon dioxide emission 
reduction. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the high octane blending value of ethanol makes it 
an excellent alternative to other octane enhancers with known 
or suspected health dangers which are now widely used in 
Canadian gasoline. We have wonderful vehicles today, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve come a long way since Henry Ford’s Model T, 
but those vehicles would be as nothing if it were not for the 
high-octane gasoline that we put in them. And we need to have 
something that helps, that enhances that octane. 
 
We know now that there are some that are used that are not 
entirely safe. For instance, I would refer to MMT 
(methylcyclopentadienyl manganese tricarbonyl). Now I know 
that in some quarters the verdict is still not in on MMT, but we 
on this side of the house are very concerned about the possible 
problems that may result from MMT or for other aromatic 
hydrocarbons, so we are very pleased about the octane 
enhancing capability for ethanol. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, by further refining petroleum, the octane 
level of gasoline is raised but this requires major capital 
expenditures. So we know we could keep refining the gasoline 
over and over until we get a really pure product, but that 
requires a lot of retooling, and so rather than doing that, we 
think that instead of adding significantly to the cost of gasoline 
and adding significantly to our dependence on light crude and 
oil imports, that it is far better to go the more environmentally 
friendly strategy, the more environmentally friendly route, and 
to develop a strong ethanol strategy in Saskatchewan. 
 
Carrying on just briefly about the environmentally friendly 
aspects of ethanol, just look at the cost, both financial and 
environmental, of megaprojects for enhancing Canadian 
domestic supplies of light crude oil. Fuel ethanol compares 
very, very favourably in both capital and operating costs of 
production to megaprojects such as Hibernia and the tar sands 
projects. Both projects, I would point out, have received major 
federal governmental assistance and investment. We would 
hope that the federal government would look very favourably 
upon our initiatives and our ventures in the ethanol industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other speakers this evening have pointed out the 
abundant and the renewable supply of Canadian grain that is 
available for fuel ethanol production. Do you know that if the 
use of fuel ethanol were to increase so that ethanol was present 
in all Canadian gasoline at a 10 per cent concentration, Canada 
would still remain a leading grain exporter? 
 
Let me talk about a few more environmental benefits of the 
effect of adding ethanol to gasoline on the environmental 
quality. These include reduced air toxins, reduced carbon 
monoxide, reduced ozone formation, and the potential to reduce 
net carbon dioxide emissions to the atmosphere. Mr. Speaker, 
there are many societal costs associated with petroleum energy 
such as respiratory and other health problems. There are crop 
yield losses and damage to vegetation, environmental disasters 



568 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

such as we saw with the tanker mishap with the Exxon Valdez. 
These are not fully accounted for in the price of gasoline today, 
Mr. Speaker. By comparison, renewable ethanol produced by 
sustainable agricultural practices can stabilize farm income and 
reduce the need for government support payments to 
agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I saw a rather interesting quote the other day from 
the California Environmental Policy Council, and I would like 
to just quote it at this time. They said: 
 

Ethanol is a safe, biodegradable fuel that does not pose a 
threat to water, soil, or public health; and ethanol has been 
awarded a clean bill of health. 

 
Obviously those are good, solid, practical reasons for us to enter 
into an ethanol strategy in this province. So I just want to 
review the environmental aspect of ethanol, Mr. Speaker. 
Ethanol is a renewable resource. When ethanol is mixed with 
gasoline it reduces the reliance on oil, which is a non-renewable 
resource. Ethanol burns cleaner than gasoline and ethanol 
reduces pollution and greenhouse gases. Solid reasons, Mr. 
Speaker, for us to be entering into a very aggressive and very 
successful ethanol strategy. 
 
As you know, ethanol is a high-octane, water-free alcohol made 
from the fermented sugar or converted starch found in 
Saskatchewan’s products such as wheat, straw, or wood 
by-products. It’s a renewable resource that burns cleaner than 
gasoline. And when it is blended at 10 per cent with traditional 
fuels it can reduce greenhouse gas emissions by as much as 30 
per cent. 
 
The production of ethanol, Mr. Speaker, fits in very well with 
our government’s plans to revitalize the rural economy. 
Saskatchewan, as we all know, is blessed with an abundance of 
the kind of raw materials needed for ethanol production. But in 
addition to having the right stuff, so to speak, we also have 
many other key ingredients that are needed to develop a 
dynamic ethanol industry. 
 
We have many gifted and far-sighted developers and 
entrepreneurs in this province, Mr. Speaker. We have 
reasonably priced land. We have the transportation 
infrastructure needed to move ethanol to markets. We have 
good access to power and to water and we have a vast rural base 
which gives us quick access to goods and services. 
 
You know, some scientists have touted ethanol as the fuel of the 
future. It can be blended with gasoline and diesel fuel for 
transportation. It may also be used to run power plants. In 
combination with fuel cell technology, Mr. Speaker, it may 
present an alternative to fossil fuels. 
 
Saskatchewan farmers, scientists, business people, and our 
federal counterparts will help us determine — but I think we 
already know the answer — will help us determine the 
significant short- and long-term benefits for our rural economy 
in ethanol production. And we are determined, Mr. Speaker, 
that we will take advantage of these opportunities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve tried very briefly this evening to outline some 
of the environmentally friendly aspects to ethanol. I want to just 

close off by talking very quickly about the emission aspects of 
ethanol. I want to talk about ground-level ozone, the greenhouse 
effect, and emissions. 
 
Now ground-level ozone, as we all know — though we in 
Saskatchewan I think are blessed compared to other 
jurisdictions that have smog inversions and so forth — but we 
all know that ground-level ozone causes human respiratory 
problems and it also damages many plants. But actually 
ground-level ozone does nothing to increase ozone 
concentration in the stratosphere that protects the earth from the 
sun’s ultraviolet radiation. 
 
Now there are many compounds that react with sunlight to form 
ground-level ozone, and these compounds, in combination with 
moisture and particulate matter, create the smog which is the 
most visible form of air pollution. These compounds include 
carbon monoxide, unburned hydrocarbons, benzene, and 
nitrogen oxides. 
 
According to Environment Canada in a 1998 study, the benefit 
of reducing smog has been estimated at at least $10 billion a 
year, Mr. Speaker — $10 billion a year if we in this country can 
reduce smog. Ethanol in low level blends with gasoline results 
in a very definite overall decrease in ozone formation. So 
ethanol makes sense both environmentally and economically. 
 
I wanted to also very briefly talk about the greenhouse effect, 
Mr. Speaker. The greenhouse effect, of course, refers to the 
earth’s atmosphere trapping the sun’s radiation. It’s a term 
that’s often used synonymously with global warming, which 
refers to the increasing average global temperature arising from 
an increase in greenhouse gases coming from industrial and 
transportation activities and indeed from population growth. 
The use of ethanol fuels has been shown to reduce emissions 
that contribute to global warming by up to 35 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker — another good, solid environmental reason for 
entering into an ethanol strategy. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I wanted to talk about emissions, both 
carbon monoxide and carbon dioxide. Mr. Speaker, by 
promoting a more complete combustion of the fuel, the use of a 
10 per cent ethanol blend results in a reduction of carbon 
monoxide emissions of up to 25 to 30 per cent. And, Mr. 
Speaker, the use of ethanol can reduce net carbon dioxide 
emissions by up to 100 per cent on a full life cycle basis. 
 
The use of 10 per cent ethanol-blended fuels results in a net 
reduction of carbon dioxide of between 6 and 10 per cent. The 
carbon dioxide released from ethanol production activities and 
inputs and its use is less than that absorbed by the plants used to 
produce ethanol and the soil organic mix. So, Mr. Speaker, we 
have a net win for our industry, for our agricultural producers, 
and for the environment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to close by just quickly delineating the 
advantages to using ethanol-blended fuels. First of all, 
biological renewability; second, a cleaner environment; third, 
improved air quality; fourth, cleaner burning engines; fifth, up 
to 30 per cent lower emissions of carbon monoxide. 
 
Now I’ve run out of fingers on that one hand so I’ll start on this 
hand. Sixth, reduced emissions of volatile organic compounds, 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 569 

 

sulphur dioxide, and particulate matter; seventh, lower net 
carbon dioxide emissions; eight, less dependence on imported 
light crude oil. Ninth, avoidance of environmental costs and 
risks associated with fossil fuel exploration and transportation. 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, the top, tenth reason for why our 
ethanol strategy is good: expanded market opportunities for 
Saskatchewan farmers, expanded economic opportunities for 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
For all those reasons, Mr. Speaker, for environmental reasons 
and for economic reasons, I am proud, Mr. Speaker, to support 
this government’s motion with respect to our ethanol strategy. 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m rather excited 
to join into this particular discussion on the ethanol debate, 
partly because there have been some good ideas that come from 
both sides of the House. I think this is something that’s good for 
Saskatchewan. And even though there are some other little, 
unique nuances about how the government side has developed 
this, I think the end result is fairly good. There’s a few things 
they could have done that are a little different, and we will bring 
those to your attention in a little bit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s been a long time coming. There’s nothing new about the 
ethanol. There’s nothing new about different forms of fuel for 
internal combustion engines. You just have to go back to read 
some of our history books, and we’ll find some of the 
old-timers talking about using fuel back in the ’20s and ’30s 
called skunk gas, which was basically made out of various 
kinds of materials and was essentially a predecessor of ethanol, 
which doesn’t, thank goodness, have the name of being a skunk 
gas, but it was out there. 
 
I believe also during World War II when some of the countries 
ran short on fuel, also made fuel out of straw and different types 
of material. So this is not a new technology, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
not new at all, and I guess that’s the part . . . it seems as if the 
government side of the House, the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) feel they got out of bed one morning a month or two ago 
and said, guess what? — ethanol exists. It’s not quite the way it 
worked, Mr. Speaker; it’s been around for a long time. 
 
The member from Regina Qu’Appelle gave some credibility to 
the group from Rosthern that he had spoken to, and I believe 
they enlightened him quite well on ethanol because it’s one of 
the first groups that he did speak to when he decided to go 
down the ethanol road. The group in Rosthern, Twin Rivers 
development, has been looking at ethanol for a long time. It’s 
probably five or six years . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . we 
have the member from P.A. (Prince Albert) saying since ’42. 
No, that’s incorrect. 
 
But they’ve looked at this for a long time. They tried in many 
different ways to get a project going and they ran into a lot of 
trouble and a good part of that trouble originated just across the 
floor from the government side. And I’m going to explain some 
of the difficulties that they created for this group, but very 
knowledgeable. 

There are probably throughout the province, Mr. Speaker, some 
10 to 15 different communities that have gone down this road to 
some extent and their development is at different stages. 
They’ve done some research work, they’ve done some studies, 
and they’re starting to put this together. 
 
Now one of the things that happened —, and I know this quite 
well from the group in Rosthern and the other groups have had 
the same experience — when they came to government and 
said, okay here’s a process that we have; we’re going to need a 
large cattle operation, we’re going to need . . . and we’re 
looking at doing an ethanol operation alongside. And they came 
to government. 
 
There wasn’t the possibility of meeting with one person from 
government and saying, okay, I’ll handle this all for you. They 
would get shuffled from someone who is responsible for water. 
They’d get shuffled over to someone responsible for air. Then 
they’d get shuffled over to a SERM (Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management) department. Then 
they’d get shuffled over to an Agriculture department. 
 
Each one of these had a little group of authority, a little bit of 
authority that they had to fit into. And it became a very tedious 
process for these new companies who in many cases really had 
had not much to do with government at any time — a very 
frustrating time for them to sort of . . . They felt these were 
roadblocks because they didn’t know how slow government 
worked and they thought they’d be able to talk to a minister, sit 
down; say, okay here’s what’s happening, here’s what we’ll do; 
they’d get the go-ahead and an hour or five later, maybe a week 
later, they’d be on the way. Found out that’s not the way it 
happened and it really slowed down and frustrated the process. 
 
I know on one or two occasions my group from Rosthern came 
and asked me to make a couple of phone calls to a few 
individuals from government to see if we could get some 
paperwork that was sort of bogged down on a desk, get it 
moved on a little further. 
 
And in those few cases where I did make a phone call I will 
have to say that we did get some fairly quick results. In the one 
case we had the result in two hours and I think government 
needs credit for that. Unfortunately why did it have to sit there 
for a month or two before the phone call came through to get 
that speeded up? 
 
I mentioned earlier on, Mr. Speaker, that the NDP seem to act 
as if they had suddenly come across this great discovery of 
ethanol and now they were going to push this thing through. 
 
The member from Regina Qu’Appelle went on at length, and 
we remember it was about six hours ago in this particular place, 
and he used the first person pronoun as if the I had done this. I 
will help with this, I’ve done this, I met these people. Well I’m 
sure it was a much bigger procedure than just one particular 
individual doing that. 
 
In fact is what is significant is when there was a major 
conference on ethanol in Minnesota about a year ago he wasn’t 
even there — he wasn’t even there. The only people from this 
House who were there were Saskatchewan Party people — 
were Saskatchewan Party people. That minister from Regina 



570 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

Qu’Appelle wasn’t even aware of it — wasn’t even aware of it. 
And now he acts as if he dreamt this up and figured this whole 
thing out in his basement laboratory. That’s not how it 
happened at all. 
 
In the beginning of his dissertation, the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle made a short statement that was quite frightening. 
He came up with the idea that government wasn’t quite sure 
where to put their money; they haven’t decided where to put 
their money. Well I’m not sure that the people out there are that 
excited about having government put a lot of money into it 
because this NDP government’s money investment track 
record, Mr. Speaker, is not very good. Potatoes — potatoes 
should bring that to mind. Potatoes should keep them all quiet 
just as they contemplate how well they did in that particular 
situation. 
 
I think we have to come up with something a little more recent, 
very recent, and it shows exactly how this NDP government 
thinks when they start getting involved in a business venture. 
And it also involves energy, and it also involves a clean 
environment — something that the ethanol process and the 
direction that ethanol’s going is a very big plus for our 
province, for our country, basically for our whole world. 
 
But as you know, Mr. Speaker, when you travel to Alberta 
down the No. 1, you’ll see a number of big wind chargers out 
there. They’re working right now, they’re turning — it looks 
fairly slowly — but they’re producing electricity. That’s good. 
 
Those were put there by private enterprise — without money 
from this government — working just fine, producing great 
electricity. They found their own market for it; they’re doing 
quite well. 
 
Then along comes the NDP government and says, I think we 
want to get in on this game — we want to get in on this game 
too. So they’re going to build some more. Well that in itself is 
not a bad idea. It would be nice if we could provide all of the 
electricity in this particular province from wind generators. 
 
However now that they’ve made that commitment, when 
private interests came into Saskatchewan and said, we would 
like to build some more, the NDP’s business system said, I’m 
sorry; you can’t do it. We’re not going to let you do it. You 
can’t send that electricity down our government power lines. 
 
That’s scary. I would have hoped they would have embraced it 
and said, anything that makes our air cleaner, that protects our 
environment, we’re going to go with. But this government 
didn’t do that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . The member from 
Prince Albert is playing his little woo-witchy thing again. Well 
it is scary. It’s very scary that someone would want to come in 
here and do an investment and then suddenly find that this 
government is going to oppose it, in some cases even want to 
stop it — especially, Mr. Speaker, when it’s something as good 
as wind generating. 
 
Now here’s the carry-over where this links in with the ethanol. 
All of these companies are somewhat concerned. Where will 
this NDP government go if they move down the road toward 
ethanol? At what point, at what point will this government 
suddenly decide that they’re going to take over the system or 

they’re going to shut down that system? 
 
We’ve seen it happen, as I said, right now in this last year with 
wind generating. They will probably go do the same sort of 
thing in the ethanol. And that’s the scary part. And it’s by far 
the unfortunate part because as someone . . . and I’ve had a little 
experience with a situation where a lot of ethanol would have 
been good. 
 
Those of you that travel to Vancouver from time to time will 
notice what used to be a beautiful lower valley area, sometimes 
called the lower mainland of British Columbia. A very scenic 
place nicknamed the lotus land by many individuals, now has a 
brown haze over it that moves from Vancouver up through 
Hope and then just gets trapped in the valley area over there. 
Now when you look at that, when we breathe that, I dislike that 
part of the country now because it doesn’t even feel healthy. We 
can do a lot to eliminate being contributors to that sort of an 
environment with the ethanol here in Saskatchewan. So I’m 
excited about what’s happening. 
 
I’m glad to support many of the aspects that we’ve had. The 
Saskatchewan Party released its plan in September, quite some 
time ago. And we remember this government at that point 
making fun of it. They said, oh that doesn’t work; you can’t 
mandate use of ethanol in gasoline. How do you know how 
much you’re going to do with it? And the big fuel companies 
aren’t going to allow you to do that, and we’re going to lose all 
this tax money. And there was just no end of fearmongering 
over there, no end of fearmongering. And that was spoken by 
every single NDP on that side, and all you had to do was look at 
the articles they put in their newspapers on a weekly basis as 
they ridiculed that program. 
 
Now they’ve picked up almost all aspects of that program, Mr. 
Speaker, almost all aspects. They picked up, first of all, the fact 
that it’s a good idea. Then they’ve picked up on the fact that if 
you’re actually going to have these developments throughout 
our province, there’s a need for them to have a market. 
 
And I know that was one of the things that was always a 
difficulty for the development that was looking at this in my 
home community. They had the location for the feedlots. They 
had the people who could run that. The technology for the 
ethanol on the side was there. To find the people to run that was 
no problem. The feed was no problem. Communities were 
excited about the jobs. They had done their environmental work 
as far as the water was concerned, as far as the waste was 
concerned. 
 
And then they said, now we’ve got this great idea, we can 
produce this ethanol, and where are we going to sell it? And 
then we found out by doing some of the research . . . and I think 
Pound-Maker has just been an excellent example of private 
enterprise doing a lot of hard work. They’ve had to go all over 
North America to find markets for their ethanol. Right now 
they’ve managed to find more markets than they can probably 
supply at this particular point. But it hasn’t been easy for them. 
And so when another feedlot ethanol plant was looking at the 
markets, they didn’t seem to be there. 
 
But they could have been here, in our Saskatchewan, had this 
government four or five years ago said, okay, those individuals, 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 571 

 

those groups who want to raise money locally — and as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, there was much more money available 
locally five years ago than there is right now in rural 
Saskatchewan — we will guarantee you a market by having a 
certain percentage of our fuel in ethanol. That’s what this 
government has now said they would do, and that’s probably 
one of the key things in the plan, is to sort of guarantee a market 
for all these ethanol plants. 
 
I remember when we proposed that they laughed at it. And then 
suddenly someone woke up and said, oh that’s a good idea. So 
they adopted it, and that’s fine. We support that; it’s a good 
idea. It’s a good idea wherever they get it from. 
 
(19:45) 
 
And the other part that came into it . . . and I just mentioned it a 
little earlier on the statement made by an NDP that they were 
wondering where to put their money. Well maybe if they 
changed some of the tax structure somewhat and looked at 
removing some of the taxes that are there, probably some of the 
capital taxes which, as we know, in Saskatchewan are fairly 
high. If we just took that right off the ethanol component . . . in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, we should probably take it off of all of 
business and this whole province would be better off. But if we 
took it off that ethanol component, the amount of private money 
around Canada would say, here’s a chance for investment 
without that onerous tax there which means our chance to go 
ahead and receive some benefit called profit. 
 
I know the NDP don’t like that word, but it’s a great word 
because if no one made any profit there wouldn’t be any taxes 
to run all the programs that we have in our province. We could 
have had money come in from all over Canada, particularly 
western Canada — Manitoba, Alberta, where the knowledge of 
ethanol is there, the abilities are there, the skills are there — 
coming into Saskatchewan to build those. But now we have this 
government saying, well I’m not sure where we’ll have to put 
our money. And that as I said, Mr. Speaker, is a somewhat 
frightening concept, and it’s also one of the things that keeps 
some of that investment from growing and developing as it 
ought to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What are all, some of all of the benefits that we can derive in 
this particular province from an ethanol procedure? Well I 
already mentioned to some extent it’s very much an 
environmentally friendly substitute or additive for gasoline, and 
probably for diesel fuel as well. And my colleague from 
Cypress Hills discussed that part about putting it into the diesel 
fuel as well and how some of the agricultural developers of 
equipment have spent years trying to see how they can get that 
working properly in some of their engines. 
 
Secondly, it can be manufactured from the very things that 
we’re so good at in Saskatchewan: the growing of grains, the 
growing of straw, those sorts of things. That’s what we do well 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, but we need to be able to carry 
some of those things a little further than we do. They could use 
new markets. It would be just the greatest things if some of our 
farmers could go ahead and be able to sell their grain close at 
hand, save on the shipping, maybe get a higher price for it — 
also, having invested in some of the ethanol plants, get the 
benefit from those particular by-products as well; also the use 

for the straw. 
 
Third, if we can just feature the development of plants like we 
have at Pound-Maker, maybe if now we’re looking at five, six, 
a dozen, but maybe at some point where we have two or three 
dozen of these across the province, the amount of manpower 
that would take to build those — and that’s one thing this 
province needs is jobs — we could get some of those people 
back from other provinces that have been chased out by this 
NDP and their methods of governing this province since the 
middle 1940s. 
 
Why hasn’t our province grown? We’re at the same number we 
were way back then. This group across is a group that’s run this 
province for most of those years, and they haven’t created any 
jobs. We could use those jobs. 
 
Fourth, there are several valuable by-products. And as we run 
that grain and that straw through there, it isn’t just the ethanol 
that comes off but there is many other uses that can come out of 
some of the other by-products that are there. And I think only as 
those things are developed . . . And I have the member from 
Saskatoon all excited about the fact that this includes makeup 
and lipstick and all sorts of other great things. 
 
And I’m getting a lot of help on this from the NDP, and that’s 
good to see because finally they know something about some of 
the topics that we’re discussing in the House; they’ve done 
some research. Unfortunately, they’re only about six to eight 
months into this whole plan and really don’t know a whole lot 
about it. 
 
The other thing is because the ethanol process requires it to be 
close to a feedlot situation, what we have then is a possibility of 
all the other spinoff operations that can develop because of the 
cattle. Instead of moving our cattle down to Alberta, moving 
our grain down there and our people down there to process, that 
can all stay here. And then we can take those cattle, we can 
slaughter, we can process them, all of that requiring jobs . . . 
providing jobs for us in Saskatchewan and providing an 
opportunity to export other things besides just trainloads full of 
grain and trainloads full of people following the grain to be 
processed someplace else. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier on, this is an exciting process. It is 
something that we have great hope for and, as we mentioned 
earlier on, this government needs to make some things very 
definite for the people that are hoping to develop that. 
 
And sometimes I think that they don’t plan big enough. They 
gave the size of their plant, what they were featuring or 
dreaming about, that they’d have a certain number of plants of a 
certain size across Saskatchewan. 
 
Shortly after they announced that — I believe it was less than a 
week — someone from the northeast corner of the province 
there’s a new development who’s prepared to go ahead and 
make their operation many times larger than what the 
government’s plans are because he said this would be a whole 
lot more efficient. 
 
If they’re going to build it, let’s build it big enough so it’s 
efficient and we get the economies of scale, and we can make 



572 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

some profit on that. All sorts of exciting things about this, Mr. 
Speaker — the jobs, the development, the taxes, the revenues 
— all of those things will be good for Saskatchewan. 
 
And as we’ve discussed it today, Mr. Speaker, I’m prepared to 
support the amendment as the Saskatchewan Party has put it 
before the House. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
at the outset I should like to just deal with some fundamental 
questions that the people of Saskatchewan may be having about 
ethanol, such as what is ethanol and what will ethanol do for us. 
 
And I want to refer people to an excellent booklet called 
Questions and Answers about Ethanol, which I believe has been 
published by the Minnesota Department of Agriculture in 
conjunction with the Minnesota Corn Growers association, so 
that some of the questions and answers about ethanol are 
Minnesota specific. Nevertheless we can make some 
assumptions about ethanol and what it means and how it works 
in our case. 
 
And I would also refer people, Mr. Speaker, members or others 
who may be watching this, to Web sites that contain a great deal 
of information about ethanol. And the first would be Web site 
www.greenfuels.org to provide an overview of ethanol. People 
may also want to refer to the Web site run by the state of 
Minnesota, www.mda.state.mn.us\Ethanol, with a capital E, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s www.greenfuels.org and 
www.mda.state.mn.us\Ethanol, with a capital E, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So for those people who are watching this at home and want to 
get, if you like, background information about ethanol more 
than can be supplied here during the course of debate on the 
floor of the Legislative Assembly, I would certainly refer 
people to those Web sites and I think they will find a great deal 
of information to assist them in their understanding of this 
gasoline additive which has been explained in the House as 
simply being a form of alcohol which is distilled from grain, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the people who are watching, and especially consumers, 
will have a great number of questions because the Government 
of Saskatchewan has indicated that it would be worthwhile to 
move forward to establish, at some point, targets for the use of 
ethanol as a blend with gasoline in Saskatchewan so that all 
motorists who fill up their tanks will have to use a blend of 
ethanol with their gasoline. 
 
Some customers or some drivers in Saskatchewan are doing that 
now and certainly people in many other jurisdictions — in 
Minnesota notably — will be used to using ethanol. People in I 
believe it is Brazil, will be very used to driving with a blend of 
ethanol or methanol, as the case might be in Brazil, and I think 
it will raise a number of questions for people who are watching 
and who are interested in this about the impact on automotive 
engines. 
 
As an example, will the use of ethanol, for example, void my 
car’s warranty? And certainly not. It won’t do that. Most 
automobile manufacturers didn’t address this issue back in the 
’70s but as soon as each manufacturer tested their vehicles with 
a 10 per cent blend, they approved the use of a 10 per cent 

ethanol blend. So using a 10 per cent ethanol blend in your 
vehicle will not void any warranty, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Will ethanol work in fuel-injected engines? Absolutely, Mr. 
Speaker, it will work in fuel-injected engines. Ethanol never, 
never contributes to burning or fouling of port fuel injectors, 
Mr. Speaker. It’s a very clean additive or blend for our gasoline, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
If I use ethanol — now here is a good question for people in 
Saskatchewan — if I use ethanol, do I need a gas line 
antifreeze? Well no, no you don’t, Mr. Speaker, because gas 
line antifreeze is alcohol, usually methanol, ethanol, or 
isopropyl. And so inasmuch as an ethanol blend contains up to 
10 per cent ethanol, it is able to absorb more water than a small 
bottle of methanol or isopropyl alcohol, therefore eliminating 
the need and expense of adding a gas line antifreeze, Mr. 
Speaker. So this would be welcome news for some of us who at 
some point in the past have had to deal with cars at minus 40 
that were seizing up. 
 
Ethanol won’t burn valves. Many people who drive an older 
vehicle, they will ask will ethanol hurt my older engine, 
designed for leaded gas? The answer is no, it will not do that. 
 
Does ethanol lead to plugged fuel filters? Well, Mr. Speaker, 
ethanol can loosen contaminants and residues that have been 
deposited by previous gasoline fills. These can collect in the 
fuel filter. This problem has happened occasionally in older cars 
and can easily be corrected by changing fuel filters, something 
that people should do from time to time in any event, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now they go on to the symptoms of a plugged fuel filter, but I 
don’t want to go into that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there are many questions that people will have about the use 
of ethanol. And I would certainly encourage people to check the 
Web sites, as I’ve mentioned, to answer some of the detailed 
questions they may have, because this will be an issue of 
concern for the people of Saskatchewan, and I think 
increasingly so will be a matter that people will discuss. And 
information, reliable information, accurate information is 
important for the people of Saskatchewan as they enter into a 
debate about ethanol and the use of ethanol in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(20:00) 
 
So again I would certainly refer people to the state of 
Minnesota, to those Web sites. If people don’t have access to a 
computer and they want me to send them a copy of this 
Questions and Answers about Ethanol or any other information 
that I can obtain for them, I’ll be more than pleased to provide 
them with that information. And all they need do, Mr. Speaker, 
is to call my office at the Legislative Building at 787-1900; 
that’s 787-1900 and we’ll be more than pleased to provide them 
with that information, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They can also write me, that is the member for Regina Victoria, 
the member for Regina Victoria, 105 Legislative Building, 105 
Legislative Building, Regina, S4S 0B3, I believe it is, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s the member for Regina Victoria, 105 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 573 

 

Legislative Building, Regina, S4S 0B3, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This will be, as I’ve indicated, an issue of significant debate. 
The automobile is a very important part of our economy. It is a 
very important part indeed of our social life, and changes that 
are going to affect everyone who drives an automobile in terms 
of what it is that they put in the tank will, I am sure, engender a 
great deal of discussion and debate about the advisability of it, 
why we’re doing it, what it might do, what it won’t do. 
 
So again I encourage people to get as much factual information 
as they can so that they’re well informed and can inform others 
around them about how ethanol has worked in other 
jurisdictions, what the impacts may be — or more appropriately 
will not be — in terms of their own vehicle, and generally 
inform themselves about this change that is going to occur in 
Saskatchewan and is likely going to occur in many jurisdictions 
of the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now why ethanol and why is there so much debate in 
Saskatchewan about ethanol? Some of the previous speakers 
have alluded to the why, Mr. Speaker. And I would just briefly 
— just briefly — like to touch on why it is that ethanol is so 
important to Saskatchewan at this point in time. 
 
One has to do with the environment and this is a recognition 
that of course has happened in other jurisdictions — Minnesota 
notably, Brazil, as I’ve mentioned, other jurisdictions too. You 
have to remember that ethanol is a growing phenomenon in the 
United States, which is a huge market, and people are switching 
to ethanol because of environmental concerns. 
 
Car companies are also beginning to developing . . . to develop 
alternative fuel vehicles. This is a publication of the Ford Motor 
Company. And Ford Motor Company says that Ford had been 
developing alternative fuel vehicles for more than three 
decades. Their flexible-fuel lineup includes the popular Taurus 
and other additions. And they trumpet the use of ethanol, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So this is one car manufacturer that has recognized the need — 
the market, I suppose is more accurate, because this is a 
business and there are interests in supplying a market. But they 
recognize the nascent market that is there for clean fuel or 
cleaner fuel vehicles that do less pollution of the environment. 
 
Then we should not underestimate that. And again I would 
highlight or underline the comments that previous speakers 
have made in this respect, with the environmental impact that 
will accrue if we make the switch to blended gasoline — that is 
blended with ethanol — and the impact that it will have in 
reducing, reducing, Mr. Speaker, the carbon dioxide emissions. 
 
Which is something that we in Saskatchewan, other provinces, 
Canada, other countries in the world, are trying to grapple with: 
the issue of carbon dioxide emissions — to lower those 
emissions. Because there seems to be fairly clear science that 
the increase in carbon dioxide emissions over time has led to 
greenhouse gas emissions, which is leading to horrendous 
environmental problems and that if we don’t check it, will lead 
to even further environmental problems in the future, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

Just by reducing our gasoline consumption by 10 per cent, 
because we make the switch to ethanol which burns cleanly, we 
can have a significant impact on any target that might be 
established, whether it’s the Kyoto targets that Canada has not 
signed on to yet — but if we were to adopt those, would have a 
significant impact on those Kyoto targets, certainly would take 
care of all of the targets that we need to meet in the 
transportation sector, and would go a long way to meeting our 
overall targets for reducing carbon dioxide as envisioned in the 
Kyoto accord. 
 
Many people have spoken this evening about the environmental 
impact, Mr. Speaker. I would just like to quote from two 
people. One was a quote from December of the year 2000 when 
an NDP leadership candidate said: 
 

Replacing 10 per cent of our hydrocarbon fuels with 
ethanol will help Saskatchewan people go a long way 
towards meeting our commitment to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. 

 
So that’s to show that this is something that’s shared by both 
sides of the House. Here is one person from the government 
side, who at that point was a leadership candidate, saying that 
replacing our hydrocarbons with 10 per cent ethanol would go a 
long way towards our commitment to reduce greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
 
On the other side we’ve had the Leader of the Opposition, nine 
months later approximately in . . . yes, on September 19, 2001, 
nine months later, say that: 
 

Burning more ethanol as a fuel means cleaner air and a 
cleaner environment for Saskatchewan families, and it will 
go a long way. 

 
Hey what the heck, Mr. Speaker. Well they’re saying the same 
thing here. Well now, Mr. Speaker, can you believe it? Well, 
Mr. Speaker, I just don’t understand. 
 
An Hon. Member: — What don’t you understand? 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — The member says, what is it that I don’t 
understand. And what I don’t understand is that we put forward 
a motion on this side of the House with respect to ethanol, and 
it’s a motion that seems acceptable to all. And then the 
members opposite put forward an amendment because they take 
the point of view that although they agree generally with the 
direction that we take with respect to ethanol, they say that they 
need to make an amendment and make specific mention of 
something that their leader said in September 2001 because they 
said, we’re the first ones to articulate anything of this nature in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Well that’s what they said, Mr. 
Speaker. So that’s why they need the amendment. 
 
Well I may be wrong, Mr. Speaker, but people are welcome to 
check Hansard, but it seems to me that’s what the members 
have been saying, that their leader, the Leader of the Opposition 
— and may he be the Leader of the Opposition for a long time, 
Mr. Speaker — the Leader of the Opposition said, they said he 
articulated, he articulated as a Saskatchewan political leader the 
very first time an ethanol plan for Saskatchewan. That is what 
they said, Mr. Speaker. 



574 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

And including . . . Their speaker said that what we need to do is 
that we need to set a target. And I’m looking at the speech of 
the Leader of the Opposition that he delivered in the year . . . 
well the Leader of the Opposition said in September that what 
we need to do is that we need to set a 10 per cent ethanol 
component for gasoline. That’s what the Leader of the 
Opposition is saying, that we need to have a 10 per cent target. 
 
But now I’m looking here. This leadership candidate nine 
months earlier said exactly the same thing, or I guess you might 
say, publicly he said it first. But these members say their leader 
said it first. I don’t know if the words phony-baloney are 
parliamentary, Mr. Speaker, and if not I would certainly 
withdraw them . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . well someone 
said that phony-baloney describes the opposition, Mr. Speaker, 
but that may not be parliamentary, and I would certainly 
withdraw that. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, you know I’m getting a little distracted here, 
Mr. Speaker, about what I perceive to be a lack of originality on 
the part of the members opposite, a lack of originality, Mr. 
Speaker. This . . . someone else’s plagiarism, Mr. Speaker, I 
wouldn’t want to go so far. I mean just because someone one 
month says you go a long way towards meeting, and then nine 
months later somebody says it will go a long way in achieving. 
Well, there are in fact only a limited number of words in the 
English language, Mr. Speaker, so maybe it’s a coincidence;, 
maybe it’s not plagiarism. 
 
But I tell you one thing. When they say that their leader and that 
their party was the first to articulate publicly some vision, some 
goal as to what we should be doing with ethanol, Mr. Speaker, 
they were not. In fact, they were nine months after the first time 
this was articulated publicly, Mr. Speaker. So someone else, 
someone else, someone else gave birth to their policy 
pronouncement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In fact, now that I remember . . . now that I remember, now that 
I remember, Mr. Speaker, one month, one month after this NDP 
leadership candidate made this announcement about ethanol, I 
attended a reception, along with members of the opposition, and 
they expressed their admiration for what it is that this leadership 
candidate had to say about ethanol, Mr. Speaker. And now they 
have the gall to come into the House and say, well you know, 
we were the first ones there. 
 
Well no one would ever accuse them of originality, Mr. 
Speaker, not from the day that their party was formed when 
they had to think of a discredited Progressive Conservative 
Party in Saskatchewan and what to call themselves. 
 
Well what they did was they looked to the Yukon, where the 
Yukon Progressive Conservative Party had the same problem, 
same issue, totally discredited. So what did they do? They 
called themselves the Yukon Party. And that group, they said, 
we’re totally discredited; we’ll call ourselves the Saskatchewan 
Party. 
 
Their birth, Mr. Speaker, their birth wasn’t exactly 
characterized by originality, Mr. Speaker. Their ideas . . . 
similarly, Mr. Speaker, now we see with respect to ethanol, no 
one can accuse them of originality. In fact, I don’t think they’ve 
had a new idea since the 19th century, Mr. Speaker. 

Can anyone think of any new ideas that they’ve come up with? 
What are the new ideas that they’ve come up with? Nothing, 
Mr. Speaker. Nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know, there is one time, only one time can I think of where 
someone said something kindly about their originality. And 
when I checked on that, they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would remind the member that the 
topic here is dealing with ethanol and ethanol policy, and I 
would ask him to kind of bring his remarks around to that topic. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m going to get 
back on the topic here but sometime . . . Mr. Speaker, before I 
do that I should like to table with the Legislative Assembly, if I 
might, a copy of a news release that I see was drafted on 
December 28 of the year 2000 by an NDP leadership candidate, 
Mr. Speaker, which talks about legislation that would require all 
gasoline sold in Saskatchewan by the year 2007 to contain 10 
per cent ethanol, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I should like to table that in the House and forever quell 
any notions that people might have that any originality on this 
topic comes from the members opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, there’s nothing very 
original about ethanol. On our side we’ve done a great deal of 
study about what it is that other people in parts of the world 
have done in terms of promoting ethanol, the use of ethanol, the 
technology of ethanol. We’ve had the Saskatchewan Research 
Council in Saskatchewan do an exhaustive study on ethanol, 
Mr. Speaker, that’s been around for some time since April 
1999. 
 
And I would refer people to Saskatchewan and the Ethanol 
Energy Economy: A Strategic Background Study to Support 
R&D Proposals on Ethanol and Fuel Cells by K. Hutchence of 
the process development branch of the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So ethanol is nothing very new and for any group in this 
Assembly to claim that somehow they have the ownership 
rights or that they’re the vanguard of some new technology or 
some new economic innovation, Mr. Speaker, is just a bunch of 
malarkey, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is something that has been talked about by many people 
for many years but you know the defining issue here is, the 
defining issue is not what it is that you say about ethanol, Mr. 
Speaker, but what it is that a government is prepared to do, Mr. 
Speaker. And that is the defining difference in this case, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There on opposition they talk, and sometimes in ways that don’t 
lend themselves to a quick understanding of the actual situation. 
And then you have governments that actually act, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I should like to table this document, if I may, with the 
Legislative Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 575 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve dealt with the 
environmental issues that underline why there’s an interest in 
ethanol, that ethanol . . . a gasoline that’s blended with ethanol 
will help to significantly reduce carbon dioxide emissions and 
therefore help us to meet our targets, whether these are formal 
targets that are adopted at some point by virtue of the Kyoto 
accord or whether we establish some other target. It won’t 
lessen the need, Mr. Speaker, for us all as a society to look for 
ways to reduce carbon dioxide emissions, to reduce these 
pollutants and to ensure a future for our children that has a 
clean environment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is also other compelling reasons that we 
want to . . . want to press ahead with ethanol development and 
that has to do with economic reasons. And it may sound 
contradictory that on the one hand that an industry offers so 
much hope, you know, in reducing greenhouse gas emissions, 
in being such a positive force in terms of improving the 
environment, but at the same time we say that this is a positive 
economic force as well. Well it is because it has the . . . it offers 
the hope to provide alternate markets for grain producers in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
There is a widespread belief, Mr. Speaker, that as the world’s 
population increases — and the world’s population these days is 
about 6 billion people — and people believe that the world’s 
population will continue to increase, and therefore there will 
always be an increased need for grain products that are grown 
in Saskatchewan, and therefore Saskatchewan farmers will 
always have an opportunity for increased exports of grain from 
Saskatchewan to other parts of the world. 
 
But that is something that’s not really borne out by expert 
analysis. People point out that even though the world 
population today is 6 billion, it’s likely to rise to a maximum of 
about 7.7 billion by the year 2040, and that’s from a Time 
magazine article in June 29 of 1998. 
 
I believe The Globe and Mail also a week or two ago had a 
rather substantial article on population trends worldwide and 
what was happening in various parts of the world, and where it 
is that fertility rates were decreasing, and pointing out examples 
such as the country of Japan that if the Japanese did not 
increase their fertility or have more children, that by 75 years or 
90 years, the Japanese population would shrink to three or four 
people because fewer children were being born than people 
were dying, Mr. Speaker, of natural causes. 
 
So what is happening is that projections that have been made 
over the years about how the world’s population will increase 
are now being ratcheted down to smaller and smaller increases 
all the time and, in fact, people are projecting that after about 
the year 2040, the population worldwide will decrease to 3.6 
billion people by the middle of this century, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Saskatchewan Research Council, who did some research on 
this topic, they state that if Saskatchewan food is in chronic 
surplus with a global population of 6 billion, then it would be in 
painful surplus with a global population of 3.6 billion, Mr. 
Speaker. So in a very broad way, they’re painting a picture of, if 
we are overproducing today, if there is a glut in the world’s 

market today, then in the long run we should be concerned 
about our ability to export what it is that we grow. 
 
And the reasons for that . . . many members of the House can 
speak far more knowledgeably than I can about why it is that 
we have increasing grain production. We had over time 
developed much better varieties and strains of wheat that can be 
grown in many more places of the world than was ever possible 
20 or 30 years ago; that countries such as Algeria that 20 years 
ago might have been a net exporter of grains is now a net 
exporter of grains, I believe, and that other countries are turning 
in the same direction. They have far less reliance on the grain 
exports that we desire to sell to others, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Research Council, too, showed that although the exports by 
the world’s grain exporting countries, the five major exporters 
— Argentina, Australia, Canada, Europe, and the United States 
— although these grain exports were trending up . . . and it’s 
always a series of peaks and valleys. Nevertheless, these grain 
exports by these five major exporters trended up until about 
1980. And since 1980, although we still have a series of peaks 
and valleys in net exports by these countries, overall the trend 
line is flat, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what we see happening is that even though the world 
population is increasing, we see many countries of the world 
that hitherto had not been able to grow sufficient grains to meet 
their domestic needs are now in a position to grow the grains 
that they need to meet their domestic demand. And some are 
even in the position to do exports themselves, Mr. Speaker. So 
that if you’re in the grain exporting business the outlook is not a 
very favourable one, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So it then raises some questions that if you can’t sell what it is 
that you grow to external markets, are there markets that you 
can generate internally that might be able to pick up some of the 
grain that is being produced? And one of the answers for that is 
ethanol, because ethanol can use grain to produce the product, 
and therefore you provide an alternate market for grain 
producers in Saskatchewan. And I think that is one of the 
reasons that so many people in rural Saskatchewan have met the 
government’s proposals with enthusiasm because they do see it 
as a glimmer of hope in what otherwise appears to be a fairly 
gloomy forecast when it comes to grain exports, Mr. Speaker. 
So they’re encouraged by that. 
 
And that is a good reason for us, Mr. Speaker, to develop this 
ethanol industry because it does provide alternate markets for 
our grain producers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and grain 
producers are very important. The provincial symbol is still the 
wheat sheaf, Mr. Speaker, and we need to understand the 
importance of that industry and that market for our people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another reason that both members of the House are very 
interested in seeing this ethanol industry develop in 
Saskatchewan is because — and other economic reasons — is 
that not only does it create markets for farmers that are 
producing in Saskatchewan, it also has the potential to create 
jobs in Saskatchewan because ethanol in short needs a major 
distilling operation so that you can distill the ethanol. 
 
Some estimates point out that in Saskatchewan, if we were to 



576 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

mandate a 10 per cent ethanol component for all gasoline, we 
would need to produce in the vicinity of 150 million litres, I 
believe it is, Mr. Speaker. To produce 150 million litres some 
estimates would suggest that you would need an industry in 
Saskatchewan of 2 to 300 people. Now that by itself . . . that by 
itself may not be all that significant, although it certainly isn’t 
insignificant, Mr. Speaker. But in the overall context and 
overall number of jobs in Saskatchewan, it may not be seen to 
be that significant. But I think the significant point here is that if 
we are able to ramp up an industry, to develop an industry 
internally in Saskatchewan that is able to meet our own 
domestic demand, meet our own needs in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, then we are well positioned, well positioned to do the 
work that we need to do, to look for exports for ethanol that is 
produced in Saskatchewan. 
 
Because certainly we don’t have any shortage of grain in 
Saskatchewan with which to produce ethanol, and certainly we 
don’t have any shortage of people that would like to have jobs 
to work in rural Saskatchewan because that is still a preferred 
lifestyle for many people in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 
for very good reasons because Saskatchewan is a beautiful 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that is the reason that both members of the House are, if 
you like, agreed even if we disagree on some of the rhetoric and 
trying to take credit for this. And I don’t think anyone should 
take credit for this, Mr. Speaker. The credit should go to the 
people of Saskatchewan, and we should wish them well in the 
development of this industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But if we are successful in developing a industry in 
Saskatchewan that can meet our demand here, some estimates 
of demand in other parts of North America would suggest a 
phenomenal demand of so many millions of litres or billions of 
litres that might ultimately result in the creation of 7,000 jobs in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that is not insignificant by 
anyone’s standard. 
 
And it’s jobs in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, which are 
badly needed because increasingly, increasingly our agricultural 
producers are relying on off-farm, off-farm wages and salaries 
to supplement the income that they derive from their farm. 
Some estimates suggest that on average as much as one-half of 
the income of farm families, the household income, comes from 
off-farm sources, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we need to always be looking for ways to grow the rural 
economy and to provide jobs and opportunities for people in 
rural Saskatchewan. Even if they can’t find full employment on 
the farm, that we can find full employment for rural people in 
rural Saskatchewan so that rural Saskatchewan can, in the long 
run, remain strong and vibrant and a place of healthy, strong 
communities that provides hope and opportunity for many 
young people for many years to come, Mr. Speaker. And that is, 
I think, in part what motivates both sides of the House in this 
debate and both sides of the House, I think, being agreed to 
move this industry forward, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I don’t think that ethanol will be necessarily an 
economic panacea. There are many powerful trends — and I’ve 

talked about this before — many powerful trends that affect 
Saskatchewan, that affect other parts of North America where 
agriculture is a very important part of the economy and where 
we don’t have large urban centres. Because the urban centres, 
Regina and Saskatoon, although they may seem large to some 
people in Saskatchewan, are not large in comparison to many 
other urban centres in North America that . . . where you have 
large agricultural areas. These areas are being affected by 
powerful trends, and some of them I talked about in terms of 
food production and global population changes and so on, Mr. 
Speaker. So ethanol production, I think we have to be realistic 
that it may not be an economic panacea, but it may position us, 
as I’ve indicated, it may position us to supply external markets 
and create very significant job opportunities in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. And that’s one of the reasons I think that both 
sides of the House want to pursue this particular strategy, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Questions will be raised by those in the environmental 
movement and others who have an interest in this about the 
amount of energy that it takes to create, including subsidies, the 
amount of energy that it takes to create a bushel of grain and the 
amount of energy that it then takes to transform that bushel of 
grain into a litre of ethanol and what the savings may be, in 
however they measure these things, I think in British thermal 
units. I’m not an engineer, Mr. Speaker, but I think that’s how 
they measure these things. And people will have comments 
about whether or not the BTUs in are less than the BTUs out 
and all those kinds of questions, Mr. Speaker. And fair enough. 
And I think that’s one of the areas too that we need to be 
cognizant of that. 
 
And I think that if we develop an industry, even if this is an 
industry that’s based on grains that are grown in Saskatchewan, 
we will have an industry that will at least provide us with some 
base to do further research on ethanol and maybe the use of 
cellulose or straw, if you like, to convert that into ethanol. Some 
science has been done on that. A lot more needs to be done on 
that to make that economical which, in the long run, would be a 
far superior solution than to using grains as the feedstock for 
ethanol. 
 
So there’s a lot of work that has to be done. I want to be 
realistic about this, but at the same point, Mr. Speaker, we as a 
people in Saskatchewan, we cannot stand still. We must not 
stand still. We must move forward. This is an area where both 
sides of the House agree that we should and can move forward. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this government will move forward. Thank 
you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, the debate on ethanol is very interesting, and I think 
after listening to the member from Regina Victoria speak, I can 
say that, Mr. Speaker, yes, both sides of the House are in 
general agreement on the idea that there is a need, Mr. Speaker, 
for ethanol production in Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
we do indeed have a news release out last September, agreeing 
with the idea and promoting the idea, Mr. Speaker, for the need 
for ethanol production in Saskatchewan. So in that sense, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re both on the same page in the House, Mr. 
Speaker. 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 577 

 

But there are some slight differences as to where we’re all at on 
this particular issue, Mr. Speaker. And I think it really comes 
down to how to proceed with the development of ethanol in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we’ve heard a lot of comments, Mr. Speaker, about the 
need, indeed the benefit of ethanol production in this province, 
how it would help our agricultural sector by providing an 
alternative market for the agricultural products. And not just 
grain, Mr. Speaker, not just grain, but even straw is a potential 
source for a ethanol plant to develop into ethanol and as a 
by-product as well, the biomass from the straw that would be 
utilized in development of ethanol. We’re all in agreement on 
that. 
 
We’re all in agreement, Mr. Speaker, that ethanol would be 
beneficial to our environment in the reduction of CO2 emissions 
which, according to the federal government, Saskatchewan is a 
large contributor to the production of CO2 in Canada, both from 
our coal-fired electrical plants owned by SaskPower, some of 
which, Mr. Speaker, do not have CO2 scrubbers on them, as 
well as from our agriculture and trucking industries because, 
Mr. Speaker, in agriculture we burn a lot of fossil fuels in 
production, in putting seed in the ground, in putting grain, pulse 
crops, various types of agricultural commodities in the ground, 
in maintaining the soil in a proper condition, Mr. Speaker. And 
in harvesting we burn a lot of fuel. That creates CO2, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
We also have a fairly extensive cattle industry, Mr. Speaker, 
which is accused by some people of quite a CO2 production. 
I’m told, Mr. Speaker, though that if you want to look at 
animal-type production of methanes — CO2 — that it’s actually 
termites that are the largest producer of methane gases, CO2, 
Mr. Speaker, not livestock industry. 
 
Now that’s not a well-known fact perhaps by those who wish to 
promote the idea that the cattle industry is not a positive thing 
to be in, Mr. Speaker, but it’s the production . . . the 
decomposition of cellulose wood by termites that is one of the 
major contributors, Mr. Speaker. And I don’t think any one of 
us would be suggesting that we go out on a campaign to 
eradicate termites because termites, Mr. Speaker, are somewhat 
along the line of the cockroach — are survivors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
They have been here not for just a few decades, Mr. Speaker, 
not even just for a few thousands of years, Mr. Speaker. They 
have been here on earth for hundreds of millions of years, Mr. 
Speaker. So I don’t think our best efforts, Mr. Speaker, would 
accomplish a whole lot when it comes to the elimination of the 
termite, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that a number of people are 
wondering as to how this equates to the production of ethanol, 
Mr. Speaker. But ethanol is produced from cellulose fibre. 
Termites eat cellulose fibre. So perhaps if we were to get into a 
serious, serious ethanol industry, Mr. Speaker, we might be able 
to starve them out. But I think though that we are not going to 
be in a position to consume enough ethanol in this province to 
make a serious dent on the termite population. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when it comes to development of ethanol in our 
province, the big question is, is how do you proceed? What vein 

do you take? What mechanism do you use to develop the 
ethanol industry? Well the government opposite has clearly 
shown how they believe government should proceed in the 
development of the economy, in the development of industry 
and business in this province. And clearly to them there is one 
way, Mr. Speaker. That’s to own it. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that idea is, as far as the NDP government is 
concerned, is almost as old as the termite; but, Mr. Speaker, not 
nearly as successful. While the termite has managed to survive 
for hundreds of millions of years, Mr. Speaker, the concept by 
the NDP of complete government ownership has failed 
wherever it has been tried. It has failed in Russia. It has even 
failed in China, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. Speaker, it even failed 
in Albania. So I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, that the members 
opposite will surrender on the idea that the ethanol industry 
should be government owned, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we need in this province though, Mr. Speaker, is 
entrepreneurs and an entrepreneurial spirit in the development 
of the ethanol industry. The government, the government’s role 
should be to provide the environment — just as the earth has 
provided the environment for the termite to survive — the 
environment, Mr. Speaker, for entrepreneurial spirit to survive 
in Saskatchewan and not be trod upon by government. 
 
Although, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan under the NDP 
regimes in the past, entrepreneurs have sort of been considered 
in a negative vein the same way that termites and cockroaches 
have — you have to get rid of them, Mr. Speaker. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s the wrong attitude. That’s the wrong attitude, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We need to encourage entrepreneurs in this province. We don’t 
need another Crown corporation, Mr. Speaker, acting like a 
huge can of Raid on our entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker. We need 
to encourage them. 
 
We need to create an economic environment through the 
reduction of the tax load, Mr. Speaker, through the elimination 
of the corporate capital tax, to encourage people to come in and 
develop the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the ethanol industry is not a new one in North 
America. It may very well be a relatively new industry in 
Saskatchewan. We’ve had two plants, to the best of my 
knowledge, that have tried and been somewhat successful, one 
more so than the other. It was a plant, Mr. Speaker, out in the 
Kindersley/Eston/Kerrobert area, Kerrobert I believe, back in 
the ’70s and ’80s that was producing some ethanol. It was not a 
terribly efficient plant, Mr. Speaker, but it did manage to 
produce ethanol and showed that there was possibilities on the 
prairies for the development. 
 
The second plant, Mr. Speaker, is at Pound-Maker. Now the 
Pound-Maker plant came in the mid-1980s, is tied in 
conjunction with a large cattle operation, a feedlot operation, 
Mr. Speaker, and has been quite successful. And it continues to 
be successful, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But one of the impediments that has always faced the ethanol 
industry is that it is not a cheap product to make. Depending on 
the price of grain, depending on the price of oil — its natural 



578 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

competitor, Mr. Speaker — there are times when there needs to 
be proactive government intervention. More so than 
participating in the actual production, Mr. Speaker, it’s to create 
the environment to allow ethanol to be produced. And you do 
that, Mr. Speaker, through tax management. You need to 
provide, as I said earlier, a tax environment that would allow 
the investors to realize that there is a profit to be made here, Mr. 
Speaker, that there is a reason to proceed to develop ethanol in 
our region. 
 
We have the natural products necessary, Mr. Speaker, to 
develop the ethanol industry. We have grain. We have cellulose, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
we have cellulose from wood fibres. We have . . . If you look 
across, particularly the eastern half of the province, Mr. Speaker 
. . . they never developed the trees in the western part of the 
province, but on the eastern side of the province, Mr. Speaker, 
we can get in there ahead of the termites and get, Mr. Speaker, 
that cellulose from trees to develop it into ethanol. We can use 
grain from our farms. We can use straw from the grain 
production. We can use cellulose, Mr. Speaker, from the tree 
pulp to develop ethanol. It’s only a matter of providing the 
economic environment, Mr. Speaker, that would allow that to 
happen. 
 
Now if you’re going to develop an ethanol industry in this 
province, there’s another half of the equation that you need to 
work with. You need to have a market, Mr. Speaker, a market 
for the ethanol. Now in Saskatchewan because we’re such huge 
distances, because we’re such an agricultural province, we burn 
a lot of fossil fuels. We can use, Mr. Speaker, a percentage of 
our consumption of gasoline and diesel . . . not so much diesel 
because you don’t mix ethanol with diesel. But with the 
gasolines, mixing ethanol and that will give us a natural market 
for our product, Mr. Speaker. Once you have developed our 
own natural market and we can produce what is needed here in 
Saskatchewan, then we can look, Mr. Speaker, at exporting. 
 
And the fact is, the Pound-Maker plant that’s already in 
production exports virtually all, if not all, of their product to 
Alberta. So the market potential is there, Mr. Speaker. We 
simply need to take advantage of it, which we have not done so 
to the extent that is necessary. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Now the minister of Economic Development talks about 
economic development in this province, creation of 30,000 new 
jobs. Not going to happen, Mr. Speaker. Now if he was talking 
of 30,000 new termites he would be on, but he’s not, Mr. 
Speaker; he’s talking about real jobs in Saskatchewan and it 
isn’t going to happen. 
 
But if the minister was to encourage and promote and put into 
place the necessary economic environment and tax structure, he 
could go part of the way, Mr. Speaker, to developing the 
ethanol industry in this province. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana says, how do you do that? 
Well you have to look, Mr. Speaker, at what does it take to get 
businesses to move to Saskatchewan. They need to have the 
ability, Mr. Speaker, to generate a profit, a return on 
investment. But first what you have to do is entice people with 

capital to invest in Saskatchewan. They invest in Saskatchewan 
. . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Why is the member on 
her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I’m afraid from the position where I sit in the 
legislature that I can only see a few people, but I did see Peter 
Gerrard come in. And I know that he is an excellent 
representative of the credit union system in Saskatchewan and I 
would like all members to welcome Mr. Gerrard and all the 
other guests who have come. 
 
We would have liked to have been over at the credit union 
reception, Mr. Deputy Speaker, but circumstances and our 
important recognition of our duty here kept us here so I would 
like to ask the members to welcome the credit union 
representatives. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Development of Ethanol Industry 
(continued) 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Speaker, as I was talking earlier, there is a need to develop an 
economic environment in Saskatchewan that would promote 
the development of an ethanol industry. 
 
What we need in this province to develop that ethanol industry 
is not government interference, but rather the creation of an 
economic environment. We need to bring capital, Mr. Speaker, 
into this province. People who will be prepared to invest their 
capital in this province need some assurances, Mr. Speaker. 
They need some assurances that they are not going to be 
nationalized by the government, they need some assurance that 
they’re not going to be put into a position of competing against 
tax dollars, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to use an example. I’d like 
to use an example, Mr. Speaker, of exactly what I’m talking 
about. 
 
Out at Gull Lake, Mr. Speaker, private enterprise put up some 
windmills to generate electricity, sell that electricity, Mr. 
Speaker, to SaskPower. Mr. Speaker, it’s not a large operation 
but it was the beginnings, Mr. Speaker, of wind generation in 
this province. As private owners, Mr. Speaker, they paid 
property taxes on their wind chargers. Well, this looks like an 
interesting project, Mr. Speaker, so what does the government 
do? Do they encourage this private entrepreneur to develop 
more of a wind charger technology, Mr. Speaker? No. They go 
in, Mr. Speaker, and start to compete against it. 
 
Now entrepreneurs are not afraid of competition, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, they only want to have a stable environment, they 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 579 

 

want to have a fair, level playing field and, Mr. Speaker, the 
ability to make a profit. 
 
Well when SaskPower went in, they changed the equation, Mr. 
Speaker, because SaskPower does not pay any property taxes to 
the local municipalities, unlike, Mr. Speaker, the private 
entrepreneur had to. So now all of a sudden the cost equation 
has changed. There is a competitor in the market who does not 
have the same cost structure, does not play on a level playing 
field, Mr. Speaker; who pays neither property taxes nor income 
taxes, which are always a cost if you’re going to make a profit, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
That is what capital worries about in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker: (a) that they invest in the province and are nationalized 
like the potash industry was or (b) are forced to compete against 
government tax dollars. So, Mr. Speaker, those capital investors 
need an assurance from the government that those things are not 
going to happen. 
 
Unfortunately, part of the musings and the tummy rumblings 
from the members opposite at the development of their ethanol 
strategy was the potential to have government intervention and 
ownership, Mr. Speaker. And the fact is the government still 
has not given any assurance, Mr. Speaker, that they will not be 
competing against any private entrepreneurs that enter into this 
field, that the tax dollars will not be going there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have seen a number of proposals come forward, Mr. 
Speaker, that are said to be part of the government’s proposals 
where the government will take a major share in the ethanol 
plant, will hold 49 per cent of any livestock industry that 
develops alongside of the ethanol plant, and will hold a 50 per 
cent or greater share, Mr. Speaker, of the cattle held in that 
plant. So anyone else looking at going into the field is going to 
be competing, Mr. Deputy Chair, against tax dollars. 
 
That simply prevents and drives entrepreneurs out of the 
province, Mr. Speaker, and clearly this government is not 
prepared to step forward and say that will not be happening. 
 
We saw another piece of evidence today that SGI 
(Saskatchewan Government Insurance) is now buying up 
independent insurance brokers, Mr. Speaker. So when you look 
at capital investment in an ethanol industry, they still have the 
fear that they’re going to be working against their own tax 
dollars, Mr. Speaker, working against their own tax dollars. 
 
And you notice, Mr. Deputy Chair, how the members opposite 
react to that. They react negatively, but they won’t say that it 
won’t be happening. Because they believe in their heart of 
hearts, Mr. Speaker, that the government is the only ones who 
should be involved in business in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s another part to the ethanol industry, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. It’s not exactly ethanol, but it’s a cousin to that, and 
that’s the bio-diesel issue, Mr. Speaker. Bio-diesel does for 
diesel fuel what ethanol does for gasoline, Mr. Speaker. It’s an 
additive. And fact is, I’m told that you could run your diesels on 
100 percent bio-diesel. It becomes much more efficient though, 
Mr. Speaker, if you run a percentage. It takes only about 2 per 
cent to improve the BTU power, the productivity of your unit of 
diesel fuel by adding bio-diesel. 

In this province bio-diesel, Mr. Speaker, would be developed 
from our oilseed production, mainly from canola, Mr. Speaker, 
mainly from canola. And we still have the canola meal to be 
utilized in the feed industry, Mr. Speaker, still have that 
available, Mr. Speaker, to be utilized in the cattle industry. If 
we were to utilize and take out of the marketplace a portion of 
our canola production, that would not only, Mr. Speaker, 
provide for a safer and cleaner environment, it would help to 
drive up the price for the remaining canola that’s available to be 
made into vegetable oil, that could be made into canola meals, 
that would be utilized in the various livestock industries, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So bio-diesel is not that difficult to make, and as my colleague 
from Cypress Hills was talking about, the large equipment 
manufacturers are already developing the engines necessary to 
utilize bio-diesel. We can utilize it today, but they’re making 
the engines that much more efficient for use of bio-diesel, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There’s a number of jurisdictions where bio-diesel is being 
used, Mr. Speaker. I happen to have a magazine here that is The 
Farm Industry News, Mr. Speaker, the September issue, last 
year. It’s a publication from the US (United States), Mr. 
Speaker, where they are starting to use bio-diesel to a greater 
degree. They’re already utilizing ethanol, Mr. Speaker, to quite 
a degree. In fact there’s the one little article in here is called 
“Ethanol Market Grows,” Mr. Speaker. I’d like to read a few 
quotes from it: 
 

When you pulled into a gas station back in the 1980s, you 
may have been greeted by a skull-and-crossbones-stamped, 
“No alcohol in gas” sign. 
 
But this evil visage no longer exists. Instead, most service 
stations in the Midwest offer a kinder, gentler, 
“super-unleaded” 10% ethanol blend. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, we need to develop that kind of an attitude 
towards ethanol in this province — not that it’s harmful to your 
engine, not that it’s harmful to the environment, but rather that 
it’s a friend to the environment. And this deals, Mr. Speaker, 
with all engines. And I know that there is a concern amongst the 
public how this affects snowmobile engines, but, Mr. Speaker, 
it even works well in the snowmobile engines. So, Mr. Speaker, 
to those people who enjoy the snow and the winter recreation 
using their snowmobiles, they can safely use ethanol-blended 
fuels in their machines all winter long, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Farmers are ethanol’s biggest user. A recent survey conducted 
by the Iowa Corn Promotion Board confirmed that 91 per cent 
of Iowa’s corn growers regularly use ethanol. When combined 
with use by other customers, ethanol consumption totalled 1.6 
billion gallons in 2000 in the US; in 2001, use is expected to 
increase to 1.9 billion gallons. 
 
That’s an awful lot of ethanol, Mr. Speaker — an awful lot of 
ethanol, Mr. Speaker, and we’re missing out on the market. 
There is a market there, Mr. Speaker. We don’t even have to 
look to the US for the market. There is a huge market in Canada 
waiting to be tapped and we just have to get on the ball, Mr. 
Speaker, and be a part of it. 
 



580 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

We’re talking, Mr. Speaker . . . While we’re talking here, 
Manitoba and Alberta are already investigating it and getting 
ready to proceed. They’re getting the capital investment, Mr. 
Speaker. In Saskatchewan we need to create the environment by 
the government, Mr. Speaker, to encourage people to invest in 
the industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
In doing that what they have to do is give those investors the 
confidence that they will be allowed to proceed, not 
unrestricted, Mr. Speaker, but on a level, fair playing field 
without having to compete against the government and their 
own tax dollars. 
 

“Throughout the Midwest, ethanol is widely available,” 
says Trev Guthmiller, executive director of the American 
Coalition for Ethanol . . . But outside the Midwest, it’s 
spotty.” 
 
That likely will change, he adds. The Bush Administration 
recently denied California’s waiver to exclude 
ethanol-based fuels. This will open a huge market for 
ethanol. Plus, legislation that establishes a national 
renewable fuel standard may triple ethanol use in the next 
decade, Guthmiller said. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it looks like the American jurisdictions are 
moving towards a national policy on ethanol. We need to do the 
same in Saskatchewan. And I don’t know, and I haven’t heard, 
of any initiatives by the government to approach our 
neighbouring provinces, to approach the federal government to 
move ahead on a national ethanol strategy. 
 
If we could get the federal government on side, Mr. Speaker, 
because they are the ones that are promoting the Kyoto accord, 
the reduction of CO2 emissions, so they should come on-board, 
Mr. Speaker, to use ethanol as one of those means to reduce our 
CO2 emissions from our fuels that are burned. So we need 
access, Mr. Speaker, to the Ontario, to the British Columbia, to 
the Quebec markets to do this, Mr. Speaker. And to do that we 
need federal government co-operation, the setting of a national 
standard for ethanol usage, and the promotion, Mr. Speaker, of 
ethanol. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Now we like to blame the provincial government, Mr. Speaker, 
for all of the taxes on fuel. And while I would like to say they 
deserve that reputation, Mr. Speaker, I can’t do so because 
while the provincial government charges 25 cents a litre . . . 
excuse me, 15 cents out of the 25 on fuel, the remaining 10 
cents a litre is charged by the federal government. So we need 
to have federal government co-operation, Mr. Speaker, on this. 
 
Now the provincial government is talking that they’re prepared 
to develop the industry; that’s good. Now they need to 
co-operate in allowing that fuel to enter the marketplace. We 
also need to have federal involvement, Mr. Speaker, to allow 
that fuel to enter the marketplace in other jurisdictions. Both, 
Mr. Speaker, need to reduce the taxes on ethanol-blended fuels. 
 
When you look at it, Mr. Speaker, you’re going to approach 
someone who is retailing gasoline. Let’s use the co-op as an 
example. You’re going to approach the co-op and say, we want 

you to sell ethanol-blended fuel. That’s a mix of, let’s say 10 
per cent — 10 per cent ethanol versus 90 per cent gasoline. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the co-op doesn’t produce ethanol. The 
co-op produces, at their refinery, gasoline. So naturally they 
want to market gasoline, not ethanol. So there needs to be some 
sort of an encouragement in there, Mr. Speaker, to give them a 
reason to market ethanol in their gasoline. A reduction in the 
fuel tax — fuel excise tax — is that reason, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The same with someone who produces oil. Now I don’t know 
for sure . . . I know the co-op was involved at one time in oil 
production. I don’t know that they still are; they may well be. 
But for a company who is producing oil, refining the oil, 
marketing the oil, Mr. Speaker, again there’s no incentive for 
them to sell ethanol. They’re in the business of selling — 
producing, refining, selling — gasoline so they need to have 
that incentive, Mr. Speaker, to sell blended fuels, to sell the 
ethanol. 
 
Part of that incentive, Mr. Speaker, has to come from 
involvement by the provincial government, part of it has to 
come through involvement by the federal government, Mr. 
Speaker. We need both jurisdictions, as is happening in the US 
in development of the ethanol industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Fuels like, Mr. Speaker, again to quote, fuels like E85. Now 
I’ve never heard of E85 before, Mr. Speaker, so I’d like to 
explain a little bit about what E85 is. E85 is 85 per cent ethanol 
and a 15 per cent gasoline mix. Now that’s not what we’re 
talking about producing in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, or 
selling. 
 
But however, Mr. Speaker, more and more stations in the US 
are selling E85 every year. More automobiles and more pickups 
are also available for its use. And as the magazine points out, 
this is an industry still in its infancy, a fuel still in its infancy, 
Mr. Speaker, but it does move away from the majority 
consumption of gasoline and the emissions related to that, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other ethanol backers are working with the 
automobile and pickup manufacturers to include more vehicles 
that burn E85. Currently consumers can buy these vehicles in 
16 states. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if you live in an area that still doesn’t offer 
ethanol — this is what the magazine says — you don’t have to 
accept it. And the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, don’t 
have to accept that we do not have ethanol in all of our 
gasoline. Guthmiller says, go to fuel dealers and ask them to 
make ethanol available. Let people know where there is a desire 
for it to be sold. That’s what we had to do in the Midwest for 
the last 10 to 15 years. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s taken a while for that industry to develop 
there. If you go to Minnesota right now, indeed that industry is 
a fairly strong and vibrant industry because the state of 
Minnesota put it place the economic environment that allowed 
that industry to grow to development and to provide a very 
worthwhile economic generator in that province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, ethanol development in this province has a 
good future. But it only has that future if we allow it to happen. 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 581 

 

Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party has a plan on how to do 
that. By putting in place the economic environment that would 
allow the capital investment, the generation of the products and 
the sale, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re glad to see that our plan is in agreement now with 
the plan being put forward with the government. It’s not exactly 
the same thing, but it’s pretty close, Mr. Speaker, pretty close. 
The only question is who owns it? 
 
And again I’ve gone over that, Mr. Speaker. On our side we 
believe that private industry, private investors . . . the co-ops as 
an example, they have refineries. There’s no reason they also 
couldn’t be involved in the generation of ethanol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, all of those, all of those areas, Mr. Speaker, are 
available . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I hear the member 
from Saskatoon Southeast talking about credit unions. Indeed 
credit unions, Mr. Speaker, could invest, could be one of the 
capital resources that would help develop the ethanol industry. 
Mr. Speaker, when I was the president of my local credit union, 
we looked for opportunities such as this. My local credit union 
wasn’t big enough, Mr. Speaker, to be able to provide the 
capital funding for an ethanol plant, but we would certainly 
have been very interested in being a partner in that kind of 
development along with other credit unions and other investors 
in our area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So there is a role to be played by the co-ops. There is a role to 
be played by the credit unions, Mr. Speaker, but there is one 
group that needs to keep their fingers out of that pot, Mr. 
Speaker, and that’s the government. The government’s role is to 
create the economic environment, not to be the owner, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there is also the cattle industry component to 
this very issue. Ethanol is only one part of it. You need to 
develop . . . it takes one part of the plant of the biomass that 
you’re using. You need to utilize the rest of it, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s where the cattle industry comes in. You take, Mr. 
Speaker, that biomass that remains, and you feed it to cattle, 
Mr. Speaker. And this would be another area in which would be 
of benefit to Saskatchewan. 
 
As my colleague from Cypress Hills was pointing out that right 
now, Mr. Speaker, we ship our grain to Alberta. Our grain 
follows the cattle we ship to Alberta, and we ship our kids to 
feed that grain to those cattle, Mr. Speaker. And we need to 
break that cycle, keep those cattle, that grain, and those kids 
here, Mr. Speaker; creating a development in Saskatchewan, 
paying taxes in Saskatchewan. And we all benefit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I believe this is an industry that is well 
worthwhile, that we need to do all that we can to encourage, 
Mr. Speaker, and that encouragement needs to be done in view 
of an economic environment, not as government ownership. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Motion negatived. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much. I am very pleased 

this evening to have the opportunity to enter into the debate as it 
relates to the development and the growth of the ethanol 
industry in our province. 
 
I want to say first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, that throughout 
the course of the last decade or so we’ve seen a great deal of 
work that’s gone forward in putting together a ethanol strategy 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
I can remember some years back in our part of the province, in 
the community of Grenfell, where a economic development 
group got together and tried to build an ethanol industry in our 
area. However, Mr. Speaker, I think with all of the initiatives 
and the incentives that were attempted to be provided by the 
community and the local investment, that challenge, Mr. 
Speaker, was very difficult for them to achieve. 
 
And so by and large, through the course of the past year, a year 
and a half, Mr. Speaker, we’ve been working very closely 
through our office, through the Rural Revitalization office, with 
people who have had a great deal of expertise in the work 
around the development of ethanol in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I heard, Mr. Speaker, on a couple of occasions today, from 
speakers opposite, on this side of the House, talking about the 
success of the Pound-Maker plant in Lanigan. And we should 
be reminded, Mr. Speaker, that the Pound-Maker plant in 
Lanigan really had a lot of its origins through a group of 
investors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Pound-Maker plant required investment from private 
citizens of the area. It required investment, Mr. Speaker, from 
the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool. And it had some investment, 
Mr. Speaker, I should tell you, from the provincial government 
as well. And so through the course of the development of the 
Lanigan plant, Mr. Speaker, it had a variety of number of 
players in putting that project together. 
 
And I was interested, Mr. Speaker, on a number of occasions 
today where members opposite talk about, and in the inclusion 
of the motion this evening of where we both support, Mr. 
Speaker, the importance of this industry to Saskatchewan, but 
how in fact the opposition, Mr. Speaker, talks about how you 
can’t develop an ethanol industry in Saskatchewan and only 
need to use private sector dollars to do that. 
 
And I want to say first and foremost, Mr. Speaker, that when I 
review and read some of the recommendations of the ACRE 
(Action Committee on the Rural Economy) committee . . . And 
the ACRE committee now, Mr. Speaker, has on its committee 
the individual by the name of Brad Wildemen, who others have 
referred to here this evening as well. And Mr. Wildemen, Mr. 
Speaker, has been leading the campaign in Saskatchewan in 
terms of growing and building the ethanol industry. And one of 
the things that Mr. Wildemen would tell you, and the ACRE 
committee would tell you, that one of the most difficult tasks 
today in developing an ethanol industry in Saskatchewan is to 
find significant capital dollars to do that. And the ACRE 
committee has enunciated that on a number of fronts, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And so what we should pay attention to in terms of the 
development of the ethanol industry, Mr. Speaker, is how in 



582 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

fact it will be financed and capitalized over the next while. And 
ACRE will tell you, Mr. Speaker, that you can’t build an 
ethanol industry, by and large, Mr. Speaker, in this province 
unless we start looking at how the provincial government 
might, or through CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), or how public investment might be associated 
with some of that development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so I say to the members opposite that when they talk about 
the development of the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan, they 
should not rule out holus-bolus the need for investment of 
public money to build the industry. 
 
I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, this evening about the 
visions that a number of people in Saskatchewan have about 
building this industry. We have, I think, today somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 35 to 40 communities across Saskatchewan 
who have said, Mr. Speaker, that they want to see an ethanol 
plant in their community. And the reality, Mr. Speaker, is that 
when you take a look at the kind of development that’s required 
in building the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan and the kinds 
of resources that we have in our province today and the kind of 
capital that’s required and the access to the domestic market, in 
all likelihood, Mr. Speaker, the development of 30 to 40 plants 
in Saskatchewan is not likely. 
 
And more likely, Mr. Speaker, what we’ll see in this province at 
the end of the day is somewhere in the neighbourhood of a half 
a dozen to a dozen plants that will be functional in 
Saskatchewan and will be not only building the ethanol 
industry, but will be also building the subsidiaries of the 
livestock industry. 
 
And I heard, Mr. Speaker, today that as a number of the 
members opposite stood in their places and talked, they talked 
about the value of this industry that it has to rural 
Saskatchewan. And there is no question, Mr. Speaker, about the 
value of what the ethanol industry has to our province or the 
commitment or the involvement and investment that it will 
make to our province. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Clearly, Mr. Speaker, when we build the ethanol plants in 
Saskatchewan — and build them we will — it has a tremendous 
impact on what happens with the grain industry in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, on our grain industry. Because this 
will provide for us in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker, an 
opportunity for us to market our grain yet to another venue, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Secondly when you take a look for example of the 
Pound-Maker model of which I think, Mr. Speaker, we should 
be paying some attention to in this province, we see 28 of the 
investors today or 28 farmers who live in that area who actually 
invested in this plant and today own this plant outright, Mr. 
Speaker. Not only do they own the feedlot but they also own the 
ethanol plant. And throughout the course of their work and as 
we see this model developing we’re hoping to see an 
association of a number of livestock venues around it, feedlots 
that will be surrounding the ethanol plants across the province. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, it will allow for us to provide forage 

growth and production in those areas of which the livestock can 
be fed with. It also provides a new opportunity for people who 
want to move or transition from the current growing of crops 
into livestock and provides a brand new avenue, Mr. Speaker, 
for a whole host of people who want to get into the business. 
 
And secondly, Mr. Speaker, on this front what I hear often and 
what ACRE reports to me . . . or thirdly what I hear often, Mr. 
Speaker, from a number of people from across the province 
who talk about the ethanol development they say that they want 
to be also participants in the investment, Mr. Speaker. As they 
are in the Lanigan project. Today people want to add the 
value-added to their operations. And the way to add value to 
your operation, Mr. Speaker, is to have an investment in the 
ethanol plant today. And this is one of the ways in which I think 
we can grow the industry with private investment, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to talk a little bit, Mr. Speaker, today a little bit about 
some of the offshoots that are also associated with the industry. 
Now I heard the member who just preceded me from 
Cannington speak about the importance of developing this 
industry only with private sector dollars and not putting any 
public money into this pool at all. 
 
And I want to say to the members opposite because they’re 
stuck on this piece, Mr. Speaker. We saw in the early . . . and 
throughout the course of the ’80s how the private sector in this 
province works; because we had the members of the day, Mr. 
Speaker, the government of the day make all sorts of 
investments, Mr. Speaker, encourage the private sector in terms 
of developing and building the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And what did we get, Mr. Speaker, in this province? We got a 
huge, huge debt in Saskatchewan. A $15 billion debt of which 
this province today, Mr. Speaker, struggles to work through in 
order to build our economy. And in this province today we’ve 
decided, Mr. Speaker, to make some public investment in 
primary sector growth. And we did that five years ago, Mr. 
Speaker, or four years ago, in the hog industry. 
 
And in the hog industry, members opposite would say to me, 
we should leave the hog industry in the primary production to 
grow on its own. Well we did that, Mr. Speaker, for the better 
part of a hundred years in Saskatchewan. And what happened is 
that we stayed, Mr. Speaker, at about 800 or 900 hogs in 
Saskatchewan for the last ten years with very little or no 
growth. And then when we make a public investment, Mr. 
Speaker, in the growing of the hog industry in Saskatchewan 
five or six years ago, and today, Mr. Speaker, we can report that 
our hog industry has grown from a million hogs to two million 
hogs in that short space of time, Mr. Speaker, which is through 
the public investment that we’ve made with private sector 
entrepreneurs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so when we take a look at what we want to do with the 
livestock industry in Saskatchewan and the ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan, we should be able to look at the kind of model 
that we’ve developed with the hog industry and transplant some 
of that, Mr. Speaker, into what we want to do in the growing of 
the beef industry and the ethanol. 
 
So I say to the members opposite that when the ACRE folks go 
about the province and speak with investors and speak with the 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 583 

 

private sector and speak with communities and speak with the 
investment houses, they say to them that what we’ll want to see 
in many fronts is that we have some public investment in this 
project. And so to build an economy of rural Saskatchewan 
today and to build an ethanol industry, we shouldn’t discount, 
Mr. Speaker, the opportunity for involvement of public sector 
dollars to have that happen, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this province, as my colleague says, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
grown our Saskatchewan economy on several fronts, and we’ve 
grown it because we’ve used the three engines of government to 
make it work, Mr. Speaker. We’ve used the engines of the 
private sector through the private-sector/public-sector 
partnerships of which we have many in Saskatchewan today. 
We’ve used the co-op model, Mr. Speaker, to help grow our 
economy in our province. And for sure, Mr. Speaker, we’ve 
from time to time used the public sector to grow the economy in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so unlike our members opposite, Mr. Speaker, we have a 
different method and a different model of growing the 
Saskatchewan economy of which ethanol will be a part of 
today, and the livestock industry. It’s to take all three engines, 
Mr. Speaker, and have those three engines work simultaneously 
and together to build a strong Saskatchewan economy using the 
co-ops, using the public sector, and using the private sector, Mr. 
Speaker, to move that along because we know throughout the 
course of the ’80s the private sector model alone did not work 
in this province. 
 
And we’ve experimented with it. We’ve seen it happen, and 
we’re hearing today again, Mr. Speaker, from the members 
opposite. They’d like to go back to that piece again and give the 
Saskatchewan people and the Saskatchewan community the 
same kind of debt and financing that Saskatchewan people have 
been struggling with since the 1980s, to try and pay that off and 
leave it . . . and the debt that they’ve left for our children and 
our families and our communities across the province. 
 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, that on this side of the House 
we’re not adopting that solace approach of the private sector 
development. We’re not adopting that, Mr. Speaker, in which 
we’re going to try to build an economy of which our 
community of Saskatchewan ends up with a huge growing 
public debt of which we’ve been trying to retire. That’s not the 
model, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going to be using on this side of 
the House. 
 
I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that today, as we look at developing 
this industry, I want to talk a little bit about the four or five 
different key areas or issues that are important for us as we go 
to build this industry. And the member from Cypress Hills 
talked about need for a lockstep approach, and there is a need 
here for a lockstep approach to move this whole industry and 
this process forward. 
 
First of all, we need to make some decisions about who in fact 
or what kind of models, Mr. Speaker, these new ventures are 
going to look like. Are these ventures going to be free-standing 
ethanol projects in Saskatchewan? Are they going to be 
free-standing facilities that are going to produce only ethanol in 
our province? Or are they going to have some other association 
that’s going to be tied to them which is the livestock industry? 

And I say, Mr. Speaker, if we’re only interested in 
Saskatchewan today to develop an ethanol industry with 
free-standing ethanol plants which consume somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 150 or 160 million litres of our domestic 
market, then we can do that probably with one or two plants. 
And somebody will come into our province and they’ll invest 
fully in that plant and we’ll have two operating ethanol plants in 
Saskatchewan which will employ somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 40 to 50 jobs. We can do that, Mr. Speaker. 
That can be one of the models of which we choose. 
 
And as I listen to the members opposite today speak from their 
places, this is what I hear most from them. That we should 
develop an ethanol industry today. We should let the private 
sector develop it. They can pick the locations across the 
province from which they want to do it. Bring in the public 
money . . . bring in their own investment money, and what 
they’ll do, Mr. Speaker, is they’ll create 40 or 50 jobs in 
Saskatchewan. They’ll capture the 150 or 160 million litre 
market that we have in our province and that will be the 
economic development of which they drive. That’s one of the 
models from which I hear the members opposite speak a great 
deal about. 
 
Well I’ve got to tell you, Mr. Speaker, that if we’re going to 
develop an ethanol industry in Saskatchewan in the way in 
which we want to do it, it should, Mr. Speaker, be tied to . . . it 
should be tied to the livestock industry. And it should be tied to 
the livestock industry in synch, because this is where the growth 
of our Saskatchewan community is going to be. And this is 
where the growth of our Saskatchewan community will come 
from, Mr. Speaker, because that’s exactly where we want to 
take this. Now maybe some people talk about the second model, 
Mr. Speaker, about what comes first. Maybe the ethanol 
industry is the offshoot of the livestock industry, and it becomes 
part and parcel of what happens in that piece, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so what we can do I think, Mr. Speaker, is two things here. 
In my view this project or these developments across the 
province need to tie themselves to the livestock industry 
because this is where our potential for greatest growth in our 
province is today. We can take a million head of livestock that 
we have today, and we can grow that to two or three million 
over the next couple of years, and that’s what my department 
and our targeted levels are at. And we can do that, Mr. Speaker, 
by tying them closely and associating them closely to the 
livestock industry, to the feedlot industry because that’s the 
second model in my view that I think, Mr. Speaker, that we 
have a tremendous amount of potential. 
 
Now some people will argue, and I’ve heard it on that side of 
the House again today, that most of the plants in Saskatchewan 
might look like the 70 or 80 or the . . . (inaudible) . . . litre 
operating plants in Saskatchewan and that will be our model. 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, we need to take a look at some of the 
models that we have like the Lanigan’s which run at 20 or 30 
million litres of which they have 30 and 40 . . . or 25 to 30,000 
head that are tied to that particular plant. And that particular 
plant, Mr. Speaker, employs, that particular operation employs 
somewhere in the neighbourhood of 35 to 40 jobs in that 
particular area. And that’s the kind of modelling, Mr. Speaker, 
that I think we want to see across the province as we build the 
industry. 



584 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

Secondly, Mr. Speaker, I think we need to talk a little bit more 
about the lockstep process when we talk about what we’re 
going to do with the producers because the producers in 
Saskatchewan are saying to us that they want to also be 
investors in the projects. They want to be tied to that. And so 
we want to ensure, Mr. Speaker, that as we build the ethanol 
industry, the producers across the province will have an 
opportunity to invest in it and get the kind of valued-added 
opportunities that today we have from diversifying a rural 
economy and diversifying our agricultural economy. And that, 
Mr. Speaker, will assist us in doing that. 
 
Thirdly, Mr. Speaker, and I’ve talked at some length about the 
importance of the investments and from that prospective we’ll 
be working closely with communities and are working closely 
with communities today to see what kind of local investment 
dollars are available. We’ll be working closely with the 
industries of which . . . with the financial institutions who can 
provide some the funding for these kinds of projects. And 
clearly, Mr. Speaker, we’ll be examining the kinds of 
participation that we need to have as it relates to the public 
investment because this is from the perspective of which ACRE 
is concerned in terms of being able to build the industry in our 
province. 
 
And I was very interested as the members opposite spoke for 
some length today about the way in which the industry is going 
to, is going to develop itself and how and who were first, sort 
of, off the mark, Mr. Speaker, in terms of building and 
developing the industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
And I was very pleased, Mr. Speaker, to see that the member 
from Victoria . . . Regina Victoria tabled the information that 
showed, Mr. Speaker, that through the course of the leadership 
campaign, early in . . . late in 2000 and early in 2001 were . . . 
Members who were involved in that leadership race, Mr. 
Speaker, travelled across Saskatchewan in a significant fashion 
to all parts and all sectors of rural and urban Saskatchewan, and 
talking about how in fact we could grow the rural economy in 
this province. And members who were involved in that 
leadership campaign, Mr. Speaker, talked about how, by 
developing the ethanol industry, by developing the livestock 
industry, that we would make a difference in growing our rural 
economies and growing rural Saskatchewan. 
 
And so when the members opposite stand up in their places, Mr. 
Speaker, and say, well in September, September of this past 
year, our leader stood up and made a pronouncement about how 
important ethanol is to the future of Saskatchewan, and the 
credit that they’re taking for being first off the mark on the 
ethanol piece, Mr. Speaker. But what happened is that they’ve 
been about a year behind the kinds of discussions that were 
being held, Mr. Speaker, in this province, in every part of 
Saskatchewan as our members were travelling the province and 
talking about this industry and the value of this industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So when we talk about, Mr. Speaker, who is it who’s going to 
lead this industry, I have to say, Mr. Speaker, it will be 
members on this side of the House who brought this vision 
forward, Mr. Speaker, more than a year ago. 
 
And I have, Mr. Speaker, here in front of me this evening, a 

press release that was issued I think, because a number of 
members across were talking about the strength of the new 
agricultural critic and how, in fact, this critic has been the leader 
in terms of promoting the ethanol industry. And how the Leader 
of the Opposition . . . the Leader of the Opposition from 
Rosetown talks about the value of this individual and what 
she’s done. 
 
And I want to read parts of this, Mr. Speaker, because this is the 
important piece as the Leader of the Opposition speaks about 
his new critic. And he says this: well as the caucus is — and I 
quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Well as the caucus is meeting this morning and I will be 
asking the (and he names the individual, Donna Harpauer 
who was the deputy critic of Agriculture and who is from 
the Watrous constituency) to take the position of the chief 
agricultural critic, at least until the end of the session when 
we’re going to have or just consider the entire caucus 
restructuring and might have some of the changes by the 
provincial government structure overall. Donna is from the 
farm in the Lanigan area and is very familiar with the 
agricultural issues. I know that she will be a very 
competent and capable person for the industry. She 
recognizes the importance of agriculture because living and 
working on a farm and being part of the farming operation, 
and is very current with agricultural issues. And having 
been Bill Boyd’s deputy critic for Agriculture, she has been 
working on a number of agricultural issues already. 

 
(21:30) 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 
 

In fact, Donna Harpauer was the key person in our caucus 
who put together our ethanol policy. 
 

. . . is what the leader says. 
 
But then he goes on to say: 
 

Donna has a very high profile on the ethanol issue and is 
becoming well known throughout Saskatchewan because 
she has a vision for agriculture. 

 
. . . Mr. Speaker, is what in fact the Leader of the Opposition 
says. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, I was going through some of my 
literature, Mr. Speaker, as it relates to the member from 
Watrous, who is now the new Agricultural critic. And then the 
Agricultural critic said to The Western Producer one day, just at 
the end of last year, when she was asked by one of the reporters, 
and this is the question that the reporter asked. How would the 
ethanol production over the next three, four, five years and the 
increase in the industry solve any long- and short-term growth 
problems? What would it be, Mr. Speaker? 
 
And Harpauer says this, and this is what it says, this is the quote 
from the member. She said: “I don’t know”. The ethanol 
production, I don’t know. Like, we are looking at that as one 
point as to how we can look at the agriculture industry as a 
whole. 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 585 

 

She doesn’t know, doesn’t know it, doesn’t like it, and doesn’t 
understand it, Mr. Speaker, is what this quote says. It says, the 
reporter says, how will the ethanol production over the next 
three, four, or five years increase in the industry solve any 
short- or long-term growth problems at all? The response by the 
member is it won’t. It won’t, Mr. Speaker, is what she said. 
Like, we are looking at that as one point as to how we can look 
at the agriculture industry as a whole. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you, the opposition leader 
stands up and makes a long dissertation about how in fact this 
ethanol industry was developed by one of his key members 
today, sitting in this Legislative Assembly, who was talking 
about how in fact the ethanol industry is going to grow in 
Saskatchewan and she was the person who crafted it first, Mr. 
Speaker. And I can’t hardly understand what she said about it, 
Mr. Speaker. I can’t hardly understand. 
 
And it says, she doesn’t know how in fact it is going to help the 
province over the next two or three or four or five years. She 
doesn’t know how it will help the Saskatchewan economy, Mr. 
Speaker, over the next three or five years. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, you don’t have a clue about 
how you’re going to deal with the agricultural industry in the 
next couple of years. You don’t have a clue about . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. I just remind the member to 
continue his speech through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Sorry, Mr. Speaker, I got a bit carried 
away. I’ll look directly at you, Mr. Speaker, and I want to say, 
they don’t have a clue about what we’re going to do with the 
agricultural industry. 
 
And I heard speaker after speaker today stand up and talk about 
how we’re going to develop the ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan and not one of them, Mr. Speaker, not one of 
them talked about how it would be developed in Saskatchewan. 
They wouldn’t tell us about what the model is but they told us 
how they’re going to . . . not to invest in it. 
 
They told us how not to invest in it. They didn’t talk about how 
the communities would be involved, didn’t give us any ideas of 
the kind of modelling that we would see in Saskatchewan. You 
know why, Mr. Speaker? Because that party opposite has 
absolutely no understanding, no appreciation, and no belief in 
fact, Mr. Speaker, that we can grow rural Saskatchewan again 
anyway. 
 
Don’t believe it, Mr. Speaker. And we hear it on a regular basis 
from those members, Mr. Speaker. And today, Mr. Speaker, we 
hear it. Today we hear it from the member opposite, Mr. 
Speaker, who says . . . the agriculture critic has no 
understanding. She doesn’t know what the ethanol industry will 
do in Saskatchewan over the next three or five years, Mr. 
Speaker, doesn’t know it. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, I listened to the member today from 
Cannington as he got up in his place and he talked at length 
about the investment within the private sector and he talked 
about Hi-Alta. And a number of people today are talking about 
Hi-Alta, Mr. Speaker, and how in fact that’s going to impact 

our provincial economy and our provincial operations of the 
insurance industry. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, this is one of the most 
hypocritical arguments that they’ve made this week, Mr. 
Speaker. Because I heard the members opposite the other day 
say to me, when we de-insured the crop insurance, Mr. Speaker 
. . . We said in Saskatchewan we’re not going to be in the crop 
insurance industry any longer. And what did the private sector 
say to us, Mr. Speaker? The private sector across the province 
wrote us and said, we very much appreciate that the 
Saskatchewan Crop Insurance agency today is no longer 
providing the spot loss hail. 
 
I have a letter, Mr. Speaker, from the agencies of the crop 
insurance across the province thanking the Government of 
Saskatchewan from getting out of competing with the private 
sector. That’s the letter that we got. And what does the opposite 
member say today, Mr. Speaker? The members opposite get up 
today in the House and say, you know what? You should not be 
competing with the private sector is what they say. And we get 
out of competing with the private sector, Mr. Speaker, and what 
do they say? You should be getting back in, Mr. Speaker. You 
should be still in there; you should be still in the crop insurance. 
And I don’t know which it is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I’d like, in the next few days, Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Watrous to explain to me how it is that they don’t support the 
government’s decision to come out of the crop insurance 
program, Mr. Speaker. I’d like the member from Watrous to 
explain for us, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like the member opposite 
to explain to me how in fact in this province today we’re going 
to build an ethanol industry where we don’t have the group 
investment, Mr. Speaker, of the private sector, the corporate 
sector, and of the public sector, Mr. Speaker, along with the 
private sector individuals and the producers, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
be interested in learning that. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, our 
government, Mr. Speaker, will work collectively to build a 
strong agricultural industry. It will work to develop a strong 
ethanol industry in our province and we’ll work closely with all 
of those communities, Mr. Speaker, who are currently on our 
page. And we’ll be doing that, Mr. Speaker, in partnership, Mr. 
Speaker, we’ll be doing that in partnership with our 
communities. Because that’s the way on this side of the House 
we do our business, Mr. Speaker, and that’s how we’re going to 
grow our rural economy. 
 
And that’s how we’re going to grow rural Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, because we have a vision for rural Saskatchewan in 
terms of rebuilding it, redesigning it through the kinds of work 
that we’re putting in today, Mr. Speaker, through a variety of 
different fronts, through our CommunityNet programs, Mr. 
Speaker, and how we’re building schools in rural Saskatchewan 
today, Mr. Speaker, and how we’re supporting the infrastructure 
in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those are the kinds of things that we’re doing today. We’re not 
going to adopt for a minute, Mr. Speaker, we’re not going to 
adopt for a minute the kinds of practices and principles that we 
have of the people across the way from us. We’re not going to 
adopt those, Mr. Speaker, because those models, Mr. Speaker, 



586 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

we’ve had tested in Saskatchewan throughout the 1980s. We’ve 
seen what that works like, Mr. Speaker, on that side of the 
House from those kinds of people, from that kind of party 
philosophy, we’ve seen it, Mr. Speaker, in terms of what 
happens. And, Mr. Speaker, it didn’t work — it didn’t work — 
it didn’t work in the 80s and it won’t work again because 
Saskatchewan people, Mr. Speaker, will not tolerate that kind of 
. . . they will not tolerate that kind of policy, Mr. Speaker, will 
not tolerate that kind of philosophy, will not tolerate, Mr. 
Speaker, that kind of investment in our province any longer. 
Because that’s not the approach the Saskatchewan people are 
prepared to have. 
 
And so today, Mr. Speaker, I take . . . well I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, I hear a noise from the Saltcoats constituency this 
evening, Mr. Speaker, because the member from the Saltcoats 
constituency continues to say, Mr. Speaker, that you shouldn’t 
be investing in the public sector. He said the public sector, Mr. 
Speaker, should not be investing in the growing of the 
agricultural industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the member from Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, today in 
his riding, Mr. Speaker, today in his riding we’re building hog 
barns. And we’re building hog barns today with private sector 
and public sector investment. 
 
But that’s not what the member from Saltcoats wants, Mr. 
Speaker, the member from Saltcoats wants us not to build in his 
constituencies. He doesn’t want us to build in rural ridings, Mr. 
Speaker. What he wants us to do, Mr. Speaker, well the member 
from Saltcoats . . . the member from Saltcoats wants to make 
. . . wants the private sector, Mr. Speaker, to do the work and 
the member from Saltcoats, Mr. Speaker, doesn’t believe in 
public sector involvement to grow the industry. 
 
Well on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’re going to 
grow the industry in Saltcoats, Saskatchewan. We’re going to 
grow it in Canora, and we’re going to grow it in Cypress Hills, 
Mr. Speaker, because we have a vision for Saskatchewan and 
those members have no idea, Mr. Speaker, no idea of growing 
Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to say, Mr. Speaker, that the 
building of the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
will cover off both fronts for us, Mr. Speaker. It will help us 
with the emergency strategy; it will grow us with our energy 
strategy in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I remember the . . . I listened carefully to the member from 
Sutherland when he talked about the importance of the work 
that we’re doing today with wind power, Mr. Speaker. And how 
in fact wind power in Saskatchewan will assist us in meeting 
some of our green plan in the province. And the member from 
Greystone . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the member from 
Greystone, thank you very much. I appreciate the correction. 
The member from Greystone. And the member from Greystone 
who talked about the ethanol piece and the importance of the 
energy and the green plan. 
 
And I want to this evening, Mr. Speaker, pay my appreciation, 
and I know on this side of the House, to the member from 

Qu’Appelle, from Regina Qu’Appelle, because through the 
course of the summer, Mr. Speaker, of the last summer, the 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle travelled the province, to all 
corners of the province, Mr. Speaker, met with industry, both in 
the oil and gas industry, met with producers, met with models 
of where the ethanol industry was being developed, Mr. 
Speaker, travelled outside of our province. 
 
The member from Rosthern stood up today and said he was in a 
meeting in Minnesota and he was the only one who . . . he and a 
couple of his colleagues were the only ones who traveled 
outside of Saskatchewan to examine what’s happening with the 
ethanol industry. Nobody else except he did it. And maybe the 
member from Watrous went, but if she did, didn’t learn much at 
that exercise, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to say that the member from Regina Lumsden 
travelled, Mr. Speaker. He travelled the province, travelled 
outside of the province and prepared, Mr. Speaker, a very 
detailed report, Mr. Speaker. A very detailed report on what we 
should be doing from an economic perspective and 
development plan in terms of the strategy of growing the 
ethanol industry in Saskatchewan because, Mr. Speaker, on this 
side of the House, we understand the importance and the value 
of growing the industry, growing the ethanol industry in the 
province. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve done it. And tonight, 
Mr. Speaker, I want to pay tribute to the member who travelled 
the province because to a large degree he took the 
recommendations which were being provided by ACRE and 
built on those, provided some meat and potatoes onto the 
package, onto the structure of the ethanol piece, Mr. Speaker. 
And today, Mr. Speaker, what we have is we have an ethanol 
strategy that we’re rolling out for Saskatchewan communities, 
Mr. Speaker. And we’re going to do that, as I said, Mr. Speaker, 
because we understand the importance of growing rural 
Saskatchewan. We understand what that’s about. And we know, 
Mr. Speaker, through our consult and through our discussions 
and through our deliberations, Mr. Speaker, and through our 
deliberations with Saskatchewan people, we’ve had the 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to understand what we need to do 
with the ethanol industry. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, and I hear again the member from 
Saltcoats who continues to talk about how he wished he could 
be on this side of the House. I know, Mr. Speaker, because . . . 
And I think that the member from Saltcoats will need to change 
parties two or three more times, Mr. Speaker, before he ends up 
on this side of the House because I know, Mr. Speaker, I know 
that he talks a lot about . . . he talks a lot about being on the 
transition team, Mr. Speaker. And if there is anybody who’s 
been the captain of a transition team, we know who he is. It’s 
the member from Saltcoats who has been the captain of a 
transition team because he’s seen more people transitioned 
through this House, Mr. Speaker, and more leaders transitioned 
than we care to count. And so we know who the leader of that 
is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So tonight, Mr. Speaker, I want to . . . Mr. Speaker, tonight I 
want to attach my support, Mr. Speaker, to the work that we’re 
doing in building the Saskatchewan economy around ethanol. 
I’m going to attach my support to it, Mr. Speaker. I know with 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 587 

 

farm organizations and farm leaders, of which we meet on a 
regular basis, of which we meet through our investment council 
. . . we have an extension of our investment council where we 
have farm leaders and farm organizations who sit beside us. 
We’re building, Mr. Speaker, a package for Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re building a strategy for Saskatchewan of which we’re 
going to see an enhanced agricultural economy, which we’re 
going to see growth in the agricultural industry, which we’re 
going to see an enhanced livestock industry because of the work 
that we’re going to do with ethanol. We’re going to see stronger 
communities, we’re going to see stronger infrastructure 
because, Mr. Speaker, we believe in rural Saskatchewan and 
we’re working with rural Saskatchewan people to make a 
difference. And ethanol will be very much a part of that 
strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And tonight I attach myself in support of the work that we’re 
doing, Mr. Speaker, to building the ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(21:45) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased to stand and enter into the debate on ethanol, as I think 
we’re aware in this House that there is quite a movement in my 
constituency relating to ethanol. I would just like to make a 
couple of comments about the previous speaker’s comments 
when he talked about our ag critic and our member from 
Watrous and made, I think, some disparaging remarks about it. I 
would suggest that the member from Watrous has better 
knowledge of the agricultural issues and has a better 
agricultural mind than all of those members on that side put 
together. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — That’s including the Minister of 
Agriculture because he’s the only one that knows anything 
about agriculture on that side — and that’s very, very limited. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Talk about the member from Watrous 
and her knowledge about ethanol. At least she had the intestinal 
fortitude to attend an ethanol conference and knows more about 
it than any member from that side, even though the minister 
claims that the members there travelled around the province. 
Did they get off the bus? They travelled around the province but 
did they get off the bus? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the way the minister was talking, I 
think the minister lost it. However, I have to say . . . I may have 
to retract that because I don’t know whether he had it to start 
with. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister talks about a vision for 
Saskatchewan. I would suggest that his vision for Saskatchewan 
has blinders on. Now, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit 
about the ethanol and the ethanol industry. I’m extremely 
supportive of the ethanol industry in this province. One of the 

impediments that we have and I’m worried about still and I 
spoke about the other day, is government involvement in the 
industry. 
 
Now the minister sits and talks about how the government is 
promoting private industry, and I think it was about five times 
in his speech he said, what we build — we being the 
government. Well our view is the government should get out of 
the road and let the ethanol industry go on its own — set a level 
playing field and get out of the road. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we talk about the Crown 
involvement, and I’m still worried about Crown involvement in 
ethanol. It bothers me because if the government, which they 
used our ethanol policy, if they would’ve used the whole 
ethanol policy of the Saskatchewan Party I would’ve been very, 
very pleased because we stated in our policy that we would 
legislate an ethanol blend. And we would legislate it worded 
such that it’s in advance — in advance. This would allow 
investors a guarantee that there would be a market for their 
product in this province. 
 
What do the other side do? What does the government 
introduce? They said we will in the future, we will in the future 
legislate a blend. Well how does that attract an investor? How 
could anybody trust the government? How can an investor put 
money down on the auspices that we might, in the future, put an 
ethanol blend in the legislation? We had the intestinal fortitude 
to say we will do it up front. We will legislate a blend in 
ethanol, and some member foolishly stated on the other side 
that, well you’re going to import ethanol; well let’s not be 
ludicrous about this. We’ll put an ethanol blend in that at a 
certain timeframe. It’s there, rather than do it retroactively. 
 
So my concern, Mr. Speaker, is if you don’t put the ethanol 
blend in legislation at the start, you don’t get investors, or you’ll 
have a harder time getting investors. Now we hear the 
government suggest that, well if we don’t get investors, we’ll 
get CIC involved. That’s the last thing we want to hear is have 
CIC involved in it. My goodness. Now what we’d have is 
another Crown corporation. Now the last thing we need in this 
province is another Crown corporation. I think we’ve done 
enough suffering through some of the Crown corporations. We 
don’t need it anymore. 
 
But I was just reading an article, I was just reading an article, 
and it just jumped out at me from this article, and I want to 
quote. It says, “The function of socialism is to raise suffering to 
higher level.” So that’s what they wish to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would like to talk specifically about 
ethanol in my constituency. The minister gets up, the Minister 
of Agriculture gets up and says, oh we had talked about ethanol 
long before you did on your side of the House, long before. 
Well I’m not sure if the minister even knew how the spell the 
word when we were talking about it. We’ve talked about 
ethanol for years and years as a way to reduce gas emissions in 
this province and in the world. 
 
However now we get into some planning of ethanol, and the 
minister talks about and the government talks about how happy 
they are. They’ve introduced this ethanol plan which was really 
ours to start with. But I would like to point out that the town of 



588 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

Shaunavon on the 11th of September of 2001 had already had 
their meeting on ethanol. Now I wish the government could 
suggest that they were in advance of that, which would 
absolutely be ludicrous. 
 
Now the town of Shaunavon and their regional economic 
development association have been extremely proactive in the 
development of ethanol. Their concern, as is mine, is 
government involvement. 
 
I met with them again just this past weekend and the wording I 
get from the town of Shaunavon and the REDA (regional 
economic development authority) in that area is whatever you 
do, keep government out of our hair. And I want to repeat that 
— keep government out of our hair. So, Mr. Speaker, let’s let 
private industry run with this program. And the minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. I would just like 
to be able to hear the member. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — And the minister in his dissertation starts 
talking about, well we think we have a plan here, we have a 
vision, we’re going to have four or five plants, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe that’s about the way he put it. Well here we have again 
government involvement. Why would you restrict to four or 
five plants I ask? Why not let free enterprise run its course? 
 
If we could have 20 plants in this province, would members on 
that side of the House say no, no, no, no, our Ag minister said 
four to five plants. That’s all we want, that is our vision. I 
disagree with that. I totally disagree with that. 
 
If we could have free enterprise into the ethanol industry in this 
province, let them decide how many plants there should be. We 
have discussed in Shaunavon 160 million litre plant, a 160 
million litre plant. Right now as the dealings are going on 
they’ve got offshore sales for the whole production, right now. 
So why would we have a government that’s even thinking about 
restricting to four or five plants? 
 
The member from Cypress Hills touched on ethanol offshore 
sales. I know this is something totally alien to the government 
— offshore sales. They would rather spend money offshore but 
offshore sales . . . now all we have to do is look at places like 
Nevada, California, and look at the market, look at the market 
that we have. Why would we even consider looking at only four 
or five plants in this province? 
 
Now the spinoff. And we’ve heard everybody talk about the 
spinoff. We look at the constituency of Wood River and the 
value of ethanol that it has in the Wood River constituency. We 
look at it tied to a cattle industry. 
 
Well I want to digress just momentarily because the cattle 
industry and the ethanol industry do go hand in hand. And I do 
want to . . . when I say the ethanol industry and the cattle 
industry go hand in hand, and now we have members on the 
government side of the House said boy, this ethanol is our idea, 
I wonder how they could explain Pound-Maker being up and 
running and very successful. 
 
And that is a very successful plant. And the yip from the other 
side says, government money, I don’t know. 

Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the cattle industry. Now we 
want ethanol and the cattle industry melded together. We were 
— in spite of the government — we opened a feedlot in my 
constituency. The impediments to the operation and the opening 
of that feedlot was the Government of Saskatchewan. Every 
stumbling block to establish that feedlot was the Government of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
So now, now if we want to put an ethanol plant in conjunction 
with the feedlot, can you imagine the problems that are going to 
exist, the problems coming from this government? 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my constituency alone I have five organizations 
that have talked about, and they have talked to me about an 
ethanol plant with feedlots. Five in my constituency. And we 
have a Minister of Agriculture who gets up and said, we should 
have four or five in the whole province. Well give your head a 
shake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in a constituency like Wood River, if you have a 
feedlot and an ethanol plant, look at the spinoff businesses and 
industry that creates. And I know my colleague from Cypress 
Hills talked about it. If you have a 30,000 head feedlot, or two 
or three, and I can see in my constituency having 10 to 15, that 
might produce or be compatible with maybe three ethanol 
plants or four ethanol plants, I don’t know, depending on the 
size. And we hear debate about, well a small plant is better, or a 
large plant is better. Mr. Speaker, again, let private industry 
decide which is the best size of plant. It’s just like somebody 
saying, which is the best size of feedlot. Let private industry 
decide. Let’s get out of the hair of private industry. 
 
But now if you have private industry in a feedlot and an ethanol 
plant, the spinoff jobs are unlimited — meat packing, slaughter 
facilities. 
 
But one of the things that’s very, very interesting is the choices 
it gives to farmers. The choices it gives to farmers, not only in 
the marketing — and I know the people on that side of the 
House really, really support the Canadian Wheat Board — but 
this gives farmers a choice. It gives the farmers a choice in what 
to plant. It gives farmers a choice in where they can sell. The 
options to the farmers are totally, totally increased. 
 
The money that the farmers will save in transportation costs, à 
la the Wheat Board which it costs them about a dollar twenty a 
bushel to ship to a port in Vancouver even though they wish to 
sell it to a pasta plant. And I should bring this in; why didn’t our 
pasta plant or why are they not going? It’s problems. It’s 
problems created by an NDP government and the Wheat Board. 
But we have choices for farmers. And I’ll use the example of a 
farmer in my constituency that baled his entire wheat crop — he 
baled it. He received, selling to a feedlot, $85 a tonne. His crop 
went three tonnes per acre. Well I would like somebody on that 
side . . . somebody figure out on this side math for those people 
on that side. That makes a pretty good dollars per acre — 255 
per acre on hard wheat, on hard wheat. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I would suggest that there’s no where in this 
country that you can grow hard wheat and get $255 an acre. So 
look at the possibilities it has for farmers throughout the 
province. 
 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 589 

 

(22:00) 
 
Also I would just like to touch base . . . again my colleague 
from Cypress Hills touched on it, and I’ve talked about this 
before . . . is providing a place for our feedlots in this province. 
From the feeders association, we ship 750,000 head of feeder 
cattle outside of this province. And we’ve talked about this. 
And I hope nobody on that side of the House is proud of it but 
we ship 750,000 head of feeder cattle outside of this province 
and they go to Alberta. 
 
Along with them — and I don’t hear any yipping from the other 
side because they know it’s true — along with that we ship 
grain. We ship grain from this province to feed those same 
750,000 head of cattle. And the very, very sad reality is, Mr. 
Speaker, we send our young men and women to feed 
Saskatchewan grain to Saskatchewan cattle in another province. 
Now how can anybody on that side of the House be proud of 
that? 
 
I think it is absolutely terrible that we even accept that. So what 
causes this? Can anybody from government stand up and 
honestly tell me what caused this other than the socialist 
policies of this province over the last 50 years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — So, Mr. Speaker, putting ethanol plants 
in conjunction with feedlots back in this province, at least we 
can keep our feeder cattle here. Hopefully we can keep our 
feeder cattle here and that will provide some jobs. Maybe even 
the ones that left for Alberta will come back. 
 
And the total spinoff industries are unlimited, well like I say, 
with meat-packing, slaughter facilities. And that, goodness 
gracious, that in itself might keep some youth in our schools in 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we know the forecast . . . we know the forecast from 
members opposite is we’re going to lose 35,000. What a 
forecast. They want to manage the downward spiral of the 
province, preparing to lose 35,000. Well, my goodness. 
 
So if we had an ethanol plant and feedlots, we would keep 
young people in this province. We would have jobs for people 
in this province and that would in fact — terrible word — but 
we would have more taxpayers in this province and we might 
have to keep some more schools open. Wouldn’t it be a 
problem for this government to have to open schools rather than 
close. If we could set up an ethanol plant and create a couple of 
hundred jobs in my constituency, for an example, we may have 
to open a school rather than close them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, my throat is getting sore so I’m 
going to end my comments here. As you can see, I’m very, very 
much in favour of the ethanol industry in this province. 
 
I want to close by saying this ethanol industry in this province 
is . . . could be a boom and should be a boom as long as we 
keep the government out of the way of the whole program. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, well I think I’ve just 
about heard it all tonight. I am almost convinced that there is 
nothing that ethanol can’t do. It is going to open schools; it’s 
going to have the rural economy rebuilt; it’s going to have 
people moving into this province; we’re going to have an eight 
billion litre industry; we’re going to have the private sector 
booming; we’re even going to get a good speech out of the 
member from Wood River. 
 
I can hardly wait to the motion where we get to debate who 
invented the light bulb so the members opposite can try and 
take credit for that too. This is nonsense that we’ve heard today. 
 
All we needed to do today was to stand up in the House; not 
fight over who was going to take credit; recognize the good 
work that had been done by the communities, by the investors, 
by the proponents, by the people that sent us here; and approve 
the simple motion that was in front of us to say that we agree 
with the government’s policy and that we wanted the 
government to move forward. That’s all we put forward today. 
 
Nothing in the original motion, Mr. Speaker, calls on us to 
congratulate the NDP. Nothing calls on us to say that this was 
the responsibility of the member for Regina South or the 
member for Qu’Appelle. This simply said that this policy was a 
positive policy, that we should move forward with it, and that it 
was worth endorsing by this Assembly. 
 
But member after member on that side has stood up to say oh 
no, we thought of this first. I’ve got a big surprise for 
everybody in this House. The idea didn’t come from anybody in 
this House. The idea came from the people working in their 
constituencies. That’s where the idea came from. And you 
know what? It didn’t come in the last year or two years, it’s 20 
years — 20 years. That’s where we’re at. 
 
And do you know why we’re moving forward with this policy 
today? Because it makes more sense today. We’ve got a 
situation where oil prices are up so it makes sense that we can 
substitute in ethanol into the gasoline without inflating the 
price. You want to know why it makes sense today? It makes 
sense today because we can attract the kind of capital into the 
province to build these plants today. That’s why it makes sense 
today. 
 
You know why it also makes sense today, Mr. Speaker? It 
makes sense today because we’ve got communities focused on 
working together. That’s why it makes sense today. And it 
makes sense today, Mr. Speaker, because we’ve got the 
technology which helps bring the price of this down. 
 
Now I know the member from Wood River wants to take credit 
for this. And I’m very happy, I am very happy that there is a 
very good proposal coming forward from the constituents in his 
riding of Shaunavon, in the Shaunavon area of Wood River. I 
want to tell you that it was a very positive meeting that I had 
with them as they outlined to me what their views were on how 
we should move forward. And I think the member for Cypress 
Hills did a fairly articulate job, an eloquent job, of stating that 
earlier today. This was a positive proposal where the 
community was coming together. It was going to work with 
other communities. It was going to work with rail companies. It 
was going to build a good ethanol proposal. 



590 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

This is similar to what the member for Melfort-Tisdale 
should’ve been standing up and talking about also. There is a 
good proposal potentially coming forward from the Tisdale 
area. There’s a good proposal in Yorkton, in Melville. All 
across this province, there are good opportunities. 
 
But instead 10 after 10 tonight, we’re sitting here debating an 
opposition amendment because they want to take credit for it. 
We could have dispensed with this motion hours ago. We 
could’ve moved on with our additional business, and we 
could’ve shown a point of unity in this Assembly rather than 
sitting there and listening to speeches as to who said what first. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s certainly entertaining. I’m sure it makes for 
good television. I doubt anyone’s begging us to go back to the 
shopping channel. 
 
But it does kind of make you wonder when we have an 
opportunity to debate and to move a simple motion that says 
this Assembly supports the ethanol policy released by the 
government, a policy that’ll create an environment for building 
a vibrant ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. I don’t see 
anywhere in here the words, New Democratic Party. I don’t see 
anywhere in here any reference to any of our leadership 
candidates. I don’t see any reference to the Leader of the 
Opposition. I don’t see anything partisan in this resolution. 
 
Don’t I wish I could say the same about the amendment. Don’t I 
wish that we could go back to our constituents and talk about 
how tonight we talked about the opportunities in those ridings. 
It started out that way. I think we had that opportunity. And 
what we had the opportunity to do was to go forward and talk 
about building this industry in a sensible way — not in a 
wild-eyed kind of way. This is going to at best be a 
400-million-litre industry on a grain-based industry. 
 
Why? Because when you move beyond 400 million litres worth 
of production, you’re starting to use more than a million tonnes 
of grain. When you start using more than a million tonnes of 
grain, the price of grain starts to move and changes the 
economics. That’s why. 
 
That’s what this policy is based on. It’s not based on the 
rhetoric of some opposition policy. It’s not based on the rhetoric 
of some Web site somewhere. This is based on economic 
reality. This is based on what the economists are telling us 
work. This is based on what the scientists have told us to work. 
And do you know what? This is based on what every members’ 
constituents have told us as we’ve been around the province. 
 
Now why don’t we go back to talking about what the original 
motion is and give credit to our constituents and give credit to 
our communities? Why don’t we? Instead we’ve now got to 
deal with this amendment in front of us. An amendment of 
grandstanding and partisanship which is not necessary — not 
necessary. 
 
It’s been entertaining to watch the members try to outdo each 
other as to whose idea this was. The member from Wood River 
barely even talked about the proposal that his communities were 
putting forward. But we’ve got an opportunity now, I think, 
before 10:30 tonight, to dispense with these motions and to get 
on and to show that all the members on this Assembly are 

agreeing with what the motion put forward by the member for 
Saskatoon Greystone said. 
 
We have an opportunity to endorse a sensible policy that I hear 
every member trying to take credit for. Let’s simply vote this 
motion off. Let’s simply say that we agree. Let’s get rid of this 
partisan amendment. And say that the Legislative Assembly 
supports the government’s approach. It’s a measured approach, 
it’s a rational approach. It’s not an approach that’s going to cure 
the common cold. It’s not going to cure every economic woe. 
But it will provide us with some of the basic building blocks to 
get an ethanol industry established here. What the size of the 
plants are isn’t specified in the policy, it’s not specified in the 
resolution. Who’s participating as investors isn’t specified in 
the resolution. It’s not specified in the policy. 
 
If there is room for private sector people to take up the . . . I 
have said time and again that that’s what this policy is here for. 
It will be a private-sector driven policy. I hear investors tell me 
that some of them want to know that the government will be 
there with them because they’re afraid of a change in policy. 
Well they know that they can take the word of people on this 
side of the Assembly. 
 
Now what I ask is that the members opposite join with us 
voting for a moderate, rational, measured, motion, for a 
moderate, rational, measured, approach. And that we get past 
the politics. We vote for the motion, and we move on. That’s 
what I’m asking for. I’m voting against the amendment if we 
get to vote before 10:30. And I will be voting in favour of this 
resolution put forward by the member for Greystone. Thank 
you very much 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order please. Order. Order, please. Order 
please. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s quite 
important that each of us have an opportunity to express an 
opinion on this very important topic. 
 
The ethanol production in Saskatchewan is at a stage that is 
about ready to take off. There is a lot of positives. We’ve talked 
about the positives on both sides of the House all afternoon. 
And I really believe that we can add one or two more comments 
here that I think are quite important before we run out of time 
on this issue. 
 
One of the things that I think has to be brought forward, Mr. 
Speaker, is the fact that when we want to put a value-added 
production in place in this particular province, there is always a 
problem in trying to attract the necessary interest of investors 
coming into this province. If you’re going to put a project of 
this size in place, this is going to require a lot of incentives and 
a lot of confidence by these investors. 
 
There is nothing that I can see that’s happened in this province 
in the last number of years that gives any kind of confidence to 
investors to put that kind of a gamble of their money into 
Saskatchewan because it is the confidence of the investment 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 591 

 

that is so important. If we can’t get the confidence of investors 
up, then we’re not going to get outside interest in putting these 
plants in place. 
 
These are very expensive plants, and there is a real need for 
outside investment because it is outside investment, not Crown 
corporation or public money, that is going to make a success. 
The business plans that are going to be put together on a facility 
of this size really, really requires the expertise of the long-term 
investment community. 
 
(22:15) 
 
Now that investment community, why would they choose to 
come here? 
 
Well is there an opportunity to make a return on investment? 
Potentially we would hope there would be. But you’ve got to 
remember that we’re competing in an investment world that is 
in competition with other provinces and other regions. 
 
We’ve seen the success of the ethanol industry in Minnesota. 
We’ve seen the investment success in other parts of the 
province. When I lived in Manitoba we noticed that in virtually 
all the rural communities there was investment placed in 
businesses and in production that we don’t see in this province. 
And the reason for that is because there was a confidence by the 
investors, both outside investors and investors within the 
province itself. 
 
From the experience that we’ve seen in this province, people 
are very reluctant to put large amounts of money forward. An 
example was brought up again today with the insurance 
company that we talked about in Hi-Alta. Here’s a situation 
where an insurance company wants to do business in 
Saskatchewan and it is a real concern both to the insurance 
industry and also the investment industry that they’re coming 
into this province. 
 
And here we have found that there is taxpayers’ money and 
Crown corporation money involved in that competition. That is 
not the example of confidence that we need for large amounts 
of capital that is needed in this particular . . . the ethanol 
industry at this time. 
 
What we need is we need to stimulate those things that will 
draw the investors into our economy. We need to do things that 
we’ve outlined in our Grow Saskatchewan. We need to look at 
the corporate capital tax for instance. This is a major 
disincentive for investing in Saskatchewan particularly in a 
province that has very high corporate capital tax compared to 
the competition needed in other provinces, either in Manitoba 
or Saskatchewan. 
 
We need to put those kinds of lower incentives in place and not 
to mandate the success of the projects such as ethanol. I don’t 
think you can mandate it. I think you have to attract it and let 
the private enterprise decide whether they want to invest their 
capital to make it work, based on the fundamentals that are in 
place. And we need to put the proper fundamentals in place if 
we’re going to, like I said, attract that kind of investment. 
 
The question, Mr. Speaker, would be why are we pushing for an 

ethanol industry at this particular time? The idea of ethanol I 
think is very favourable but is it because the price of crude oil is 
such that we need to mandate part of the gasoline and fuel 
consumption in this province? Is it the price of crude that is 
driving this? I don’t think it is. 
 
I know at one time the price of crude was even higher. Why 
wouldn’t it have been the ideal opportunity at that time? 
Because after all ethanol is not a new science. Ethanol 
production has been around for a great number of years in other 
provinces, in Manitoba using the native grains that work best in 
that particular plant, certainly in Manitoba and ethanol 
production has been used here . . . is being produced here right 
in this province. 
 
So I guess the question would be, why are we trying to all of a 
sudden determine that ethanol is going to be the dream that’s 
going to solve all the problems in this particular province at this 
time? There is great advantage and we’ve acknowledged that. 
We just want to make sure that the fundamentals are correct and 
the project goes ahead on merits of business opportunity and 
return on investment and not on the basis of a mandated 
requirement that does not make sense. 
 
The reason that that is so very important is we’ve fallen into 
this trap before in other industries and other ventures in this 
particular province, Mr. Speaker, whenever we want to think 
that in this province we can move ahead and we can develop 
some kind of industry based on a natural advantage that we 
have because of production. 
 
For example, a pasta plant. One of the traps that we fall into is 
thinking that yes, we can grow good durum here. We have lots 
of durum. Therefore we should be able to make pasta and the 
world should come to us in order to buy our pasta supply. 
 
The trap is twofold, Mr. Speaker. First of all, the trap becomes 
the fact that the marketing of the product is the . . . is the part of 
the equation that has to drive this whole business plan. It’s the 
marketing, not the mandated amount that has to go in. If there is 
a business plan based on the marketing, then at least we’re on 
the right track. Without the marketing aspect, the operation is 
destined to fail or it will have to be perceived to be bailed out 
by public money or a Crown corporation. Because it’s 
established we don’t want to lose it, but the fundamentals to put 
it in place becomes very critical. 
 
And a good example again is the pasta plant that we’ve all 
heard about that was destined at one time for either Weyburn, 
maybe in Swift Current, or in North Dakota. Again, the same 
trap that we fell into in those discussions, a great business plan 
was put together, a whole vision for the industry was in place, 
there was great amounts of enthusiasm for the ability for 
farmers to be able to deliver the pasta . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Why is the member from Moose Jaw 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, on a point of order. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I would ask that you would 



592 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

call the quorum to determine whether there is sufficient number 
of members to conduct the business of the House. 
 
The Speaker: — That is not a point of order. However, I am 
obliged at any time that a member raises a quorum, to call a 
quorum. I would ask at this time that the Sergeant-at-Arms tile 
the doors and that the members take their seats. 
 
At this time, I would ask the Clerk to take the count. In order to 
do so, I would ask all members to please rise. 
 
Calvert Atkinson Hagel 
Lautermilch Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag Osika 
Lorjé Kasperski Goulet 
Van Mulligen Prebble Belanger 
Crofford Axworthy Junor 
Hamilton Harper Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
Kwiatkowski Heppner Draude 
Bjornerud Wakefield Elhard 
D’Autremont Wall Huyghebaert 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order please, order. 
 
Clerk Assistant: — Mr. Speaker . . . thirty-six. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. There being . . . order. Members will 
come to order. Members will come to order. There being more 
than 15 members present, debate will proceed. 
 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I’ll continue with 
the thought that I was, that I was putting forward at the time. 
And I was talking particularly about the marketing strategy of 
some of these major ventures that will certainly be a great 
advantage to us here in this province. 
 
The mistake that we ran into, as I was alluding to, Mr. Speaker, 
was the fact that when we put a facility or plan to put a facility 
in place, we never think far enough along the road that we 
should be directing the plant at what the market is going to 
require and what the market demands rather than the other way 
around. 
 
The other trap that we fall into as producers in this province 
would be the fact that the local and the regional investment into 
these projects — and certainly we’re going to need a lot of local 
and regional investment. That investment that the local people 
are putting in should be based on the fact that they are going to 
get a return on their investment on the value-added part of this 
operation, not on their ability necessarily to sell more of their 
product to this facility. The value added is the large markup and 
in fact the large value producer in this chain. That is where the 
return should be and not in the increased opportunity of 
delivery although that should be included, and if it is it should 
be just a bonus. 
 
There is other kinds of things that we should certainly be 
looking at in this province — ethanol happens to be the timely 
issue but there’s other things that, why haven’t they been 
looked at in this province as well? 
 

If this government has a vision for agriculture certainly it’s not 
hinged on one particular enterprise — ethanol. Why have we 
not heard about some of these other operations? For instance 
the pasta plant operation, where is that going? Is there any 
promotion on the part of this government? 
 
Why are we not hearing things that maybe would make just as 
much or more sense? Why not for instance the prospect of a 
noodle production plant in Saskatchewan? Certainly we can 
grow large quantities of the kind and quality of grain that would 
fit extremely well into noodle production. 
 
The fact is that the market for noodles is increasing at an 
exponential rate as we want in this province. We want to take 
advantage of every opportunity not only to diversify the 
production but also to take advantage of the value added that we 
can experience in these particular operations. 
 
Now the value added . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members of the Assembly it now 
being past the hour of 10:30 this House stands adjourned until 
tomorrow at 1:30 p.m. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:30. 
 


