















































Hansard: March 19, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 91 
 March 19, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Boyd: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased this afternoon to present a petition on behalf of 
residents of the Kindersley constituency and a number of others 
surrounding it. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reverse its decision to eliminate child maintenance as 
income from provincial low-income programs. 
 
And in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition comes from most of southwest 
Saskatchewan, west central Saskatchewan — people from 
Kindersley, Leader, Alsask, Marengo, Smiley, Piapot, 
Kerrobert — a number of other communities within the west 
central part of Saskatchewan. I’m pleased to present on their 
behalf. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators are from the city of Yorkton and the town of 
Langenburg, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker. I have a petition and the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide high speed Internet service to the community of 
Lanigan. 

 
And the petitioners, it’s signed from Lockwood, Jansen, 
Lanigan, Guernsey, Colonsay, and Drake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition and the prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 

government to work with SGI to develop a more fair 
guidelines for deductible on vehicles that are damaged as a 
result of attempted car theft. 
 

Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Allan and 
Watrous. I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12 they are hereby 
read and received: 
 

A petition concerning the fair guidelines for deductible on 
vehicles that are damaged as a result of car thefts; 
 
Resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation; 
 
Legislation making it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 
to be in possession of tobacco products; and 
 
A petition concerning repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I give notice that I shall on 
Thursday next move first reading of The Members Conflict of 
Interest Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following question. 
To the minister responsible for SaskPower: 
 

What was the total cost to SaskPower of the advertising 
campaign to heighten public awareness regarding the 
dangers involved in putting cutlery in toasters; (2) have the 
incidence of toaster tragedies significantly dropped since 
the public awareness campaign? 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that on day 
no. 9 I’ll ask the government the following question. To the 
Minister of Agriculture: 
 

How much in terms of dollars did each of the following 
parties contribute to the spot loss hail coverage portion of 
the 2001 Saskatchewan Crop Insurance program — the 
federal government, the provincial government, and the 
farmers? 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 9 ask the government the following question. 
To the Minister of Health: 
 

Are retail outlets located on First Nations reserves in 
Saskatchewan required to follow all the provisions of The 
Tobacco Control Act as passed by the Legislative 
Assembly and, specifically, are those outlets on First 
Nations reserves prohibited from displaying tobacco 
products as outlined in this Act? 
 

Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 



92 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased 
to welcome to the House and I’ll ask all hon. members and 
yourself, Mr. Speaker, to welcome to the House today a friend, 
acquaintance from my constituency, from the Sakimay First 
Nations, Mr. Richard Kay, who is sitting in the west gallery. 
Welcome to the Assembly, Mr. Kay. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I too would like to welcome 
Mr. Kay. And also we have some special visitors from the north 
country on the west gallery, and also from Regina. We’ll start 
with Regina, Victoria Gubbels, and we also have Joan Beatty, 
originally from Deschambault Lake, living in Saskatoon, and 
also we have Philip Morin, you know, from Southend, Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation, living in Prince Albert. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are working in the field of treaty and 
Métis issues as well as dealing with health concerns, and have 
been working in the field of communications. And in that 
regard, Mr. Speaker, I would say . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
So I would ask all members to say Ta wow and welcome to the 
special guests. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too, on 
behalf of the Saskatchewan Party official opposition, would like 
to welcome the members of the First Nations from Sakimay, as 
well as Mr. Morin. Welcome to our Assembly and I do hope 
you enjoy the proceedings today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And these folks are soon going to feel over welcomed, but I’d 
as well like to welcome Victoria Gubbels, who I know resides 
in my constituency and is an active member of the community 
and has in common with both Joan and Philip, who are with 
her, working hard to establish the kind of working relationships 
that are going to take us into a very healthy and successful 
future in Saskatchewan. So I’d just add my greetings. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — And it feels so good, Mr. Speaker, that it 
seems to me I should add my greetings too, and a special 
greeting to Ms. Joan Beatty, a constituent of mine. And I would 
like to join with my colleague from Cumberland in saying Ta 
wow. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to introduce to 
you and through you to all members of the legislature, Mayor 
Les Alm of Allan, who is here. He’s also a member of the 

Saskatoon District Health Board and the new regional health 
authority for the Saskatoon area. And I’d like to welcome him 
here as well as the other health people who are here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
also want to join my colleagues in thanking all the people that 
come to the Assembly today and for visiting this fine place and 
this hall of democracy. 
 
I will point out a special welcome to Joan. I know Joan 
travelled to Ile-a-la-Crosse many years ago, Mr. Speaker, to 
take a shot of me playing hockey. She had to return when she 
worked with CBC (Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) to get 
a high-speed camera. And also she didn’t wait too long for a 
goal to be made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I want to thank her for being a role model for many people 
involved in communications. And I also welcome of course 
Victoria and Philip as well. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Elevator on the Move 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you may 
have seen in the news a few weeks ago that one of the largest 
building moves in Western Canada was undertaken along 
Highway 22 which runs through the southern part of my 
constituency. 
 
A wooden UGG (United Grain Growers) grain annex was 
purchased by Mr. Robert Keyser of Cupar who operates a pulse 
processing business. He bought the annex in order to store 
lentils, chickpeas, and other crops, and calculated that it would 
be cheaper to buy and move the annex than to build new 
storage. 
 
This elevator is 10 metres wide, 30 metres long, and 30 metres 
high and is estimated it weighs nearly 1 million pounds. 
Moving this structure was certainly no easy task. 
 
In order to perform this tremendous feat, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Keyser hired Minty’s Moving from Manitoba to undertake the 
project. Minty had to design a new 142-wheel transportation 
system to stabilize and level the elevator as it moved down the 
highway. 
 
This move certainly created a lot of interest in the moving 
industry. As a matter of fact, there were people up from 
Nebraska to observe and learn about moving such a huge 
structure. 
 
The elevator travelled 40 kilometres from Lipton through 
Dysart, Cupar, and on to Markinch where it was set in its place. 
It travelled approximately 5 kilometres an hour and gathered a 
lot of spectators and onlookers as it moved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Keyser undertook this sizable project in spite 
of the fact that just recently this government gave taxpayers’ 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 93 

 

dollars to a competitor of his. I would . . . He finds himself in 
the uncomfortable position of having to compete with his own 
tax dollars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to congratulate Mr. Keyser on undertaking such a 
feat. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Places Rated Almanac 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to refer members to a recent publication called 
the Places Rated Almanac, which describes itself, and I quote: 
 

Your guide to finding the best places to live in the United 
States and Canada. 

 
This special millennium edition of the almanac looks at and 
ranks 354 metropolitan areas according to a number of criteria 
including living costs, job outlook, education, climate, health 
care, the arts, and recreation. It’s a good read, Mr. Speaker. I 
recommend it to all hon. members. 
 
Here are just a couple of findings from the publication, which 
I’d like to share with you. First, in the category of education 
opportunities which includes school support, libraries, and 
university options, no. 10 on the North American list, and no. 1 
in all of Canada, is not Calgary or Edmonton or Toronto, Mr. 
Speaker — no. No. 1 in Canada, Mr. Speaker, is my home city 
of Saskatoon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Here’s an even better one, Mr. Speaker. An 
even better one. In a list of North America’s 20 best small 
metro areas with a population of under 250,000 based on 
quality of life, once again first in Canada is Saskatoon, second 
in Canada is Regina. Just one publication’s opinion, you might 
say. It could be, Mr. Speaker, but I say it’s a very wise opinion. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

2002-2003 Imperial Oil Mixed Curling Championships 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 
March 13 to 17 the Estevan Curling Club hosted the 2002-2003 
Imperial Oil Mixed Curling Championships. It was evident that 
a lot of hard work, skill, and sportsmanship went into this event. 
But also evident was the fact that new friendships were made, 
old friendships renewed — friendships that will last long after 
the last rock was thrown. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Sunday the Yorkton team of Bryan 
Derbowka, Kathy Trowell, Gerry Adams, and Karen Cottenie 
were crowned provincial mixed champions. I ask all members 
to join me in congratulating Bryan and his team as well as 
extending our best wishes as they compete for the national title 
in Abbotsford, BC (British Columbia) in January 2003. 
 
I would also like to recognize Kent Rodgers and all the 

volunteers of the Estevan Curling Club who made this event a 
success. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

Catholic Schools for Tomorrow Award 
 

Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. For the first time a 
Canadian school division has won the Catholic Schools for 
Tomorrow Award. Mr. Speaker, the award is sponsored by the 
journal, Today’s Catholic Teacher, and was recently awarded to 
the Catholic school divisions in Saskatchewan. This award is 
given based on the recognition of integration of technology into 
the teaching and learning of students, faculty, and staff. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan submission began in May 2000 
and has resulted in the development of a Web site. The Web site 
is Catholic Curriculum Online and can be accessed from the 
Catholic section link on the SSTA (Saskatchewan School 
Trustees Association) Web site — www.ssta.sk.ca. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Dr. Helen Horsman, the chairperson of the 
project’s advisory committee and the director of education for 
the Moose Jaw Roman Catholic Separate School Division, will 
receive the award on behalf of all the province’s Catholic 
educators on April 4, 2002. 
 
To quote Dr. Horsman: 
 

This initiative goes well beyond the expectations of the 
founding partners. The idea emerged during a simple 
discussion among the provincial colleagues and has 
developed into something that is having a profound impact 
on Catholic education worldwide. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure all members extend their congratulations 
to all of the Catholic school divisions in the province. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Health Care in Hafford Community 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On Thursday 
evening there was a public meeting concerning the lack of 
adequate health care in the Hafford community. The Parkland 
board and staff gave an update on the district’s situation. 
 
Today Hafford Hospital has acute care beds, emergency 
equipment, health care, and a health centre, and an attached 
special care home but lack one important part of health care — 
the Hafford Hospital does not have a doctor. The citizens of 
Hafford want a doctor who lives in the community supplying 
health care services, like they’ve had for decades. 
 
The government action plan has basically closed the hospital, 
leaving Hafford and area residents without a doctor on a 
full-time basis. The action plan and Speech from the Throne 
spoke of the government’s high priority it gave for publicly 
administrated health care system that is accessible to all. 
Hafford does not have adequate health care that is accessible to 



94 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

the citizens of Hafford. When asked by the chairperson who felt 
they had adequate health care in Hafford, not one person in the 
hall put their hand up, Mr. Speaker — not one person. 
 
This government and its action plan has failed the citizens of 
Hafford. Is this any way to treat the pioneers who built this area 
of the province? People at this meeting overwhelmingly said 
no. They expect better from their government and their health 
care system. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Moose Jaw Farm Family of the Year 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, along with the Deputy 
Premier and the member from Moose Jaw North, I had the 
opportunity to attend the Moose Jaw Farm Family of the Year 
dinner, at which a Moose Jaw-area family was honoured. 
 
I don’t think we could have found a more deserving family than 
that of Doug and Melody Machmer who farm in the Baildon 
area. Doug and Melody began their farming life growing 
traditional Saskatchewan crops, and still do, Mr. Speaker. But 
in the past 12 years they have diversified their operation into the 
production and processing of organic herbs. Along the way they 
are providing jobs for others as well as their family. 
 
A few years ago we could not have used the word nutraceutical 
and Saskatchewan in the same sentence. Thanks to pioneers like 
the Machmers medicinal herbs like echinacea, yellow 
nightshade, and sea buckthorn are now part of a progressive 
farm entrepreneur’s vocabulary. 
 
I am delighted the Machmer family has been recognized, Mr. 
Speaker, because they have taken the buzzwords of modern 
farming and turned them into a reality: diversification, 
processing, and value-added. And jobs. All these words define 
their operation. The Minister of Agriculture was happy to speak 
to their award and I’m pleased to bring their success to the 
attention of the Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Arcola Community Raises Funds For New Rink 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the headline says, “Auction and supper pay off big-time for new 
rink.” The Arcola community last Saturday night put on an 
auction and supper of over 100 items donated by the 
community. Arcola is a community with pride in itself and a 
belief in its future. 
 
The rink burned down last September, Mr. Speaker, destroying 
both the skating rink and the curling rink. So the community 
has decided to rebuild on their own and not wait for any 
government money that might come — or might never come as 
most likely the case, Mr. Speaker. They raised $85,000, Mr. 
Speaker, last Saturday night on items as varied as a weekend of 
farm labour by . . . with . . . donated by Darcy Singleton, was 
sold for $600; pies, Mr. Speaker, which sold for $250 each; a 
Michael Lonechild painting, Mr. Speaker, a well-known Native 
artist in the area, sold for over . . . sold for $4,000. 
 

Overall, Mr. Speaker, this community is carrying on in its belief 
of itself and will do all the hard work necessary to make their 
community a success and a place that welcomes people to come 
and visit and to live in their communities. I would ask the 
Assembly to congratulate the community of Arcola in raising 
$85,000 from the community in one night. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Former Agriculture Minister’s Contract With Government 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner has now released his report on former NDP 
(New Democratic Party) Agriculture minister Eric Upshall. 
This report clearly indicates that Mr. Upshall misled the deputy 
minister of Agriculture in order to obtain a government 
contract. The report says, only after Deputy Minister Terrance 
Scott felt satisfied that Upshall had no direct involvement in the 
proposal did he agree to receive and consider the proposal. 
Upshall did in fact have a business interest in this survey 
proposal, and gave Scott incorrect information in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Eric Upshall obtained a government contract 
under false pretense in direct violation of the conflict of interest 
Act. What steps is the Premier taking to recover the $59,000 of 
taxpayers’ money that was paid out under this improper 
contract? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that this contract has been completed, and it’s been 
completed for some months. The contract was completed under 
the workmanship and penmanship of Mr. Durst. That report has 
been tabled to the ministry. That information from that report, 
Mr. Speaker, has been used in some of the work that the 
Department of Agriculture has been using in terms of typifying 
the kinds of families that we have in Saskatchewan today — 
rural farm families. 
 
That report, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve already indicated was 
completed in advance of any of the information that’s come to 
us through the Conflict of Interest Commissioner’s report, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Eric Upshall has now resigned, but he must be 
held accountable. And the fact remains that him and his partner 
improperly obtained $59,000 from a contract from Sask Ag and 
Food — $59,000 of taxpayers’ money. And Mr. Upshall misled 
government officials to obtain this contract. 
 
Will the government launch civil action against Mr. Upshall 
and his partner in order to recover this money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
member one more time that the department, along with the 
federal government, commissioned the report. When we 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 95 

 

commissioned the report, Mr. Speaker, we commissioned the 
report under the work of Mr. Durst. Mr. Durst completed his 
work for us; we have the document. We have used the 
document to provide us with some of the work, Mr. Speaker, 
that we’re doing, as I’ve mentioned earlier, on the typifying 
farm families in the province. 
 
I want to say to the member as well, that this matter, I 
understand, is in front of the courts. The courts are currently 
dealing with Mr. Upshall and Mr. Durst in having their own . . . 
their own event in terms of trying to sort out with whom the 
payment needs to rest. As far as the government is concerned, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve received our report, Mr. Speaker, and we’re 
using the documentation today to help us with our work. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So the question remains: will the government 
hold Mr. Upshall accountable? 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is now clear that Eric Upshall misled officials 
and violated the conflict of interest Act. However nothing can 
be done about it because of two gaping loopholes in the Act. 
First, Mr. Upshall cannot be prosecuted because more than six 
months have passed. And secondly, the Conflict of Interest 
Commissioner cannot take any action against him because he is 
not a current member. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this section of the Act specifically deals with 
former members, yet the Conflict of Interest Commissioner has 
no power to investigate former members. It does not make any 
sense. 
 
Will the government take immediate action to close loopholes 
that allowed Eric Upshall to violate the conflict of interest Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member, 
and I’m sure she’s full aware of this because yesterday the 
Premier had indicated when he was asked by the media — what 
will you do with this piece of legislation? — what the Premier 
had clearly said, and I say to the House today, that this 
legislation will come back; there are amendments that we will 
be making to the legislation to close the kind of concerns that 
the member has raised and we have raised. 
 
But I want to say to the member opposite and to you, Mr. 
Speaker, that this is the legislation that this government brought 
forward. 
 
This isn’t something that the opposition had one day woke up 
and said, we should have conflict of interest legislation in this 
province. 
 
We brought the legislation forward and we put the legislation 
before the people of Saskatchewan, and now we realize that that 
legislation should be strengthened. And this government is 
going to strengthen this legislation and the way in which we 
work on behalf of Saskatchewan people and the province’s 
people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Ownership of Great West Brewing Company 
 

Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of CIC (Crown Investments 
Corporation of Saskatchewan). Yesterday we learned that the 
NDP government through the Crown Investment Corporation 
has converted its $2 million debenture in Great Western 
Brewery into equity shares. 
 
Reportedly this was very, very unexpected by the board of 
directors and other shareholders of Great Western. There was 
no discussion, no indication that CIC was about to make this 
move. It was a pure and simple — in one fell swoop — 
takeover, Mr. Speaker. 
 
My question is to the minister: when did this minister get such 
an uncontrollable craving to own a beer company? Why did 
CIC convert its debenture so suddenly and without any 
indication of its intentions to the board or shareholders of this 
company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well the fact of the matter is, Mr. 
Speaker, that back in 1995 the employees came to Crown 
Investments Corporation looking for assistance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, back in 1995 Crown Investments Corporation, 
through its investment, essentially had 80 per cent ownership. 
What has just occurred in the last day is the conversion of a 
debenture, Mr. Speaker. It clarifies the ownership of the 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think the employees of Great Western Brewing 
have been very appreciative of Crown Investment’s investment, 
and I’m sure that we look forward to a relationship into the 
future. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
there’s a big difference between being . . . having a debt or 
owning equity in the company, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think it would be a good idea if CIC would 
now offer its equity shares for sale. It would remove the 
government from a majority controller of the brewing company, 
into the private sector, by offering the shares up for sale. 
 
Members of the Great Western board believe that CIC is 
positioning itself to sell the shares and would become . . . that 
option. Yet, Mr. Minister . . . the minister told The StarPhoenix 
that selling the shares is not the intention at all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister, if it is not CIC’s intention to 
reduce taxpayers’ exposure by selling shares, why so sudden a 
move of a 80 per cent equity in this company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, here’s what the Chair of Great Western board, Vaughn 
Wyant said. Vaughn said that Great Western would not have 



96 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

survived, Mr. Speaker, without CIC’s financial help in the 
mid-1990s, and CIC has been patient, and I quote: 
 

. . . has been patient waiting for . . . (revenues) . They have 
been the beneficial owner, (he says), of 80 per cent of the 
brewery anyway. 

 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the member’s question about sale 
of the company. It is no secret, Mr. Speaker, that Crown 
Investments Corporation, in its investment strategy and 
investment policy, given the right scenario, is prepared to divest 
itself of the investment. No big secret; we’ve said that all the 
time, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this particular . . . with respect to this particular investment, 
there is not any apparent sale right now, Mr. Speaker. But as a 
policy-maker, as a member of cabinet, Mr. Speaker, given the 
right scenario, absolutely we would consider selling it. But the 
business needs to stay in Saskatchewan, and needs to employ 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, a few years ago Great 
Western needed support from CIC, and CIC came through. 
Now the company . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — . . . but now the company is on solid 
ground, thanks to the efforts of the management, staff, and 
employee owned of this successful company. 
 
CIC has an opportunity to recoup their investment, reduce the 
risk to taxpayers, and let the company continue to grow and 
prosper in the private sector, Mr. Speaker. Yet the minister 
seems intent to retain control of the brewing company. 
 
We want to know why. If they’re not going to sell, Mr. Speaker, 
will the minister please explain why they were in such a risk . . . 
in such a hurry to take an equity position in this company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, here’s what Ron  
Waldman this morning, also a shareholder in the company, said 
on the John Gormley show live this morning. He said that had 
CIC not acted as a venture capitalist and had not been available 
to the company in 1995, it is most likely — it is very highly 
likely — that Great Western Brewing Company would have not 
been an operating entity today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CIC invested in this company because we saw the 
value in keeping that company here in Saskatchewan, 
employing Saskatchewan people, and working with and 
partnering with the private sector, Mr. Speaker; not selling it off 
like those members would have done, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is our intent, as is with all of the investments in 
Crown Investments Corporation, Mr. Speaker, we would be 
prepared to sell them when the right scenario exists. That 

scenario does not exist with this company right now, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
now creates a very interesting situation. This is the same NDP 
government that regulates sales of beer, wholesales beer, retails 
beer, and now the government is a major owner of one of the 
biggest beer companies in this company, Mr. Speaker. Does this 
not open the doors for conflict of interest, Mr. Speaker? 
 
There are many other brewing companies in this country and 
also in Saskatchewan that are wondering how this will affect 
their market share — competing against the provincial 
government which they pay taxes to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that this is the same minister . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I’d like to be able to hear the 
member’s question in its entirety. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting that this is the 
same minister that last year was out on the Fishing Lakes with a 
bottle of Captain Morgan. Now he’s become the provincial 
brewmeister — or should I say minister — of this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister outline today what steps the 
government is taking to ensure that there is no conflict of 
interest now that the NDP is not only the brewer, the 
wholesaler, the retailer, and the regulator of beer sales in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I remind members in this 
Assembly and I remind the people of Saskatchewan that that’s 
the same party, the same members over there that told us to sell 
our interests in the Bi-Provincial Upgrader, Mr. Speaker, when 
we would have lost hundreds of millions of dollars, Mr. 
Speaker — hundreds of millions of dollars. We will not take 
advice from them about when we should sell, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to refer you, Mr. 
Speaker, to what their leader said and so the people of 
Saskatchewan understand that everything is up for sale with that 
party — everything in its power. I refer members to a speech to 
the Saskatoon business community by the leader of their party, 
Mr. Speaker. He said, and I quote: 
 

Premier Campbell expects to save millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars through his review, money that will be used to 
finance his aggressive agenda of personal and business tax 
cuts and balance the budget. 

 
A Saskatchewan Party government, Mr. Speaker, will launch a 
similar, core services review in this province within 30 days of 
taking office, Mr. Speaker. They want to sell everything, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 97 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investment in Retx 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister likes to talk about jobs in Saskatchewan. I have another 
question for the minister. His government, the NDP 
government, has now invested, spent $20 million on a company 
called Retx, which is an Atlanta, Georgia based dot-com. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I wonder if the minister could tell the House how 
many jobs in the province of Saskatchewan has this 
20-million-dollar taxpayer investment resulted in? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s Retx. But last 
Friday, Mr. Speaker, I stood in my very spot right here and 
announced the expansion of digital cellular service . . . Internet 
service, I should say, into 191 additional communities in rural 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — 191 more, into many of the 
communities that they represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel in its investments like with Retx, Mr. Speaker, has 
earned some $157 million above and beyond its expenses. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, if that member cannot connect the dots between 
revenue earned, Mr. Speaker — $157 million — and service 
delivered in rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know 
how he will ever understand. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. Speaker, we 
fully intend to connect all of the dots today, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister didn’t answer the question. We asked how many jobs 
has this $20 million investment in Atlanta, Georgia created in 
Saskatchewan? He didn’t answer the question, Mr. Speaker, 
because the answer is zero. 
 
According to Mr. Ching, the CEO of SaskTel, Don Ching, he 
has indicated that there has been one job created for a 
Saskatchewan person but that’s in Atlanta, Georgia. 
 
So the question to the minister is fairly simple, Mr. Speaker. 
How is a $20 million investment in an Atlanta, Georgia based 
dot-com company, how does that benefit Saskatchewan? How 
does that grow the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, if that member 
can’t connect the dots as I describe it, then there is a problem 
over there, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, jobs are important. I 
acknowledge that point — jobs are important; of course they 
are. But $157 million revenue brought back into here into 
Saskatchewan is also important, Mr. Speaker. Does that keep 
jobs in Saskatchewan? Of course it keeps jobs in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that member said that it’s important and they get 
up here day after day talking about increased service in rural 

Saskatchewan; we need cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. 
Of course we need cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. But 
we can only do it and we need to pay for it somehow — it’s by 
getting and earning revenues from investments that we make 
and SaskTel has done a very good job of that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister said that it’s not important how many jobs this 
company has created in Saskatchewan; what’s important is how 
much profit it’s generated for SaskTel. That’s what the minister 
said. So the question to the minister is this: how much profit has 
Retx generated for SaskTel? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said, SaskTel has 
a number of investments. Their record will show that they have 
done very well with their investments, Mr. Speaker. They have 
$157 million in the last several years that they have brought 
back to our province to provide service in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Again, Mr. Speaker, I say those members over there daily get 
up and they ask for cellular service in rural Saskatchewan. They 
ask for cell service, Mr. Speaker. I’m going to say to the people 
of Saskatchewan, I’ll tell you what cell service you’ll get from 
that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is to sell every Crown we 
own. That’s the sell service you’ll get from them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister likes to announce the 
opposition policy on Crown corporations. I’ll tell you what that 
policy doesn’t include. It doesn’t include hare-brained schemes 
like this, Mr. Speaker. It doesn’t include putting the interests of 
a dot-com in Georgia ahead of the interests of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister didn’t answer the question. How 
much profits has Retx brought in to SaskTel? He didn’t answer 
it, Mr. Speaker, because the answer is zero. The answer is that 
in the first year of this Crown corporation’s investment in this 
company, SaskTel on behalf of the taxpayers lost $265,000. 
How does investing $20 million in Georgia, creating no jobs in 
the province, and losing money so SaskTel has less money for 
cellular coverage, how does that benefit the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, that member’s 
criticisms are ridiculous. Today we have the member, Mr. 
Speaker, from Watrous petitioning us to provide high-speed 
Internet into her area, Mr. Speaker — petitioning us to do it. 
How do we do that, Mr. Speaker? You need money to do that 
— you need money to do it. 
 
SaskTel has a very good record as I have indicated. They have 
over . . . earned over a $150 million by way of their 
investments. Every year they . . . in the last number of years, 
every year they put money into rural Saskatchewan. In the last 
number of years, SaskTel has invested over a billion dollars into 
rural Saskatchewan by way . . . (inaudible) . . . one billion 



98 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

dollars. But you need to pay for it somehow, Mr. Speaker. Part 
of that is through the investments that we’ve made abroad and 
in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. SaskTel has just 
pumped another $2.6 million into Retx. Why? Well, Don 
Ching, tells us why — the hand-picked NDP CEO of SaskTel. 
He says, and I quote: 
 

The market has really tightened up with regard to this sort 
of company. You look around at any company that has a 
requirement for funds and doesn’t have an investor like 
ourselves (meaning SaskTel) those companies have gone 
bankrupt. 

 
In other words if Retx didn’t have the NDP pumping millions of 
dollars into it down there in Atlanta, Georgia, they might go 
bankrupt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP risking millions of taxpayers’ 
dollars to potentially protect an Atlanta company from 
bankruptcy? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, again we have the 
expert from Swift Current getting up advising us about our 
investment strategy, Mr. Speaker — the expert. And I’ll remind 
you — and I’ll remind you, and I’ll remind the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, what that expert advice would 
have cost us last year had we listened to him about the 
investment in SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker. It would have cost us 
in the hundreds . . . not in the hundreds but the tens and twenties 
of million dollars, Mr. Speaker, it would have cost us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SaskTel has a very good record as it pertains to 
investments, Mr. Speaker. A very good record as it pertains to 
investments. They need to earn this revenue so that they can 
provide the services right across this great province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
has already pumped $20 million into this Atlanta-based 
dot-com company. But it doesn’t end there. Don Ching says the 
company will likely need more money by the end of summer. In 
fact, one industry expert, the managing director of Kinetic 
Ventures says Retx, quote . . . here’s a quote, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Will need some big names and deep pockets to create a 
presence. 

 
In other words, Mr. Speaker, they need a pigeon and, here, the 
clucking is coming from that side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
because they found their pigeon in the NDP and SaskTel. And it 
doesn’t stop at $20 million. 
 
Don Ching says he’s prepared to give this company more. Mr. 
Speaker, how many more taxpayers’ dollars will the NDP risk 
on this Atlanta-based dot-com company before they put the 

interests of Saskatchewan ahead of the interests of a dot-com in 
Georgia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — They don’t like when we invest outside 
of Saskatchewan and when we invest inside Saskatchewan, they 
say we’re competing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t have it both ways, Mr. Speaker, unless 
you want to sell the Crowns and that’s exactly what they want 
to do. They want to sell every one of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to refer you to a poll, a CTV (Canadian Television 
Network Limited) poll that was done just last week, Mr. 
Speaker. It says: 
 

We asked you whether you thought the government should 
sell off Crown corporations to raise money. 

 
And you responded overwhelmingly and decisively. Only one 
in three said yes: 32 per cent of the respondents favour the sale 
of Crowns; 68 per cent said no. You, Mr. Member, are on the 
wrong side of the issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — I would ask the Minister of CIC never to 
speak directly to somebody opposite, but speak to the Speaker. 
Stick with it. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Don Ching is quoted in the Atlanta Business Chronicle 
saying: 
 

SaskTel will keep pumping money into Retx no matter 
what. 

 
He says, and I quote: 
 

If the venture market remains tight and Retx cannot secure 
funding from other sources, SaskTel is committed to seeing 
the company succeed. 

 
He says: 
 

In the end, if there was no other capital available to Retx, 
we would not allow the company to starve. 

 
That’s incredible, Mr. Speaker. This comes from a government 
that has been pleading poverty. This comes from a government 
that doesn’t have enough money for crop insurance, Mr. 
Speaker. They don’t have enough money for municipalities. 
They don’t have enough money for the North Battleford water 
supply, but they have $20 million and more for an 
Atlanta-based dot-com company. Mr. Speaker, where is this 
government’s priorities? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — And, Mr. Speaker, those investments — 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 99 

 

those $20 million investments — have brought $157 million 
back to Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to ask that 
member, the member for the party that belongs to a free 
enterprise . . . supposedly believes in free enterprise, Mr. 
Speaker, what is wrong with profit all of a sudden, Mr. 
Speaker? What’s wrong with profit? They bring $157 million 
back to Saskatchewan to provide the services that I stood up 
and announced here last Friday, Mr. Speaker, and somehow 
there’s something wrong with that, Mr. Speaker. I do not 
understand what the criticism is about. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 3 — The Correctional Services 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I move that Bill No. 3, The Correctional Services Amendment 
Act, 2002, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 4 — The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 4, 
The SaskEnergy Amendment Act, 2002, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 5 — The Apprenticeship and Trade 
Certification Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that Bill 
No. 5, The Apprenticeship and Trade Certification Amendment 
Act, 2002, be now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Horned Cattle Purchases 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 6, The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 

The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day, I would like to table a report of the Saskatchewan 
Legislative Library for the period ending March 31, 2001. 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Toth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
stand in proud support of the Throne Speech today and to focus 
and certainly bring some of the issues to the front here in terms 
of what the Throne Speech is trying to bring about in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I really commend the Government of Saskatchewan and 
our government for having the courage to make some of the of 
changes, Mr. Speaker, over the number of years that they have 
served in government. 
 
And one of the key components, Mr. Speaker, of the Throne 
Speech is the whole thing about families — the theme of 
families. 
 
And before I go any further, Mr. Speaker, I just want to say 
how proud I am to be here on behalf of the constituents of 
Athabasca and to espouse the values of Saskatchewan as a 
whole and certainly to talk about families. 
 
But before I go any further, Mr. Speaker, I want to, if the 
Assembly will indulge for a few minutes, to pay, to pay a 
special tribute to my colleague and to my friend and to 
somebody that has blazed a trail many years before me. And of 
course that is the member from Cumberland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Cumberland served this Assembly for many, many years and a 
very proud career he did have. And as I mentioned, he blazed a 
trail for many people. 
 
And I think a lot of people throughout the North and throughout 
the province can certainly thank him as well for being a role 
model and for certainly for being a person that has held his 
position in esteem, and something that he has prided himself 
over the years of holding for the time that he did hold office. 
 
I want to point out that when he talks about family, he 
appreciates, in some of his comments, Mr. Speaker, of the value 
that he received from his siblings and from his mother and from 
his father and from his community of Cumberland House and of 
course, the constituents of Athabasca. 
 
And it’s always important that we pay tribute, not that he is 
going to leave very soon, Mr. Speaker; I’m hoping he’s here for 
at least another two years if not three years. And the person 
that’s going to replace him, if it’s a male or a female, has got 
some very big shoes to fill, Mr. Speaker. 



100 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

And I just want to quote from a Northern Focus article, one of 
the papers that he certainly implemented as minister of 
Northern Affairs. He talked about being involved in politics for 
16 years, Mr. Speaker. And he actually came from the bush. 
 
And many of his discussions and conversations in the interview, 
Mr. Speaker, centred on family. And I think it’s important that 
we pick up on that because he talks about his mother; he talks 
about his father; he talks about his trapper’s cabin and the 
trapping life that he led as a young man. But he also talks about 
his brothers and sisters. 
 
And I want to point out that Cumberland House has given us 
one of the most impressive families that ever graced this earth, 
and I want to just very quickly quote some of his comments in 
recognizing his fellow brothers and sisters, themselves an 
impressive people. 
 
And first of all, and I quote from the article, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Josie runs an Aboriginal languages unit at Northern Lights 
School Division. Brenda is with Justice in The Pas. Millie’s 
in public relations at the Saskatchewan Indian Cultural 
Centre. Arlene is with INAC and Monica is a program 
coordinator at Joe Duquette. My brother Dean is a 
Northlands College director in Creighton. And Arthur, who 
died when he was 23, was a founding member of New 
Breed. 

 
So it really goes to show you that we have one of the many 
successful Goulet family members here in the Assembly. And I 
can tell you that as a member of northern Saskatchewan 
community and as a member of the Aboriginal community, that 
certainly the Goulet name is one name that we will respect, 
admire, and certainly hold in high esteem for some of the 
accomplishments they have had as a whole family, but more so 
through my friend and colleague, Mr. Goulet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, again I am quoting from 
the article and I mentioned the member’s name, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to point out that 16 years of this Assembly — a 
number of years in opposition and of course a number of years 
in government — there’s been just absolutely tremendous 
advancements made in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And we go through the list of things that he has done — 
everything from the forestry file to the commercial fishing file, 
working with the trappers, of course being the first-ever Métis 
cabinet member — that all of that is so very, very much 
important. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, above all else the qualities that he 
endeared and certainly brought to the office was the fact that he 
always kept his roots; he always remembered where he came 
from. He kept his language — it was very strong. And certainly 
today as we can see, he’s going back to education from whence 
he came from. 
 
So I think — I’m not sure I used that phrase right — but I just 
want to point out that he is going back to education. He knows 
that’s his higher calling — certainly not as high as this but 

certainly equal — in terms of trying to teach many young 
people about not only politics, but many other aspects of life as 
well. 
 
And I wanted to point out, Mr. Speaker, that the reason why 
families is an important theme — important theme in this 
speech. It talks about secure, safe families. It talks about 
employment. It talks about all the opportunities of the family 
unit. And more so . . . and I think the whole concept of family 
talks about all families, Mr. Speaker, whether you’re 
non-Aboriginal, Aboriginal, or not; that doesn’t matter. As long 
as we’re family, we’re able to build on each other’s strengths 
and successes and go from there. 
 
Well, in reference to the opposition, Mr. Speaker, I want to take 
a few minutes to also point out some of their fatal flaws. When 
the Governor General visited Saskatchewan, one of the things 
that Her Honour . . . Her Excellency pointed out was the fact 
that Saskatchewan, the province of Saskatchewan . . . the quote 
that she used was that there’s a province that turned adversity 
into opportunity, Mr. Speaker. And that really says a lot about 
the people out there in Saskatchewan, about how they are able 
to be very, very tough, resilient people that are able to adapt to 
many changes. 
 
And as I stand here as a member of government, and we talk 
about families, I recognize that family of people out there that 
stuck together and that build Saskatchewan. And what’s the 
most amazing thing to me, Mr. Speaker, about this opposition is 
no matter what is being done by the families, by the business 
communities, by the communities in general, and by people as a 
whole, this doom and gloom opposition party continues to call 
down Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to them — and I say to them, they are doing a great 
injustice to the people of Saskatchewan, to our history, and to 
what people in the rest of the country perceive us as in 
Saskatchewan, and that is a province that turns adversity into 
opportunity. 
 
Now again, we looked at some of the examples, Mr. Speaker, 
they talk about opportunity in Saskatchewan. The second thing 
out of their lips when it comes to opportunity, Mr. Speaker, is 
Alberta. And what we’ve often referred to the Saskatchewan 
Party as, Mr. Speaker, is the Alberta envy party. 
 
And the people of Saskatchewan have said to me time and time 
again: if the Saskatchewan Party do not believe in 
Saskatchewan, if they are intent on doom and gloom, if they are 
intent on showing that Saskatchewan is for sale, Mr. Speaker, 
and if they love Alberta so much . . . they are off to Calgary 
steady to try and get some money for their little political 
challenge here in the province, and if they love that province so 
much; and they have no confidence in Saskatchewan — well, 
we’ll see you later; move there. We got a province to build, Mr. 
Speaker, and that province is called Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we have families in this 
province that wants to turn adversity into opportunity, and all 
we hear from that party every day — every day, Mr. Speaker — 
is doom and gloom, doom and gloom. 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 101 

 

And what do they do, Mr. Speaker? They attack our health care, 
Mr. Speaker. They attack our highway system, Mr. Speaker. 
They attack our Crowns. 
 
Is there anything that that party likes in Saskatchewan? We on 
this side wouldn’t mind hearing about it once in a while, Mr. 
Speaker. And the people of Saskatchewan wouldn’t mind 
hearing about that once in a while too, Mr. Speaker. My plea to 
them, Mr. Speaker, is show some confidence, show some 
confidence in your own province. Show some confidence that 
business people will come and certainly many families and 
many communities will get on the bandwagon and will start 
building Saskatchewan as a family of communities, as a family 
of people, to become a very proud province that turns adversity 
into opportunity, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I beg and I plead with the Sask Party, stop spreading your doom 
and gloom. And every day, Mr. Speaker, every day, every day 
they come into this Assembly and no matter what you do it’s 
bad; it’s bad. And I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, the census . . . 
we talk about the census of the province as a whole . . . is that 
census will be updated and you will see that there are many 
more numbers in Saskatchewan than that party would like us to 
believe. 
 
Those numbers will go up, Mr. Speaker, because people are 
coming home and they do believe in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now I think the most incredible thing that I’ve seen in this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, is how in the world could you be so 
negative and have so much doom and so much gloom and 
non-confidence in Saskatchewan, and yet you want to be 
elected. Mr. Speaker, I think, I think that party is not knowing 
where they’re going or what their message is, and that’s why 
the people of Saskatchewan will never have them on this side of 
the House, Mr. Speaker, never. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — We stand up, we stand up as a family 
in this community, as a family in this province, and we’re going 
to defend Saskatchewan and her interests, Mr. Speaker, to the 
hilt. And we’re not going to go looking for answers in Calgary 
or Edmonton or Toronto, Mr. Speaker. We are going to look for 
answers in Ile-a-la-Crosse, we are going to look for answers in 
Saskatoon, we’re going to look for answers in Balgonie, Mr. 
Speaker — not in Calgary, not in Edmonton. If you want to go 
find answers there, we’ll see you later. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and the other most confusing thing about the 
opposition, Mr. Speaker, they are a confused lot, Mr. Speaker. 
They vote right but spend left. They vote right but spend left, 
Mr. Speaker. They vote right but spend left. I can’t figure that 
out. How do you do that? On this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker, we have a balanced approach: north, west, rural, 
urban, Aboriginal, non-Aboriginal — the balance, Mr. Speaker, 
is here. On that side it’s a confused lot. 
 
And every time they get up and ask a question: (a) they attack 
Saskatchewan; (b) they don’t know where they’re going; (c) 
they have no plan; and (d) all they want to do is make sure that 
they continue with their mantra of spending left and voting 

right. 
 
(14:30) 
 
So as a result of that confusion, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan will say no — no to the Saskatchewan Party and 
no to their non-belief in Saskatchewan families and 
Saskatchewan as a whole, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to them, I say to them shame on you. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members all know that all remarks are 
made to the Speaker and the Speaker does not really appreciate 
being told shame on you. Please keep that in mind. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to point out, I think the thing that’s very, very 
important in my whole analysis of where the opposition refuses 
to recognize the positiveness of Saskatchewan and the families 
we have in Saskatchewan, the economy, the environment, and 
all the things we’re trying to balance, Mr. Speaker, is to tell 
them to get with the program. Get with the program because 
you are elected here in Saskatchewan. You are supposed to 
represent your Saskatchewan values, your province. 
 
And instead of doom and gloom and trying to tear down this 
province, why don’t you get up once in a while and say, yeah, 
we are proud of something and this is what we’re proud of. We 
have not heard that from that opposition for day after day after 
day in this Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I will point out as well, Mr. Speaker, I will point as well 
that the people of Saskatchewan, the people that have left the 
province, they are looking at Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 
look at some of the values we have. And I’ll just give the 
Alberta-envy party a little example. 
 
Number one is Alberta may have 7,000 freshwater lakes, Mr. 
Speaker. We in Saskatchewan, we have 94,000, Mr. Speaker — 
not 9,400 — 94,000, Mr. Speaker. We are . . . Actually, Mr. 
Speaker we have the most lakes, and I think in western Canada, 
than any other province. And we have a beautiful province and 
we have many things that can be offered in tourism, in fishing, 
and the list goes on and on. 
 
I will point out, Mr. Speaker, to begin to espouse some of the 
values of Saskatchewan and some of the confidence and 
optimism that we should have to believe in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, then many people will come back. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have no question, I have no question in my mind 
that our Saskatchewan folks, Manitoba folks, Alberta, Ontario, 
they will come here. They will come home, to a home that is 
tolerant, to a home with a plan for the future, an exciting 
economy, and a place that welcomes all. 
 
But the first step we have to do is we have to have a good 
attitude, Mr. Speaker. And I say to every man, woman or family 
that left this province, they probably heard the Leader of the 
Opposition’s speech or one of the Sask Party’s speech 
somewhere, they became depressed, and then they left, Mr. 
Speaker. What kind of opposition party is that? Are they 
opposed to Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you there are 



102 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

many times I listen to their speeches and I feel like leaving. I 
think there is no hope here, Mr. Speaker. I figure that the 
Calgary streets are paved with gold, according to them. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is a great province and it’s 
time that we tell the Saskatchewan Party, up your attitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Now I ask the member one more time to be 
very careful about the way he phrases his sentences and to 
please make all remarks to the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Your . . . The other point I made is very 
important, Mr. Speaker, in terms of attitude, is that we begin to 
spread that message. And now I’ll point out to you that one of 
the quotes I’m looking at. And this of course is part of the 
National Post article — the eastern National Post, I might add. 
And in Toronto, Mr. Speaker, where they point out and the 
headline reads, “Saskatchewan: not the biggest, just the best.” 
 
Now I’ll read it out again, Mr. Speaker, for our Saskatchewan 
Party colleagues across the way. “Saskatchewan . . .” In case 
they haven’t heard it — “Saskatchewan: not the biggest, just the 
best.” So if the eastern media, Mr. Speaker, talks about how 
well Saskatchewan is doing, how well Saskatchewan is doing, 
then why don’t they get it, Mr. Speaker? Why don’t they get it? 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we talk about families. We talk about 
families, again continuing with the theme of families. I want to 
point out that we look at the Aboriginal community as a vital — 
a vital component of our Saskatchewan. It’s very important that 
we recognize that. Saskatchewan within the next 10, 15 years 
has . . . we have got indication that approximately one-third of 
our provincial population will be of Aboriginal ancestry, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now there is two ways you can approach it. We can have the 
doom and gloom scenario as proposed by the Saskatchewan 
Party or the Alberta envy party or we can do what we’re doing 
on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, is we are saying we’re 
embracing that opportunity. It is not going to be a negative, Mr. 
Speaker, it is going to be a positive. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, I would point out our First 
Nations brothers and sisters and our Métis brothers and sisters 
and all the Aboriginal community, they can add a tremendous 
amount to this province. And you ask any of those members 
there who have a few towns in their riding that would suffer 
dramatically if it wasn’t for the economic buying power of 
many of the First Nations that live around their community. 
They all know, Mr. Speaker, there’s many hundreds of 
examples of how the First Nations community and the 
Aboriginal community have propped up many businesses in 
small-town Saskatchewan through their stores, through their 
restaurants, through their service station, Mr. Speaker, so they 
add a tremendous amount to their economy. And yet what do 
we hear from these guys? Absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker, a 
big fat zero. 
 
And I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, this government over the years 
has spent $200 million to settle TLE (treaty land entitlement). 
It’s a huge issue, Mr. Speaker. And at the end of the day the 

TLE settlement, Mr. Speaker, will account to about 2 per cent 
of the total land mass of Saskatchewan. And yet $200 million is 
what we’re going to be putting down to assist that whole TLE 
process, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we’re going to . . . we’re not going to do it in Alberta. 
Alberta’s not going to do this, Mr. Speaker, and Manitoba is 
just beginning it. But Saskatchewan has led this file and we will 
continue to lead this file. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the North we recognize that families have 
challenges, families need employment, Mr. Speaker. They need 
to create opportunity for themselves and we have positions, Mr. 
Speaker, many people in forestry to become partners in the 
forestry . . . in the forestry industry so they don’t sit back and 
cheerlead the economy of forestry; that they’re an integral part 
of forestry, that they own some of these forestry opportunities, 
and that they direct and control the forestry activities in and 
around their communities, Mr. Speaker. That’s the first time 
that was done in North America, Mr. Speaker, and I would 
suggest to you that it may be the last. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I look across the way and I see some members 
from Saskatchewan Rivers, I see some other people from 
Shellbrook, and they’ve got a lot of good forestry opportunity 
there, Mr. Speaker. Good for them. We’re proud of that. We 
want to be part of that. 
 
Now the moment they get up and criticize some of the forestry 
activity in the North, all of a sudden we say well what’s wrong 
here? You’ve had the opportunity. You’ve had the opportunity. 
 
I looked at the member from Saskatchewan Rivers all day yell 
across here a number of negative things that Saskatchewan is 
doing, and yet in his own home riding there’s a great 
opportunity in forestry. And we say good for that opportunity to 
be there, good for the people of that region. Very important for 
the economy of Saskatchewan. 
 
But don’t criticize our northern opportunities when it comes to 
forestry. You should get up and you should cheerlead that 
particular aspect of why we think it’s important that the 
Aboriginal community be involved. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve not only done the employment opportunity, 
whether it’s TLE, whether it’s forestry, whether it’s ecotourism, 
any resource opportunity, we believe that there are families out 
there that need that opportunity. 
 
And I want to go on record as well to say that we support the 
families to bring in basic services — basic services — to the 
First Nations community and the northern communities, and the 
small communities. SaskTel for example, Mr. Speaker, they 
have done a call centre in which you can do Saulteaux, Cree, or 
Dene. And you call there and they can converse with you in 
your own language, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We also got the Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
SaskTel, they went from 30 per cent of the First Nations 
community to 65 per cent hookup, Mr. Speaker. That’s an 
incredible jump from 30 to 65 per cent. 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 103 

 

We have spent in SaskTel, $25 million in the South and $39 
million in the North to make sure people and families in the 
North and in the First Nations community have opportunity to 
do Internet, the telephone, and the basic service many of us in 
southern Saskatchewan take for granted. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when their provincial cousins were in power they 
spent $300 million in SaskEnergy hookups. And I can tell you 
that six First Nations were hooked up at that time, Mr. Speaker 
— six. 
 
I can tell you today that this government has certainly got close 
to 60 — 10 times the amount of First Nations community 
hooked up to natural gas. And, Mr. Speaker, that supports many 
families — bringing down those heating costs, Mr. Speaker. 
And this government done that. 
 
If you look at the number of agreements we have, in particular 
with SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming Authority), there’s 
900-plus workers, Mr. Speaker — 900 plus. 
 
You look at the Cree courts; for the first time in history we have 
two Aboriginal judges. And that’s something that we should all 
be very proud of. 
 
We have The Métis Act, the recognition of the Métis veterans, 
Mr. Speaker, the flag, the cart, and all of course the historical 
communities of Cumberland House, Ile-a-la-Crosse, Green 
Lake, and the list goes on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we have had some great success. But they’re 
not resting on our laurels. We know that there’s much more 
work that needs to be done. 
 
So on this side of the House we believe in the families, Mr. 
Speaker. Families of Aboriginal ancestry and families of 
non-Aboriginal ancestry. We believe of including both families 
into one solid economy that’ll serve all the people of 
Saskatchewan for years to come. 
 
Now last year we thought it was very important that we look at 
the response from the opposition — what was the opposition 
going to do, Mr. Speaker. And there’s no question, no questions 
on the positive developments of what this government has been 
trying to put in place, Mr. Speaker. No recognition of some of 
the northern challenges, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, they, along with the member from 
North Battleford, tried to hoist The Métis Act. They tried to 
hoist The Métis Act, and we stood up and we said no, that Act 
is not going to be hosted . . . hoisted; that Act is going to be 
proclaimed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that Métis Act is a good Act, Mr. Speaker. It has a lot of 
challenges ahead of it but it will, in the final analysis, in the 
final days, prove to be a very valuable Act recognizing the 
Métis people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they tried to hoist that Act. And the question I 
had, the question I have is: why would you hoist it? What is the 
logic behind hoisting that Métis Act. 
 
There was no logic, Mr. Speaker. There was pure politics. 

There’s pure doom and gloom and there is no belief in the fact 
that this Métis Act, from that side of the House, could work 
well for the Métis people. They stood up and they voted against 
it, Mr. Speaker, and that should be entered for the record. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I go back to my earlier comment today — 
Saskatchewan, not the biggest, just the best. 
 
And I say today that as a member of this Assembly and as a 
member of the Aboriginal community, that we are 
incorporating, we are incorporating Aboriginal values, 
Aboriginal players, and Aboriginal people in this particular 
government to make sure that they are side by side with us to 
development that bold, new economy and that brave new world, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what I would suggest is that many on the opposition side 
like to stoke the differences between First Nations and Métis 
people and the non-Aboriginal community. For what purpose, 
Mr. Speaker? To divide Saskatchewan. To have that doom and 
gloom pervade throughout the land. But, Mr. Speaker, we are 
not having none of it. 
 
We recognize, we recognize some of the challenges, Mr. 
Speaker, as a province. Every province has that challenge. But 
as always, I tell my colleagues and I tell this government to take 
a trip back to two, three, four, five years and see what was done 
and where we began. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we were $15 billion in debt in 1991; thanks to that 
PC (Progressive Conservative) government — $15 billion in 
debt. And today, many people in Saskatchewan, as I mentioned 
time again . . . time and time again, that they said we’re tired of 
hearing the debt. Well on this side of the House, we’re tired of 
paying it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I’ll point out that $650 million we’re paying in interest 
could be of significant value to our roads and to our health care 
and the list goes on and on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very 
important, very important that we again focus on the opposition. 
And I get in here; I listen to some of their comments. They 
attack the Crowns. They attack health care. They attack the 
government. They attack the business community. They attack 
all the people out there that they’re supposed to be working 
with. And I wonder why are they so negative, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Their whole premise, every time they get up from their chairs 
their whole premise is to make sure that they make 
Saskatchewan look bad. And I say they should take that 
Saskatchewan name out of that party; just put it the negative 
party or the doom and gloom party or the Calgary party. 
Because if they don’t believe in Saskatchewan and people are 
sensing that, then they should never have that proud 
Saskatchewan name in front of that party, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 



104 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, there are many 
challenges, there are many challenges we have. And I think the 
Speech from the Throne sets the tone that we believe in ethanol; 
we believe in the agricultural community; we believe in the 
Aboriginal community; we believe in Saskatchewan. 
 
It sets the tone of belief, Mr. Speaker. It sets a tone of 
confidence and of optimism. And the big question I have to all 
the people of Saskatchewan that is listening today, Mr. Speaker, 
is I would ask them, I would ask them is number one is, why 
don’t you believe in Saskatchewan? And number two, number 
two I’m going to ask them is why do you vote right and spend 
left? That’s the big question I have. Why do you . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Just a little help to the member. Why don’t 
they vote or believe? They instead of you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would ask why they vote right and spend left. And every bit of 
good, Mr. Speaker, they have deliberately ignored it — every 
bit of good. 
 
And I often sit down with the Minister of Finance and I say 
we’ve got the best Finance minister in all of Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. Eight years in a row we’ve balanced the budget, Mr. 
Speaker. We’ve paid down debt and never forget where we 
began from, Mr. Speaker. We have been fair to rural 
Saskatchewan, we’ve been fair to urban Saskatchewan, we’ve 
been fair to northern Saskatchewan, we’ve looked at the First 
Nations community, we looked at the non-First Nations, we 
looked at health, highways — the list goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So today instead of celebrating that success — proud 
accomplishment and we hear of all these Dominion Bond 
companies saying Saskatchewan is doing a wonderful job — 
and all of a sudden we come here and we listen to the so-called 
financial experts on the other side saying, oh no, no, no, no 
everything’s going haywire here. Well, Mr. Speaker, I tell them 
today nothing has gone haywire. The only thing that has gone 
haywire sometimes is their thinking and their math, Mr. 
Speaker. We see it every day in this Assembly. 
 
So I want to point out that the Throne Speech talks about many, 
many values but the value I think is so very important is the 
family value. And I urge them, Mr. Speaker, to have the 
courage — to have the courage to be inclusive of all 
Saskatchewan families, the Aboriginal community and the 
non-Aboriginal community. 
 
And I also encourage them to have the courage to believe in 
Saskatchewan businesses, to believe in Saskatchewan because I 
don’t know and I don’t believe that they do. And all I think that 
all the people of Saskatchewan are doing is climbing to the 
highest hill in the province of Saskatchewan, our highest peak, 
and yelling from that highest peak, we believe in Saskatchewan. 
Mr. Speaker, they got to do that. They haven’t done this. On 
this side we absolutely, totally believe in Saskatchewan and all 
of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — And again, Mr. Speaker, I will point 
out, I will point out to Saskatchewan the headline reads: 

“Saskatchewan: not the biggest, just the best.” 
 
And what I’ll point out, Mr. Speaker, again, again the people of 
Saskatchewan are pleading with the Saskatchewan Party, either 
take Saskatchewan out of your name or start believing in our 
province. We know they don’t. We know they don’t, Mr. 
Speaker. We know they do not believe in Saskatchewan. 
Otherwise they’d stop calling down Saskatchewan and they’d 
start building up our communities. And they are simply not 
doing that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would also point out, Mr. Speaker, that in my closing 
remarks is that if we take a few minutes — if we take a few 
minutes, Mr. Speaker — just to think, to reflect of the 
accomplishments we have had over the last four or five years, 
that is why we call that the envy party, the envy party right 
across the way. 
 
And it’s very confusing, not only to us but to them too as well, 
as to some of their logic and some of their attack and some of 
their math. And I can say that in terms of their plan for 
Saskatchewan, people in my office don’t say Grow 
Saskatchewan; after they hear one of their speeches, they groan 
Saskatchewan. 
 
You know, and you look at the Leader of the Opposition. They 
talk about this brand new economy, they talk about a hundred 
thousand people — if the weather’s right, we might do it. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, you know, I can see the gates are down, the lights 
are flashing — gates are down, lights are flashing, but the train 
ain’t arriving, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I would point out, Mr. Speaker, that there are many holes, 
there are many holes in the Saskatchewan Party’s platform. And 
we will begin to dissect, we will begin to dissect that plan over 
this coming session, Mr. Speaker, so people in Saskatchewan 
will know what they stand for, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Yes, we let our issues be known. We are very proud of what 
we’ve done, and this is our plan for the future. But I would 
challenge every person in Saskatchewan is to check them out, 
Mr. Speaker. Where do they stand? Where do the stand on the 
Crowns? Where do they stand on private health care? Where do 
they stand on the number of issues, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They refuse to answer because they know their answer will not 
be accepted by Saskatchewan, and it’s better to sit there looking 
silly and asking silly questions as opposed to coming forward 
with a good solid strategy, Mr. Speaker. And I submit to you 
today that is their strategy, clear and simple. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to 
spend a few minutes on my constituency. First I want to thank 
my home community of Ile-a-la-Crosse, and the constituency of 
Athabasca, I believe, next to Cumberland is one of the largest 
constituencies in the province. I believe Cumberland and 
Athabasca share half the land mass. And I believe it’s about 
125,000 square miles, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I have about 25 communities in my constituency. Uranium 
City and Black Lake and Fond-du-Lac are of course in the far 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 105 

 

North, and the furthest southern community is Green Lake, 
Dore Lake, and Sled Lake. And between them we have the 
communities of Ile-a-la-Crosse, Beauval, La Loche, and Turnor 
Lake. And the furthest east we have in terms of a community, 
Mr. Speaker, is Pinehouse. And of course the furthest west we 
have is the Canoe Lake First Nations. 
 
And I will tell you, Mr. Speaker, it’s an exciting part of the 
province. There are many opportunities, and as always I’m very 
glad to share some of the successes of the Athabasca 
constituency and to point out that many families in that area are 
very proud to be part of this government, very proud of some of 
the work that was done. They know there’s a lot of work to be 
done yet, but they’re continuing to work alongside of us. 
 
So today, Mr. Speaker, in my final comment I’ll stand that I say 
. . . I stand here today in very, very proud and undying support 
for the Throne Speech. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — . . . here in the Assembly. I want to welcome 
the new member from Saskatoon Idylwyld. Welcome to the 
Assembly. It’s good to see you. And I want to welcome all the 
Pages to the Assembly today. 
 
The member from Athabasca will be very pleased to know that 
I want to talk about very positive things today. I want to talk 
about successes. I’m here to represent the Watrous 
constituency, and I’m very proud to do so. 
 
Watrous is . . . Very wonderful people live in the Watrous 
constituency. They’re progressive, they’re hard working, 
they’re conscientious, very compassionate people, and they 
demonstrate Saskatchewan’s reputation for being wonderful 
volunteers. They have a strong sense of community and they 
have a willingness to do the work. The people of the Watrous 
constituency pull together, and in spite of all the odds against 
them and in spite of the challenges that rural Saskatchewan 
faces today. 
 
In February the Action Committee on the Rural Economy put 
out a report. The report was called community success stories, 
plans, actions and results. And in that book is a story of eight 
separate communities, and it tells what idea they came up with 
to turn around their community’s decline in population. And it 
talks about the diversities they had in putting their ideas into 
place and the work that they had to do. And I was quite excited 
to see that two of those eight communities that were talked 
about and written upon were from the Watrous constituency. 
 
The one . . . the common thread that I found in the stories was 
incredible leadership that we have out there in Saskatchewan 
among the people. They have vision, they have a plan, they 
have a tremendous amount of leadership abilities out there, and 
they’re willing to do whatever it takes. 
 
One of the stories is my hometown so it’s particularly one that I 
know a lot about. It’s about the community of Leroy. Leroy is 
not on a main highway. We don’t even ask for money for 
highway. There is no highway. So they are sort of in the middle 
of nowhere, and they realized that their population was 
declining and number of the leaders in the community got 

together and tried to come up with an idea of what they could 
do to stop it. 
 
The idea they came up with, some people may have heard of. It 
was called . . . It was a field day. It was called DirectTech. It 
was the first that was hosted in our province. They invited a 
number of dealerships to come into the community and 
demonstrate direct seeding with their farm equipment and it had 
a tremendous turnout. And they repeated this for a number of 
years until they had the money put forward . . . or put together 
that they wanted and they spent it all within the community. 
 
One of the most famous projects was putting in artificial ice in 
their rink and they re-did . . . renovated the whole entire rink 
and they had money to put into their regional park. Leroy 
Leisureland regional park has won awards. It’s an extremely 
neat little park with tennis and golf and a swimming pool and 
one that the community should truly be proud of. 
 
They didn’t stop there, Mr. Speaker, they went on. There was a 
fire in the Stomp Pork Farm. They lost pretty much the entire 
one barn. So the community within weeks again got together 
and talked about what they could do. This was going to mean a 
loss of jobs. This was going to mean a loss of sales for local . . . 
or local sales for the grain in the community. 
 
And within a matter of weeks they put together a plan for a new 
generation co-op and now underway is the plan and the 
construction for seven more hog barns, all of which will be 
community owned and will create jobs. It’ll create spin-off 
industries; it’ll give us a local market for our feed grains. And it 
stopped the out-migration within the Leroy community. 
 
Leroy community has now stabilized and they’re not losing 
people. The aggressiveness of the community has also attracted 
outside investment and fairly shortly they will be opening up a 
feed mill that has quite a large capacity as well. 
 
The other story is a story about Manitou Beach and we often 
think of Watrous/Manitou Beach as the home of Camp Easter 
Seal but they too . . . and again it’s a story about a fire. They 
lost their local chalet, which was a swimming pool. Manitou 
Beach is known for the water in Little Manitou Lake which is 
of an extremely high mineral content, and a unique mineral 
content that’s believed to have a lot of medicinal abilities to it. 
And when the chalet burnt, it was at a time when the 
community again was failing, people were leaving. 
 
At one time it was a resort but Saskatchewan people are going 
out of Saskatchewan quite often for holidays. And that’s not 
meant to be a gloom and doom story. It’s just that travel is so 
much easier. It is reality; we like the Disneyland’s and so on 
and so forth. 
 
So again it took a group of community leaders to say, what can 
we do? Like, are we going to just let Manitou Beach as a village 
fail? And they said no. And they found investment dollars 
within the local community, they built a health spa with an 
adjoining hotel. And it truly is a wonderful place. 
 
Since then a mineral bathhouse has been built, and within the 
last year . . . And some people may have heard the story. There 
is a dance hall that’s located at Manitou Beach. It’s a landmark 



106 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

for Saskatchewan. It’s a very, very old dance hall and the dance 
floor is famous because the dance floor is floating on horsehair. 
 
And the owner of Danceland wanted to sell. He wanted to go on 
to something else with his life. So he was considering selling it 
and having it moved out of Manitou Beach. The people who 
want to promote it as a tourist attraction again got together, put 
the money together, and they purchased it and are running it 
themselves. 
 
Within the last year a very active group called the Manitou 
Beach shoreline restoration association has started. They’ve got 
a lot of support from member . . . or people who live both in 
Manitou Beach and in Watrous. And they’re going to start 
cleaning up the whole area. They’re going to clean the shoreline 
of the lake. They’re going to actively put together brochures 
and go to trade shows and start promoting tourism. And it’s a 
great opportunity for them. They have simply decided they’re 
not going to let their little village die. 
 
When you go throughout the constituency those are two stories 
that were written upon by the ACRE (Action Committee on the 
Rural Economy) Committee, but they’re only two, there are so 
many more within the Watrous constituency. 
 
One that I’ve always found humorous that comes to mind is the 
little town of Watson. It’s located on the intersection of 
Highways 5 and 6. And again, they saw, you know, that their 
little town was starting to decline, and the town council really 
thought out of the box. They knew they were on a major 
intersection so they thought: what can we do that will stop the 
person driving down that highway? What will make them stop, 
fill up with gas, you know, maybe stop at the restaurant or 
whatever? 
 
And what they did was they erected the largest Santa Claus I 
have ever seen or any of us will ever see, I’m sure. It’s a huge, 
gigantic Santa Claus. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So not only were they thinking, you know, outside of the box, 
but they’re also thinking who’s going to make you stop on the 
highway and have a bite to eat, grab some snacks, fill up with 
fuel. But it’s going to be the kids. The kids are going to see 
Santa Claus. They’re going to want to stop. They’re going to 
want their picture taken there. 
 
And since that time they’ve also built a state-of-the-art 
swimming pool and they’re working very hard on developing 
more in their golf course. So I applaud them for all their efforts. 
 
Lanigan, it was quite exciting to have the opening of their 
skating rink this year. Again, a beautiful, beautiful complex also 
attached to their hall. And we all know the success story of 
Poundmaker Agventures that is located at Lanigan. 
 
Drake, again another small village, but a small village that 
refuses to allow the statistics to get them down. They’re the 
home of Bergen Industries. Bergen Industries is a farm 
implement industry. It makes smaller farm equipment such as 
grain augers, livestock trailers and so on. They’re a wonderful 
employer to have in the local community. 

And it’s also the home of Drake Meats. And Drake Meats is a 
wonderful little story in itself, a success story in itself. It’s a 
family owned, two-generational, specialty meats company. And 
I don’t know whether anybody here . . . Or most of us may have 
bought Drake Meat farmer sausage. It’s so, so popular. And 
they went out and they marketed their product and they’ve got a 
market Saskatchewan-wide. 
 
They phoned me and said they’re ready to expand. They were 
very, very disappointed that . . . They are in competition with 
Harvest Meats and they were very disappointed that one meat 
packer got extra money but they did not. They, however, are not 
going to leave the province. They are willing to compete and 
they’re willing to do what it takes. 
 
Allan is a community basically built because of the mine that’s 
located there. But it’s not that far from Saskatoon and a lot of 
people will drive out to the mine from Saskatoon. So they too 
are fighting back and the town council have put forward some 
incentives to have people come in to build houses in Allan. And 
if you build a house in Allan, you will get . . . I’m not exactly 
sure of the break you will get on your taxes. You might even be 
able to live there tax-free for a few days. And you get a break 
on taxes for every child you have in the town of Allan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Nokomis is in the process of building a 
feedlot. I’ve talked about this feedlot a few times in the 
Assembly. So it’s just still in the make. 
 
And another interesting community is the little community of 
Meacham. The member from Humboldt will know about the 
community from Meacham. That’s where she’s from. And the 
unique thing about Meacham — I don’t know how many people 
are there, probably about 200 or a little less in Meacham — and 
they host the Dancing Sky Theatre, a live theatre. 
 
And I just talked to some of the organizations . . . organizers of 
that theatre and they’re struggling for money, there is no doubt. 
And I said, you know, have you thought of relocating? And she 
said no, we want to be . . . we want to have arts and culture in 
rural Saskatchewan. It’s important. And they will fight to 
remain in the little town of Meacham. So that’s quite unique. 
 
So these are all success stories. And these are success stories 
because of the people and in spite of the diversities of the 
decline in rural Saskatchewan. And they are success stories in 
spite of the policies of our NDP government. 
 
A huge concern that is coming to me from a lot of these small 
communities that are fighting to survive and to stabilize and 
even build, is the continual and the unsubstantiated hikes in 
their utility bills for community facilities. And it has been 
extremely difficult because there’s been such huge increases 
over the last, well, over the last two years actually. 
 
And there’s one in particular that comes to mind is the small 
community of Guernsey; it’s 120 people. And their school 
closed and they were accepting of that. The unit board or the 
division board gave them the opportunity to rent the school for 
$1 a year. And they decided to do that, convert it into a 
community centre for the youth and run it as the community 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 107 

 

centre and hall. 
 
But now they are paying just under $12,000 per year for utility 
bills. So it’s a community of 120 people trying to raise $12,000 
just — just — to keep the doors open with the utility bills. 
 
The community at Bradwell finally gave up. They closed their 
hall down. And perhaps we could charge per capita but it would 
mean $100 for every man, woman, and child. 
 
But the thing is we put so much money into youth after there is 
a problem. After there is a problem we say, what are we going 
to do and what’s it going to cost — and we should. Like we 
should address problems that our youth have but it seems we 
only address them after they become visual and statistical 
problems. 
 
Whereas if we would react or rather prevent . . . if we would 
prevent rather than just react. We should maybe look at some of 
these facilities. I know the Guernsey facility, they rent it out for 
the cadets. They have volleyball once a week and the youth can 
come in and play volleyball for recreation. And, you know, 
should there not be some, some assistance there, that’s where 
the youth can go. And we have to think of preventing some 
problems, not just reacting to them once they’re there. 
 
I find all these success stories within the Watrous community 
— or constituency — demonstrate a vision. They demonstrate it 
time and time again. They demonstrate that they have a vision; 
they come up with a plan; they act upon that plan; and they 
make things happen. 
 
Perhaps our NDP coalition government could learn something 
from the communities within the Watrous constituency. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I didn’t see a lot of action talked about in 
the Throne Speech. I didn’t see a plan and I didn’t see a vision 
— in fact sort of an airy-fairy dialogue that reannounced many 
initiatives that they’ve announced before, the year prior and a 
lot of them the year prior to that. There was nothing new. It 
boasts about three industries but all of which are industries that 
they put money into themselves — one of which is in direct 
competition to Drake Meats. They promised to study, restudy, 
and look at, and heaven only knows what else, but there isn’t 
one initiative to act on anything. 
 
In particular, I was actually quite surprised to see the 
introduction of the greenprint for ethanol production yet again. 
It was announced last session. I’ve had people ask me about the 
greenprint. The report was promised to be done by midsummer; 
it was promised to be done by last fall; it was promised to be 
done beginning of this year; and now it’s announced in the 
Throne Speech. And in the meantime, Gary Doer is making 
legislative changes in Manitoba, very . . . and he’s being very 
aggressive and progressing . . . progressive in attracting the 
ethanol facilities to his province and making changes that were 
necessary to bring them there. 
 
So you have to kind of wonder what is our responsibility as 
legislators. And I don’t think as a legislator that I’m responsible 
to know how to build an ethanol plant. And I don’t feel as a 

legislator that I need to know how the inside of an ethanol plant 
works. But I do need to ask a few questions as a legislator. Is it 
good for the environment? And I mean there are a lot of studies 
out there that says, yes it is. It isn’t too hard; I don’t have to 
remake the wheel on that one. You can access all the studies 
that have already been done. 
 
We need to ask if it’s good for the economy. There’s a number 
of jurisdictions that have very proactive ethanol production 
happening. We could do a little bit of looking into those 
jurisdictions to see if it is good for the economy. And at most 
it’s showing that it creates jobs, it’s value-added industry, and it 
gives a local market for feed grains which heaven knows we 
have enough of in Saskatchewan. 
 
Do we as legislators need to examine the potential market? 
Well somewhat I think we do but I suggest that most of that 
homework should be done by the people that want to invest in 
the industry. They’re going to invest if they feel that there’s a 
potential market. If there is no potential market, they’re not 
going to invest. So instead of worrying about the market, as 
legislators I think we should be worrying about how to attract 
the investors who will worry about the market. 
 
So the question that we should be asking is: how do we attract 
the investors for the ethanol industry? What do we need to 
change legislatively to attract the people that are going to invest 
in the ethanol industry? 
 
You know if it wasn’t done anywhere, if we needed to remake 
the wheel, if we needed to study and restudy and study this . . . 
But the greenprint’s been announced and announced and 
announced, and we’ve yet to see this document; it hasn’t really 
happened yet. Why aren’t we picking up the phone? Like, let’s 
pick up the phone. Let’s talk to Minnesota; let’s talk to Brazil; 
let’s talk to China — find out, what did they do? What did they 
do to bring the industry to their jurisdiction? 
 
Most . . . I have no doubt, having attending a number of 
meetings, having attended the international workshop when it 
was held in Minnesota, all of the jurisdictions said one of the 
most prior thing that they needed to do as legislators was to 
exempt the excise tax or whatever road tax they had on the 
ethanol portion of fuel. And that is one of the number one 
things that they all said they needed to do in order to attract and 
expand that industry in their jurisdiction. 
 
And amazingly enough, at one point in time that was done in 
our province. It’s done in all other provinces in the . . . Canada. 
And it was done in our province. But this government chose to 
reapply the road tax. Now at a time when ethanol wasn’t as 
popular as it is today, people didn’t know a lot about it, we 
weren’t as concerned about environmental issues — at that time 
sales rose up to 3 million litres. When the NDP government 
reapplied the road tax, sales plummeted within our province to 
less than 500,000 litres. What does that tell them? What does 
that tell them about what taxing it did to our market? 
 
It’s time that we sort of quit studying it and studying it and 
studying it, and let’s just create a level playing field within our 
own country. And let’s do what it takes to make our 
environment friendly for the investors to come in. And guess 
what? We don’t need to build an ethanol industry then. It will 



108 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

build itself. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — We keep on hearing time and time again, 
it’s been sort of the excuse that comes along, that times are 
tough in agriculture. And don’t I know it? I live in an 
agricultural community, and my husband and I are producers. 
The NDP government tends to blame agriculture for job losses, 
for revenue losses, for people losses. For almost every loss that 
we have in our province, it’s agriculture’s fault. 
 
And there’s some argument for it and there’s some argument 
against it. But irregardless, if that is what they have defined to 
be the problem, what in the Throne Speech addresses that 
problem? They’re promising, you know, they’re promising a 
safety net that they promised for years and years and years. It 
just goes on and on with promising this and yet nothing comes 
of it. 
 
Interestingly enough, they don’t have in the Throne Speech that 
they’re going to enhance crop insurance because now that 
we’ve seen the enhanced crop insurance that has higher 
premiums, loss of spot loss hail, it’s a loss of the variable 
option. You know I hate to say it as a producer: please, please, 
please don’t enhance it any more. Like we can’t afford any 
more enhancements; it’s going to break us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Along with our enhanced crop insurance 
that’s going to cost us a great deal more money, the other thing 
that is hitting agriculture hard is the increase in the property . . . 
the education portion of property taxes. 
 
And in the RM, the rural municipality where I live, the 
education portion of property tax went up 43 per cent. But a 
neighbouring municipality, a fellow had come to my office and 
he brought his taxes . . . his tax returns with him and to show 
me — his taxes went up 81 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is in a sector where we’re saying we have a problem; we 
recognize there’s a problem. It’s supposedly causing 
out-migration, it’s causing job losses, it’s causing revenue 
losses. And how do we address the problem? Well let’s take 
away any type of insurance they may have and up their taxes 
and the problem will go away . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Eighty-one per cent increase. An 81 per cent increase. How can 
anyone sustain those type of increases? That’s not coming from 
outside sources; it’s not the federal government’s fault. It’s 
direct taxation by a provincial government that isn’t willing to 
take their own responsibilities because it is a provincial 
responsibility to educate. 
 
(15:15) 
 
So perhaps if we keep on doing this, it’ll all wash out, I don’t 
know. I can’t imagine it. There’s no mention . . . I noticed last 
year or the year before, they mentioned a Department of Rural 
Revitalization. We don’t even talk about that department any 
more. I’ve never heard of anything that it’s done for this 
province or for rural Saskatchewan. 
 

We haven’t really heard a lot . . . we’ve heard lots that they 
went on a bus tour. We haven’t heard what they heard when 
they went on the bus tour. I’m sure when they went on their bus 
tour they didn’t hear that we need our property taxes to be 
higher. And I’m sure they didn’t hear, when they went on their 
bus tour, that we need an enhanced crop insurance that gives us 
a higher premium for less coverage. 
 
There was a lot of phone calls to my office after the bus tour 
with that very question: what did they hear? Because it was 
within the last year that a lot of services in my constituency had 
been taken away, moved, or relocated. And they are small 
services. They may seem insignificant to this government, but 
they are important to the small communities. 
 
One I would like to mention is in Watrous, has had a 
conservation officer for a number of years but that office has 
been now moved to Saskatoon. And it’s one family. I mean it 
may seem very, very small but it was a family that was 
extremely active, working in the community. It was a family 
that had a number of children going to the school. They 
shopped locally, and they spent some time locally. 
 
Lanigan: they took away the number of times that a licence 
evaluator would come. And again, it seems kind of minute but, 
you know, when you bring your child in to test for their licence, 
you’re going to stop at the coffee shop, you might pick up a few 
groceries, there’s a drugstore. It’s a small thing but it’s these 
small things that are killing our small towns. So it’s important 
that we have these services in rural Saskatchewan and not just 
located in the urban centres. 
 
The most recent concern that I’m hearing is as a result of the 
Fyke Commission report and the new regional health 
authorities. The regional health authority that the Watrous 
constituency is in will include Gabriel Springs, Central Plains, 
Living Sky, and Saskatoon. It has a population of over a quarter 
of the province. So the number one question is, if we have the 
population of over a quarter of the province, why don’t we just 
have 4 regional health authorities instead of 12? 
 
But the big concern is when the board was appointed, there is 
three rural board members, nine urban board members. So I do 
believe the people of the Watrous constituency have every 
reason to believe that they will not be represented on this board. 
And we have yet to hear announced how the funding will be 
allocated, but I am sure there could very likely be a concern 
there as well. 
 
As long as this government wishes to control everything and 
own everything, there will always be more money taken out of 
the government coffers than possibly can go back in. And a 
very wise person once said to me that the government does not 
drive the economy and business does not drive the economy, 
but people drive the economy. 
 
We need to grow this province. This last statistics on population 
is devastating for our province. And the Saskatchewan Party’s 
plan, the Saskatchewan Party’s vision, that I’m proud to be a 
part of, is to grow the province by 100,000 people in 10 years. 
And the people in this province are ready to make this happen. 
They have the idea. They have the determination and they have 
the willingness to do whatever it takes to make this happen. All 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 109 

 

they need to do is for government to get out of their way and 
quit competing with them on every front that they try to do so. 
 
It’s time to end what I consider to be a disaster, social 
experience . . . experiment. It’s proving to be far too expensive 
for our economy, for our population, for the future of my 
children and everyone else’s children in this province. That is 
why I will not support the motion put forward by the 
government but I will support the amendment. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is a distinct 
pleasure to stand today to respond to this Speech from the 
Throne and to do so on behalf of the constituents of Regina 
South that I represent. This is my seventh opportunity to 
respond on their behalf in this Assembly to the Throne Speech. 
And this Throne Speech in particular, I think sets out a very 
clear direction where this provincial government wants to take 
the province; how it will help lead the province into greater 
economic prosperity. 
 
And I believe that this session will lay out a very clear divide 
between those of us who do believe in Saskatchewan as a 
province of opportunity and those on the opposite side of the 
House who do not believe there’s an opportunity here in 
Saskatchewan. This will be a defining session, Mr. Speaker. I 
believe this absolutely. And having listened to the members 
opposite speak as they have over the last couple of days, I think 
that we are seeing this more and more clearly. 
 
I found it very interesting listening to the member for Watrous 
— as it always is — to her, to her comments. And I particularly 
appreciated the fact that she started off by talking about what 
people in the communities of her constituency had to say, and 
their sense of optimism, their sense of hope, their dreams, their 
beliefs, the positive spirit that they have. 
 
It was unfortunate the speech didn’t stop there. It was 
unfortunate that she didn’t simply bring forward the views of 
her constituents, but rather had to twist it and put a little bit of 
political spin on it. I was with her right up that point, Mr. 
Speaker. And then I found I just had to start saying, well now 
what exactly is the issue here? 
 
We went through talking about each of these communities, 
about the hopes that they had. Certainly this was the same sense 
that we had as we travelled through the province on the bus tour 
this last summer. This is very much the experience that I have 
talking to constituents in my own riding, is this sense of 
optimism out there that things are in fact getting better in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no doubt that since the last time this 
Assembly met that we have seen some rather tremendous 
changes in our province, indeed in the world, and the result on 
our economy has been unfortunate. 
 
I don’t think any of us could foresee what had happened during 
the fall and the impact that now Canada is involved in a war; 
the fact that we are involved in trying to recover an economy 
which has been hurt. The impact certainly for Saskatchewan is 
significant. We have seen the impact on falling commodity 

prices. We have seen the impact in our communities. And we 
are seeing the impact as we try to work through the provincial 
budget. 
 
Saskatchewan is not alone in this situation. Certainly as we look 
across the country we can see that every province, every 
jurisdiction is going through a similar process. Ontario is 
talking about a massive, multi-billion-dollar deficit. British 
Columbia is in a multi-billion-dollar deficit. Alberta is barely 
balanced. Manitoba is having their own financial problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is not alone in the difficulties that 
we have faced in this past year. The members opposite may try 
and tell people that this is a result of the actions of this 
government. I think any citizen of this province who has picked 
up a newspaper, turned on a television or a radio, knows that 
the very things that we are facing in this province today are 
shared by Canadians across this land, by jurisdictions across 
this country, and that we are working at it in a responsible, 
responsive way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, this session will set 
forward two separate visions of how we take this province 
forward — a vision outlined by this government in the Speech 
from the Throne and a vision outlined by the members opposite 
in their so-called Grow Saskatchewan platform. Mr. Speaker, 
for the record, that was the sound of one member clapping. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that this Grow Saskatchewan plan 
that the members opposite have been out around the province 
talking about, from what I can see reading the press clippings, 
has not exactly been a resounding success — closed door 
meetings, low turnout, lack of interest. And it’s a lot like what I 
think we expected from the members opposite and their 
negative attitude towards how this province is going to grow. 
 
Contrast that, Mr. Speaker, with what was a very successful 
initiative launched by the Premier this past summer as his 
caucus, his cabinet, and he travelled this province — talking to 
people throughout the communities, listening to what they had 
to say, getting ideas, accepting those ideas. And now we’re 
putting those ideas into action. Mr. Speaker, that is what we 
have done. 
 
And the member opposite is reading, I know, off from a list of 
all the communities that we went to, and many of the good 
ideas that we’ve heard. And we see those reflected in this 
Throne Speech. We see those reflected in this Throne Speech. 
 
I want to talk a little bit today about how this Throne Speech 
impacts on the residents of Regina South, on the people who 
live here in my home community of Regina, on the people of 
the province generally, and, certainly, on our economy. 
 
Other members have spoken eloquently in this House about the 
agenda for social development and I will not spend a great deal 
of time on that today because I think the others have done better 
justice to it than I would. 
 
What I do want to talk about though, very specifically, are some 
of the things that we are going to lay out in this session to help 



110 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

move Saskatchewan’s economy forward, to continue on the 
growth that we have seen, and to celebrate the successes that 
have been such an integral part of Saskatchewan under this 
NDP government. 
 
The members opposite always like to trash talk the province. 
They always like to talk about the negatives. I say to them, Mr. 
Speaker, that I think they need to be cautious of this. There is a 
point at which such naysaying becomes a self-fulfilling 
prophecy — that they will, through their naysaying, drive off 
the investment, drive off the opportunities, drive off the kind of 
attitude that we need in this province in order to help turn things 
around and continue to build on the successes that we’ve seen 
over the last 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we don’t do enough to celebrate our successes in 
this province. I take a look at the great things that we’ve seen 
over the last seven years that I’ve had an opportunity to serve in 
this Assembly — years of successive cuts to personal income 
taxes, years in which we have seen . . . in fact we have been the 
only province in Canada to see a reduction in child poverty. 
 
Accomplishments in terms of new programs around community 
schools, accomplishments in terms of building our economy — 
these are the kind of things that we should be celebrating in 
terms of our success in this province, that we should be building 
on, that this Throne Speech builds on. And I would invite the 
members opposite to join with us in supporting that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as we’ve gone around the 
province, there’s a start to a speech that I like to give when I’m 
out talking to different groups to remind them of just how 
successful we are in this province. And it goes a little bit like 
this: 
 
We are the fourth-richest province in this nation. We are the 
third-largest producer in terms of mineral wealth. We’re the 
second-biggest producers in oil and gas revenue. We have led 
the world in production of uranium. We are the best and biggest 
producers of potash. We have tremendous potential to be 
dominant in the world in terms of diamond production. That’s 
simply on the mineral wealth side. 
 
I dare also say that, thanks to the members opposite, that they 
are the first people to forget about these successes. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we have tremendous resource wealth here 
in this province. And we are using it to the benefit of creating 
jobs for Saskatchewan people, creating economic opportunity 
for Saskatchewan companies, and in turn providing 
opportunities in our communities through continued growth of 
social development programs. 
 
There are a couple of areas that this Throne Speech speaks of 
that in particular I want to talk about today. 
 
We have tremendous opportunities in this province on energy 
resource development. Certainly we have seen this growth in 
terms of our oil patch and in terms of natural gas sector. It may 
interest the members of this Assembly to know that since 1991 
we have doubled our production of oil in this province — 

doubled our production of oil in this province since 1991, since 
this government took office. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Now we should understand this. The members opposite are 
constantly telling the business community, they’re certainly 
telling the people in Calgary, the investors, that there’s nothing 
good here in Saskatchewan. That this NDP government has 
been a hindrance to development. 
 
What is not true and what is not pointed out, is the fact of the 
opportunities that this government has opened up, particularly 
in the energy sector. Look at the fact — look at the fact that oil 
production in this province has doubled since the Romanow 
government took office and we are going to continue to see 
growth under this new Premier. There is no doubt of this. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — There is no doubt that we have an 
opportunity in Saskatchewan to move into new forms of energy 
production. And certainly the aggressive approach, and I think a 
very positive approach taken by this government in terms of 
moving into wind energy, will be a positive for us. 
 
I want to talk in a few minutes about climate change and some 
of the things that we’re doing there, but let me say that we are 
taking a much broader perspective on energy development in 
this province than has been taken by any government in the 
history of this province. From oil production, gas production, 
ethanol production, green power through renewable sources 
such as wind, these are the kind of things that we are going to 
continue to build Saskatchewan’s economy on because these 
are the things that we’ve seen the successes on in the past. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is part of the plan that is laid out in 
this Throne Speech. It should be of interest to people that we 
have seen the kind of growth and development that we have 
over the last 10 years. 
 
I was saying to some of my colleagues the other day that I have 
had the privilege, as a result of the prudent management of this 
province’s finances, to have never had to support anything other 
than a tax reduction for personal taxes in this province since I 
was elected in 1995. This is a very important and positive thing 
that we should celebrate. As a result of the actions of this 
province’s government over that time period, Mr. Speaker, we 
have laid a foundation which is allowing Saskatchewan people, 
ordinary Saskatchewan residents to participate and to see the 
benefits of that wealth. 
 
It should interest the members opposite that the Toronto 
Dominion Bank has recently released a study which says 
Saskatchewan will lead the nation in terms of the growth of our 
standard of living this year. We will lead the nation in the 
growth of our standard of living in 2002. Only three provinces 
are expected to see an increase in their standard of living. The 
other provinces will fall back. Saskatchewan is not only one of 
those three, but is the top one of those three. 
 
But the members opposite never want to comment about that. 
They don’t want to talk about the benefits that Saskatchewan 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 111 

 

people share in as a result of the actions of this government; 
they don’t want to talk about the strength of our economy; they 
don’t want to talk about the resource wealth that we have and 
the development opportunities. And they don’t want to talk 
about the sustainable development approach that we put in 
place that rebalances the agenda so that we can ensure in the 
future Saskatchewan people continue to benefit. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can all stand up and talk about what we think 
is happening. I listened to the member for Watrous share with 
us her views and I appreciate those views. But I think there’s 
something to be said when the people that study these things 
come forward with concrete facts and that those are the things 
that make for informed debate. The Toronto Dominion Bank 
talking about us leading in terms of standard of living. We have 
a study, in terms of KPMG, showing that our major . . . four 
major cities are not only competitive but are among the most 
competitive in North America in terms of business 
development. 
 
Now the members opposite talk about a bad business climate. 
Isn’t it interesting that the business community doesn’t talk 
about a bad business climate? Isn’t it interesting that when we 
take a look at what the statistics are that we see when all the 
pieces are added together, that in fact Regina, Saskatoon, P.A., 
Moose Jaw, are all communities that compete not only 
effectively within Canada but within the North American 
market. 
 
But the members opposite never say that. All we hear is a 
steady stream of doom and gloom coming out of them. 
 
The member for Humboldt yesterday or Friday talked about the 
population issues. No mention whatsoever of the fact that her 
community is one of the fastest growing in the province. No 
sense of celebrating the fact that we have helped build an 
infrastructure there which attracts people, which attracts 
business. There’s no celebration of the successes in her 
neighbourhood — certainly not by the member. But I can tell 
you the business community understands that. And I can tell 
you the people that read the statistics understand that. And I can 
tell you that the taxpayers understand that. And I can tell you 
that the voters are going to understand that. 
 
That is the fact of the matter. We have a competitive business 
environment. We see continued economic growth. We see 
growth in our standard of living and those are things we should 
celebrate in Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, we are not going to 
simply celebrate the past. What we are going to do now is we 
are going to build on that foundation that has been put forward 
by this government through successive balanced budgets, 
through prudent management of our resources, and through a 
regulatory regime which encourages investment. Let me tell 
you, Mr. Speaker, how I see this Throne Speech and the items 
contained in it working to build on those successes and build on 
those advantages. 
 
One of the most important things I think that this Premier has 
introduced during his first year in office was an investment 

attraction council. This council that he has set up has the 
mandate to deal specifically with fast-tracking of projects to 
make sure that we have a coordinated approach within 
government to deal with regulatory issues brought forward, to 
make sure that we have a clear line of communication between 
investors and businesses here, between the businesses and the 
government that sets the regulatory environment. 
 
This has been a very positive initiative — something which I 
don’t hear the members opposite saying that they would 
continue; something which I don’t hear the members opposite 
saying that they support. 
 
Why wouldn’t they support an investment attraction council? 
Why would they not support us working to make sure 
government and business and investors and communities work 
together in lockstep so that we are headed in the same 
direction? Why don’t they? Because success is not what the 
members opposite believe in. It doesn’t work to their political 
advantage, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to talk about this. 
 
But this is in fact what this government is doing. They say, 
where is the plan? Well the plan’s there. The plan is there. 
We’ve got the investment attraction council. We’ve got a 
Throne Speech which I dare say is probably the most detailed 
Throne Speech that I’ve seen in the nearly seven years that I’ve 
served in this Assembly. 
 
It talks in four very clear areas about what we are going to do to 
make Saskatchewan a better place. It talks about investment in 
the economy, in the environment. We certainly never hear the 
members opposite talk about the environment. It talks about 
investment in infrastructure. We hear them ask constantly for 
more Crown corporation investment in their communities, but 
they simply turn around and criticize the way that we end up 
having to pay for it. 
 
We talk in this Throne Speech about the provision of quality 
education. When was the last time the members opposite did 
anything other than complain about property taxes? Where’s 
their support for SchoolPLUS? Where’s their support for the 
education system? 
 
Their support is not there because all they’re interested in doing 
is talking down the school system so that they can work towards 
a low-tax, no-tax kind of regime. Well who is going to pay for 
it? Where does it get paid for? 
 
And we talk in this Throne Speech about the need for healthy 
and self-reliant families. This is undoubtedly one of the 
strengths of this government, is the work that has been done in 
terms of building self-reliant families, and building a healthier 
set of communities. 
 
We believe, and it says in the Throne Speech, and I want to 
reiterate it today — we believe that economic growth in 
Saskatchewan will continue to be led by private sector 
investment. I’m pleased to hear the members opposite support 
us. And I’m sure that when they stand, they will. That’s what 
we believe in. 
 
The members opposite though, they raise an interesting 
comment. They raise an interesting comment about the brewing 



112 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

company — Great Western Brewing — certainly the subject of 
discussion this morning in question . . . this afternoon in 
question period. This is an interesting point because this is 
where we see how this government, how this NDP government 
has used the tools available to it to support our economy, to 
help keep jobs, and to help build investment in this province. 
 
The members opposite, we know what they would do. They 
would allow those companies to go south or west or east. It 
would be like the member from Watrous who encouraged the 
arts group out of Meacham to move out. Why don’t they find a 
different location, she says. Their response was, they kind of 
like it there. 
 
Well indeed, that’s what Great Western Brewing is saying too. 
They kind of like working in Saskatoon. And my guess is, the 
people that work for Great Western Brewing kind of appreciate 
the fact that the government is there to help them. 
 
I can tell you if you think that a private sector is going to be 
there to support that alone, I’d say simply take a look at the 
situation with Labatt’s; take a look at O’Keefe; take a look at 
Molson. And you, Mr. Speaker, I would say to the members 
opposite, tell us — tell us how this works and how you protect 
those jobs without putting your money where your mouth is. 
How does that happen? 
 
I hear the members opposite talk about . . . It was very 
interesting as they talk about jobs because they talk out of both 
sides of their mouth on this. But one member was talking about 
the conservation officer that moved out of her riding. I suspect 
that that conservation officer was funded in part by a budget 
vote that we had last year that they voted against. 
 
When we put more money into protecting water, into the 
inspection services, into the community services, into our health 
networks, where were the members opposite? They voted 
against it. 
 
They didn’t vote to hire more people; they voted to fire them. 
Not because of fiscal restraint; not because of that being in the 
best interest of their communities, because we certainly hear 
that they want more services. They simply voted against it to 
obstruct what is happening on the good things in this province 
and the support that this government can make to their 
communities. It was in their political advantage, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to vote against it — not in the interest of their 
constituents. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, that this again shows an important cleavage 
between what we believe on this side and what the members 
opposite believe. And you’ll see this laid out time and again. 
 
Isn’t it interesting that today we listen to this debate criticizing 
our Crown Investments for investing in Saskatoon? 
 
An Hon. Member: — What about Georgia? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Oh well the member opposite says you 
can’t invest in Georgia; you can’t make any money off of any 
other foreign investments; you can’t invest in Regina; don’t 
think about investing in Red Deer; oh and by the way, don’t 
invest here at home either. 

And by the way, could you just put up a few more cell towers? 
Oh and by the way, could you expand the CommunityNet 
process into my community? Oh and by the way, we would sure 
like to have another conservation officer in our community. Oh 
and by the way, could you just put some more money in to keep 
the hospitals open? Oh and by the way . . . And the list goes on 
and on and on and on and on. 
 
And that’s what those members come forward with. This is 
their plan. But this isn’t a new plan; we saw this plan before. 
This plan is a classic. This plan is one that said, spend like 
there’s no tomorrow and don’t worry about how you pay for it. 
It was a case of spend like there’s no tomorrow and don’t worry 
about where you’re going to pay for it. This is their advice to us 
on the Crowns: make all these investments. Oh and by the way, 
just forget, you know, that that billion dollars worth of 
investment that the Crowns have made in the province, don’t 
worry about that. That doesn’t really matter. 
 
That’s not what they’re talking about, Mr. Speaker, as they say. 
What they’re interested in are these other issues. And so they 
say, put the services on but don’t charge us extra for them. Run 
that power company but by the way, my rink should pay less. 
Oh you’ve got to make some profit out of those Crowns 
because otherwise they’re losers and should be sold. 
 
This is the most inconsistent policy that I have heard in 
probably 15 years. And I think that it’s very interesting that the 
members opposite are laying out this plan again. This is the 
same plan, by the way, that taxpayers are still paying for the last 
time it was implemented. 
 
I wish that we did not have that more than $600 million worth 
of debt interest payments every year. I wish that we didn’t have 
a debt in this province in the $10 billion range. I wish we didn’t. 
Because if you think about all the things that we are doing in 
this province today given those constraints, just imagine what 
this government could have done if we had been given a clean 
slate to work with when we came in. Just imagine the work that 
we could do in our local communities. Just imagine the support 
for rural Saskatchewan. Imagine what could have been done to 
help keep farm families here if the members opposite had not 
squandered those opportunities the last time they were in office 
on this side. Just imagine that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(15:45) 
 
The members fail to understand, on the opposition side, that 
you can’t simply speak in platitudes about how they’re going to 
move forward. Grow Saskatchewan? Their plan is not about 
growing Saskatchewan; their plan is about gutting 
Saskatchewan. That’s what it will do. Unsustainable spending, 
unsustainable promises, all for their political benefit. It will 
result in gutting this province, and that is their objective, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
It’s unfortunate. It’s unfortunate that they are prepared to 
promise anything in order to attempt to get elected. This is not a 
new approach. We’ve seen it before, and it’s unfortunate that 
we see it again. Grow Saskatchewan — I don’t see anything 
particularly new there. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I don’t see 
anything particularly innovative coming from the members 
opposite in terms of how they’d move forward. 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 113 

 

But this Throne Speech, as I have said, outlines a different 
approach. It outlines an action plan for Saskatchewan. It 
outlines the things that we’ve heard from Saskatchewan people 
that they want done. I was pleased this summer to sit on the . . . 
as a member of the Standing Committee on Health Care in this 
Assembly as we had people in this House from all across the 
province coming in and making their presentations, telling us 
what their views were on the health care system. 
 
This is what they said. They said that they wanted us to put 
forward a clear, concise vision for health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’m very pleased with the work that my 
colleague, the Minister of Health, has done in this regard. And I 
know it has not been an easy task to pull together these kind of 
very different ideas. And in fact we did hear many different 
things. I won’t say that there was any one consistent message 
we got. We heard everything from moving towards health care 
premiums, to us going to a completely fully funded system, to 
adding more services into the system, to maybe de-insuring on 
some items. 
 
This was a very interesting exercise though, because it allowed 
people to come forward and have that direct discussion with 
their legislators about an important issue in front of them. I 
think our government responded in a very appropriate way. 
What we put back into the system was stability. What we put 
back into the system was sustainability. These were key parts of 
what came out of this process, from the Fyke Report that ended 
up going through the legislative hearings and resulted in our 
action plan on health care. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, our action plan for the economy is no less 
bold and no less important. And I’ll tell you that this Throne 
Speech lays the foundation for where we are going to see that 
growth. 
 
I want to speak a little bit about our energy resources. I want to 
speak a little bit about how we move forward in terms of a new, 
more sustainable approach to development. And I want to talk 
about how Saskatchewan is playing an important role in the 
western Canadian economy in helping develop, I think, a much 
more sustainable oil and gas regime. 
 
As the Throne Speech notes, we have approximately 35 billion 
barrels worth of known oil reserves in Saskatchewan. Most of 
this is heavy oil. This is both a blessing and certainly a 
difficulty for us as we look at moving forward to develop it. 
Heavy oil is extremely energy intensive. It has certain price 
sensitivities that we need to be careful of, and it still is at a point 
where we need to be thinking seriously about how we move 
forward with that extra development. 
 
We have put into place a number of different initiatives to help 
improve our extraction of the oil resources. Certainly 
Saskatchewan leads the nation. In many cases, in North 
America we are a leader in terms of the work we’re doing on 
enhanced oil recovery. Our horizontal drill program has been a 
very successful one in terms of helping communities like 
Estevan, in terms of the deep Southeast, even in the Swift 
Current area. We have seen how these programs that this 
government has helped bring in, these programs have helped 
build the economy there. 

I find it surprising that the member for Estevan does not speak 
more positively about the good things that are happening within 
the oil patch in her own back yard. I’m very surprised that we 
don’t hear her speaking in support of what the business is and 
the investors are doing in terms of making a more sustainable 
use of the oil reserves down in that area of the province. 
 
I want to say again, I’m surprised that the members opposite 
don’t stand up and support this government’s initiatives on 
things like oil recovery that have helped us double the oil 
production in this province in the last 10 years. Instead it is 
simply an approach the members opposite take to turn their 
head to anything positive and focus on the negative. 
 
Well this isn’t what I hear from the investors. This isn’t what I 
hear from the business people. This isn’t what I hear from the 
communities. 
 
What I hear are the things that we can do to help move them 
forward. Certainly the work that has been done on enhanced oil 
recovery has been very positive. Certainly the work that has 
been done in terms of horizontal drilling has been very positive. 
 
The member for Rosetown, the Leader of the Opposition was 
recently in Calgary, I understand, speaking to a group at the 
Petroleum Club talking about how his plans to grow 
Saskatchewan would involve the oil sector. I’m told that there 
was in that 40-minute speech, one reference to the oil and gas 
sector. In a 40-minute speech at the Petroleum Club, one 
reference — and the reference was that they would work with 
the industry on royalties. 
 
Well it certainly set me back. I mean I just don’t know how to 
respond to that. Needless to say, for the last 10 years that’s what 
we’ve been doing is working with it. We’ve been making the 
changes; we’ve been helping them work with industry; we’ve 
been building an industry — and we’re seeing the results of 
that. Not the promising of results . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Where have we seen the results, the member asks. 
 
Well let me just go through this. We have just gone through two 
years of record production — two years of record production in 
oil and gas sector. We have seen a doubling. We are now at 
over 400,000 barrels a day of oil coming out of this province — 
400,000, double what we were at 10 years ago. 
 
Where’s the growth? The growth is with small companies 
throughout rural Saskatchewan. The growth is with young 
people who are working on the rigs. The growth is with young 
people that are working in the services and supply company. 
The growth is in the communities that those members claim to 
represent. That’s where the growth is, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It figures that the members opposite, like the member for 
Estevan, would say, where’s the growth? I would invite her to 
come with me to her constituency and we’ll see where the 
growth is. I would invite her . . . I would invite the member for 
Weyburn-Big Muddy to come to Weyburn some day. Come to 
the riding that she says she represents and we’ll show you 
where the growth is. That’s what I say, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
The members opposite ask where’s the growth. 
 
Now what we are seeing today has been a slowdown in the oil 



114 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

sector. That slowdown — and this will come as a surprise to the 
members opposite — is a result of dropping prices. What 
caused the prices to drop? Oh, I half expect them to say the 
NDP government. Well unfortunately we’re not a big player in 
OPEC (Organization of Petroleum Exporting Countries) and we 
don’t have a lot of control over the world economy. 
 
What has caused prices to drop, I think we all know, has been a 
situation of instability. We have seen a drop-off in terms of 
industrial demand in the United States as a result of their 
softening economy, and we are in a time of somewhat 
instability in terms of oil and gas prices. That is what’s caused 
the price fluctuation. 
 
Now today the price of oil is moving back above $25 US 
(United States) a barrel. This is a positive thing in terms of the 
industry and the potential for drilling activity. Of course drilling 
activity always lags behind price a few months and certainly 
many of the capital commitments have already been made. 
 
We are active in terms of working with the industry to help 
build a resource regime, a regulatory regime, a royalty regime 
that works to the benefit of Saskatchewan people and attracts 
investment. And I dare say that over the last 10 years the proof 
was in the pudding and that is in the fact that we have seen a 
doubling of our oil production. 
 
We see a growth . . . I see and certainly this Throne Speech 
notes this as well that we believe there are two areas of 
opportunity for us to grow in the energy resource sector. One of 
those is in heavy oil. The heavy oil resource on our western 
border is largely known but largely untapped. 
 
As we move forward into . . . with higher differentials in the 
price, we have an opportunity to see further development. As 
we see the United States move forward with more of an interest 
in continental energy policy, we have an opportunity to play in 
terms of supply of that market as they want to decrease their 
offshore dependencies. These are opportunities that we need to 
now start to think about in terms of positioning Saskatchewan 
to supply this resource. 
 
I think we have tremendous resource wealth in heavy oil. I 
think we have a tremendous opportunity in heavy oil, and it’s 
something that we need to work on with the industry in terms of 
developing. 
 
There’s a second area that I think we have tremendous 
opportunity in and that’s in natural gas. It was not that many 
years ago that natural gas was really a waste product. There was 
no real opportunity for it to be shipped. There was no market at 
the end for it. 
 
Certainly over the last 10 years we have seen tremendous 
development in terms of natural gas potential. We are seeing a 
tremendous growth in terms of the demand for the natural gas 
product. 
 
We are also seeing, I think, a very encouraging sign in terms of 
the geoscience is happening in terms of finding new gas wealth. 
Certainly the find in northeastern BC at Ladyfern has caused 
people to think that perhaps in the western basin that we are not 
in a case of declining reserve, that there are in fact new deposits 

that can be found. 
 
We are seeing . . . one of the very bright spots, I will tell you 
today, that we are seeing in Saskatchewan is in natural gas 
drilling in the Swift Current area. We are seeing nearly double 
the wells drilled on natural gas than we did a year ago. Why? 
Because they’ve had better exploration and we’ve seen certainly 
better opportunity for development. 
 
We need to continue to work with these companies, with these 
investors, with these communities to find a way to extract that 
resource wealth, that natural gas, and get it shipped off to 
market. I think we have tremendous opportunity here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and it’s something that this government is 
certainly interested in working on. 
 
We have an opportunity also to start dealing with renewable 
fuels. One of the questions I’m asked regularly is: why is the 
price of gas as high as it is given where the price of oil is? I 
have to admit I wasn’t asked this question very much before I 
became the Minister of Energy and Mines, but now it seems to 
be a . . . I guess I’m expected to know more so I will . . . I asked 
my officials this. And the answer I get back is that one of the 
key components, one of the key components of course is 
refining capacity. We have tight refining capacity in North 
America today and this is one of the things that has caused the 
price of gasoline to go up. 
 
This provides us with a unique opportunity, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that opportunity is for us to take a look at how we 
can make use of renewable fuels to extend the life of our other 
. . . of our carbon-based fuel system like gas and oil. Clearly 
one of those big opportunities for Saskatchewan is in the area of 
ethanol development. 
 
I am very pleased that the Speech from the Throne speaks of the 
green print on ethanol production. I am very pleased with the 
work that this government has done on this and the leadership 
shown by this Premier because this is an initiative that would 
not have happened without the direct intervention of the 
Premier and his vision in terms of how we move forward in 
terms of sustainable development and new areas. 
 
We have a tremendous opportunity to grow an ethanol industry 
in Saskatchewan. An ethanol industry that, I think, will provide 
opportunities to local farmers, it will provide opportunities to 
local communities, it will provide opportunities to the energy 
sector as well as we start to expand the life of the existing gas 
resource. 
 
We have an opportunity today to build a grain-based ethanol 
industry in Saskatchewan. This green print on ethanol 
production, that will be released shortly, I think will outline 
how the government can work with communities and investors 
to do that. 
 
But there is another opportunity down the road and that is in the 
area of biomass. That we can start to take a look at how do we 
use products today that are not a great price or great utility to us 
in terms of waste wood, in terms of straw. These are other 
opportunities that we can pursue into the future. Saskatchewan 
is very well positioned in terms of our market, in terms of our 
resource, in terms of our investment climate to build on this 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 115 

 

initiative and I am very optimistic about the results we’ll see. 
The question . . . one of the questions that I’m regularly asked 
as we talked about ethanol is why now? What makes ethanol 
today more of an interest to Saskatchewan people than, say, ten 
years ago or why does it make it more viable? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Well, frankly, there are two reasons. One is we have better 
technology which has helped bring down the cost of ethanol 
production. The second is there is a growing interest in terms of 
renewable fuels and the impact it can have to reduce greenhouse 
gases, and as a result the impact it can have in terms of the 
climate change, mitigating climate change and reducing global 
warming. 
 
Certainly one of the big challenges that we have, and I dare say 
the single most important environmental challenge we face 
today, is climate change. This is something which all 
Saskatchewan people will understand has a very direct impact 
not only on our quality of life but on our economy. This is an 
issue which all members of this legislature should take a very 
keen interest in because it is something which affects the 
farming community as much as it affects our cities. It affects us 
as consumers in terms of the price that we pay for our power 
supply and it affects us in terms of how we . . . the kind of 
climate that we are going to be leaving for our children. 
 
This is the single, most important environmental threat to 
Saskatchewan today. It is an environmental threat; it is an 
economic threat, and it is something that we need to be 
prepared to deal with. 
 
The federal government has suggested that one way that we 
may want to deal with this is through the ratification of the 
Kyoto Protocol. This protocol, as members will know, is a part 
of an international agreement which is worked on to reduce 
greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Certainly our government over the last several months, in fact 
the last several years, has been working with Ottawa to better 
understand what it is that the Kyoto accord would do. There, 
today, are still many questions that need to be answered. We 
understand that targets have been set for various nations in 
terms of reducing their greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
I can tell you that from Saskatchewan’s standpoint, we 
understand very clearly that Canada has 3 per cent of the 
world’s greenhouse gas emissions. We know that within that we 
are the fifth largest emitter. Saskatchewan is the fifth largest 
emitter within Canada of greenhouse gases. We know that we 
need to work on that. We know that a large part of that is, in 
fact, because of our transportation network, the sparsity of our 
population, the type of climate we have. We know that part of 
that, of our growth over the last 10 years has been because of an 
increase in our industrial base. And we understand that 
agriculture also is a significant emitter of greenhouse gases. 
 
The challenge for us is to figure out how do we play a part in 
reducing greenhouse gas emissions? How do we reduce this, 
how do we help meet our environmental commitments, and 
how do we do that while continuing to strengthen our provincial 
economy? 

We have engaged Ottawa, we have engaged the provinces, we 
have engaged industry in a process to start to discuss seriously 
how we start to mitigate these issues. Kyoto presents some 
opportunities, Kyoto presents some very big challenges for us. 
Certainly one of the issues which we need to understand here in 
Saskatchewan is that we have such a significant growth in our 
economic output from that 1992 period, 1993 to about 1997, 
that we saw a tremendous increase in our greenhouse gas 
emissions. 
 
It is unfortunate that the Kyoto Protocol sets as the target to 
reduce below the 1990 levels. This puts Saskatchewan at 
something of a disadvantage because our industrial growth was 
after that time period. We need to work with Ottawa, we need 
to work with our national government, with other provinces, 
and with industries to set realistic targets for the reduction of 
greenhouse gas emissions. We need to clearly understand what 
the impacts are going to be on the province in terms of its 
environment, on the province in terms of its economy, and on 
the citizens who live here in terms of what the impact would be 
in terms of the consumers. That is the approach that we are 
continuing to work on as we work with Ottawa on this very 
important issue. 
 
But we are not waiting for Ottawa to give us their reports and 
their studies, which I’m sure they’ve done. We’re already 
moving forward with a long list of initiatives which we should 
be very proud of here in Saskatchewan. I am very pleased with 
the fact that today, just next door to my constituency at the 
University of Regina, there’s construction going on on a new 
Greenhouse Gas Technology Centre. This centre will be an 
international test centre for technology to help mitigate 
greenhouse gases. 
 
We should be very proud of the fact that we are a world leader 
in terms of carbon sequestration programs. We have moved 
forward in term of a very innovative project in Weyburn — 
which incidentally I never hear the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy talk about — in terms of the PanCanadian carbon 
sequestration project, the CO2 project, the fact that we have a 
project there which involves partners from really across the 
world that they are involved in this project. 
 
It was interesting I was at the university about three weeks and 
was meeting with some professors and one of them, one of the 
researchers came forward and quickly showed me a copy of a 
Hansard. And I thought oh, what is in this Hansard? What did I 
say now? As it turned out, fortunate for me, it wasn’t of me. It 
was a speech from the House of Lords. And what do these folks 
over at the House of Lords in London talk about? 
 
Well it turns out one of the things they talk about is Weyburn, 
Saskatchewan. They talk about this remarkable project that 
PanCanadian is involved in down in Weyburn in terms of 
sequestering this carbon, and one of the opportunities it has for 
us to move forward with moving this . . . dealing with the 
environmental research, helping to improve the climate, while 
at the same time also dealing with resource-extraction. A very 
innovative project. I was very happy to see it receive the kind of 
international accolades that it is, and certainly we have been 
very proud to be a partner in this. 
 
The work that is being done by our government, the 



116 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

investments that we have made are not simply on resource 
extraction. They have been investments that have helped us 
grow our economy, to protect our environment, and to move 
forward in terms of better research. 
 
The first opportunity I had to speak in this House was actually 
in a role that was very ably filled by the new member for 
Saskatoon Idylwyld this time and that was seconding the 
motion in response to the Speech from the Throne. 
 
In the comments that I made in 1996, I guess it was, I had 
talked about the need for us to move to invest more in research 
at our universities, to move this research from the microscope to 
the marketplace. Very much that is what our government has 
moved forward to do, and we simply need to look at the 
successes that we have through the Saskatchewan Research 
Council, through the work that’s done at the University of 
Saskatchewan in its research laboratories, through the work 
that’s done here at the University of Regina — and we can see 
the benefits of this. 
 
I’ve already spoken of the Greenhouse Gas Technology Centre 
which is being constructed. This incidentally is a project in 
which the American Department of Energy is involved. This is 
a case where Saskatchewan is attracting not only investment, 
not only research funds, but knowledge. We’re attracting the 
people here to build a better economy. That’s happening here in 
Regina. Of course we never hear the members opposite say 
anything good about Regina. But that’s one of the things that 
we are doing. 
 
We have seen great success with the Petroleum Technology 
Research Centre which has been constructed over at the 
University of Regina also. This is an innovative approach and it 
involves government, it involves the university, and it involves 
industry. In terms of talking about how do we more forward 
with smarter extraction of our resources. How do you reduce 
your environmental footprint? How do make sure you got better 
extraction of the petroleum resources? How do we make it last 
longer? How do you get more value added out of it? And how 
do we more forward into that 21st century of new technology in 
terms of the resource extraction? 
 
This is part of what our government has invested in. 
 
I’m always happy when I see others talk about what we should 
do in this province and I always like listening to other good 
ideas. 
 
I was reading in The Leader-Post just at the end of January that 
our Liberal friends had offered a business plan. And the 
headline read: “Karwacki offers his ideas.” And I thought well, 
this will be interesting. I thought let’s see what Mr. Karwacki 
has to say. Well, lo and behold, his great new idea is that we 
should invest in the Petroleum Technology Research Centre. I 
thought well, that’s a good idea. Happen to be a few years 
ahead of him on it but this is good to see some support there. 
 
He suggests that he wants to promote a CO2 injection project at 
Weyburn. Well this is another good idea. I think we are starting 
to see why maybe the member for North Battleford, there may 
be room over here again on this coalition. These are the kind of 
good Liberal ideas that we certainly want to welcome over here. 

His leader says that one of the things he wants to support is an 
international test centre for carbon dioxide capture for 
greenhouse gas research. Again, another ingenious approach to 
Liberal policy. 
 
I was very pleased to read that these were what Mr. Karwacki’s 
ideas were. Particularly pleased because they were ideas 
obviously brought forward in part by this government. And put 
into action. 
 
The members opposite always say, where’s the action plan? 
Well the action plan is pretty obvious. The action plan is in our 
research centres; the action plan is in the highways that have 
been constructed; the action plan is in terms of the fact that we 
have reduced the child poverty rates — that’s where the action 
plan is. The action plan is in reduced taxes for Saskatchewan 
people; the action plan is in economic growth; the action plan is 
in the fact that we are going to lead the nation in terms of the 
growth in the standard of living — that’s where the action plan 
is. That’s where the action plan is. 
 
But I’m always happy to see when . . . I should really not be too 
critical of the Liberals for supporting us on this and I think this 
is very good. Because indeed the members opposite in the 
Saskatchewan Party, I would encourage should follow the 
Liberals in this; join with us in supporting these good initiatives 
that are happening throughout our communities and throughout 
our province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, I won’t go on 
much longer today. We have many other opportunities, I’m 
sure, during the next several weeks to talk about the great things 
that are happening in our province and that we’re very proud of. 
 
I want to very sincerely welcome back to Regina the members 
who are from out of town. I think that we have here in this 
beautiful capital city of ours, great opportunities. We’ve got 
some very innovative entertainment areas. We’ve got some 
great options in terms of economic growth, and that we really 
are, I think here in Regina, leading the way on many, many 
issues, not just for Saskatchewan but for Canada. And I hope 
that over the next several weeks they’ll have an opportunity to 
take a look at some of these. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that, I simply want to say — I 
suspect what is obvious — I will be voting against the 
amendment. I will be voting against the negativity put forward 
by the members opposite and I will be voting in favour of a 
very innovative, solid, substantive plan that is laid out in the 
Speech from the Throne. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m 
very pleased to enter into debate on the Speech from the 
Throne. But first off I must make a comment about the previous 
speaker, the member from Regina South and the one on the 
other side, earlier, the member from Athabasca. And all I can 
say is I’m very pleased to be standing this far away from him so 
I didn’t get any of that stuff on my shoes. 
 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 117 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the member from 
Athabasca talked about doom and gloom and that we’re talking 
doom and gloom on this side. Well let me suggest that the doom 
and gloom has been created by 10, 12 years of NDP 
government and 50 years of CCF-NDP (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation-New Democratic Party) 
government in the past 70 years. That’s what creates the doom 
and gloom. All we do is identify a little bit of it. 
 
The member from Athabasca also talked about family. Well I 
think we’re all very, very touched with his speech about family 
and family values, and we support that. Every time we drive to 
some other province to see our family, we think about that. 
How can the individual get up and try and be eloquent about 
family values and whatnot when we send our families away to 
other parts of the country? 
 
The member from Athabasca also talked about . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . The member over there says his kids live here. 
He’s one of the lucky ones. Probably in a couple of years they’ll 
be gone. 
 
The member from Athabasca, Mr. Speaker, also talked about 
Saskatchewan Party — how can they use the name 
Saskatchewan in Saskatchewan Party? I’d like to throw that 
back to the member on the other side, when they have New 
Democratic Party. What’s new about it and what’s democratic 
about it? So I think he should look at internally a little bit before 
he starts complaining about us using the word Saskatchewan. 
 
We talk about growth and potential for growth and yet our 
people are leaving. On the government side of the House, look 
at the people from their caucus that have left: Link, Anguish, 
Shillington. All their supporters that were in cabinet, where are 
they now? You talk about us talking doom and gloom, their 
own cabinet members are leaving this province. How do they 
explain that? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to touch base on a few issues within 
the Throne Speech. It’s a recycled Throne Speech, we know 
that. It was done on recycled paper but it’s also a recycled 
Throne Speech, and I just want to touch on a couple of issues. 
 
Saskatchewan is leading in gross domestic product per capita — 
well what a profound statement. When you get your per capita 
down, it’s no wonder we’re leading in gross domestic product 
per capita. All you have to do is chase more people out and 
your per capita rate goes up. 
 
Now we talk about investing in Saskatchewan. In the Throne 
Speech it talks about the investments in Saskatchewan, the 
strand board in Meadow Lake, Premium Brands and Harvest 
foods in Yorkton, a food processing plant in Saskatoon. Guess 
what is common about this, Mr. Speaker? They’re all 
government projects. Here we’re expanding Saskatchewan one 
more time with government projects. And they’re talking about 
expanding the economy, it’s expanding government, growing 
Crowns and competing with the private sector. Is that a way to 
grow the economy? 
 
Investment in the economy and the environment. Saskatchewan 

will be led by the private sector in investment. This is from a 
socialist government that is talking about the private sector, and 
yet they just went ahead and talked about putting government 
money into all of these other initiatives. We even hear again 
today about government money going into the private sector 
initiatives, which is really not private sector — it’s government. 
 
I would like to comment on a radio program I listened to one 
day not too long ago, when Air Canada was having its financial 
woes and the Minister of Economic Development was on the 
radio, and his . . . I can’t give you the exact quote, I’ll give you 
a version of it. He said, we do not support bailing out Air 
Canada. We have a viable airline industry in this province that’s 
making a profit. Why can’t we let the private sector and free 
enterprise run its course? Can you imagine this from a socialist, 
saying let’s let free enterprise run its course? My goodness. 
 
We talk in the Throne Speech again: 
 

. . . a comprehensive National Farm Safety Net Program. 
 
This is the 10th year in a row we’ve heard we will be 
advocating a comprehensive national farm safety program. 
What is new. Same old, same old. 
 
And talking about the ethanol industry — and I’m going to 
touch on ethanol a couple of times — the Minister of Energy 
and Mines spoke ethanol and how the potential in ethanol is 
huge. And I agree. We have a tremendous potential in this 
province for ethanol, some options for our farmers. The biggest 
fear in the ethanol industry is government. The fear out there is 
the government will create a Crown corporation for the ethanol 
industry and that will scare away every private investor. 
 
The minister I understand is going around the province and his 
little speech is on ethanol and saying the Saskatchewan Party 
have a 10 per cent plan — they want to import ethanol. What 
kind of rubbish is he talking about? I don’t know what he’s 
smoking but it sure isn’t something that’s legal. 
 
In the Throne Speech here again, here again: 
 

My government will respond to . . . review . . . the 
(workmen’s) Compensation Act . . . 

 
How often do we have to review, Mr. Speaker? This is 
something new — we will review, time after time after time. 
 
Investment in infrastructure. I found this one kind of 
interesting: 
 

My government (will put) . . . $900 million, three-year plan 
to improve our highways. 

 
Well is this ever good. Is this ever good, Mr. Speaker. That is 
down from 311 million last year. Is that progress? 
 
And I can’t help but mention: 
 

. . . SaskTel will . . . (expand) high-speed internet to . . . 
(business) in 191 more communities by 2003. 

 
Well that’s about the same thing they said last year. Does 



118 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

high-speed Internet come out to rural areas? Not where I live, I 
can assure you. Can cell coverage come out there? No. Is it 
going to? Not likely. 
 

. . . my government’s plan includes other initiatives to tap 
the vitality and ideas of our youth. 

 
Well I applaud that — tapping the ideas of the youth. It’s about 
time they listened to somebody and they have to go to 
somebody to try and get some new ideas because it’s certain 
they have no new ideas sitting on that side of the House. 
 
And one more, one more on the Throne Speech specifically, 
Mr. Speaker. During this session of the legislature, the 
resources of our police service will be strengthened. The 
government will also monitor and report on measures taken to 
reduce crimes. Boy, can you imagine how much crime is going 
to be reduced because they’re going to monitor and report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Throne Speech, for my constituency, does that 
much good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit now about some other 
issues. The Minister of Economic Development, and we’ve 
heard about this already, on an interview he had stated that the 
Sask Party plan — and we have a plan — is not doable. And 
this is on a radio interview that the minister was talking and he 
referred to the Sask Party plan as not doable. 
 
Well there are a few things that come to mind, Mr. Speaker, 
thinking about that. First off, first off, he must have read our 
plan so he knows we have a plan if he read it, for him to have 
the thought to say that it’s not doable. And I’m very glad that 
he’s conversant with our plan. But for him to get up and say 
that our plan is not doable, I must assume that that side of the 
House they get together and they say we have to make sure that 
everything we do is doable. And I would like to look at a few of 
the specifics on this. 
 
Let’s look at Channel Lake. Do you think we could lose $15 
million? Sure, so let’s do it. That’s doable. Do you think we 
could lose $2 million in Guyana? Yes, let’s do it. That’s doable. 
NST (NST Network Services of Chicago), $16 million. That’s 
doable. Let’s get it done. SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato 
Utility Development Company), boy is there ever a doable one. 
 
This has to be some pretty small thinking on that part to sit 
around on that side of the House to come up with these ideas 
about what’s doable. Twenty-nine million to lose on SPUDCO, 
let’s do it because it is doable. ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), well, my goodness, let’s start 
out and give ISC a few dollars to start this information services. 
That’s doable. If they want more, we’ll give them more money. 
That’s doable. Eighty million dollars, well that’s okay, that’s 
doable. 
 
So they do have a doable plan over there, Mr. Speaker. I don’t 
agree with it, but they’re doing something — all in the wrong 
direction. 
 
Let’s go a little further on that. Let’s put $80 million into 
Australia. That’s doable. How about 200 million into Alberta, 
millions in Mexico, millions in Chile. That’s all doable, 

according to them, so they’ll do it. 
 
Let’s have Crowns compete with businesses. Oh boy, that’s 
doable. We can sure compete with businesses. Does Clickabid 
and SecurTek sound familiar? But, it’s doable. 
 
Let’s be brave. Let’s be brave as an NDP group and say let’s 
forecast that we’re going to have 30,000 less students in this 
province. What a pessimistic outlook, Mr. Speaker. But with 
their policies, it’s doable. 
 
Let’s create policy that will eliminate 12,000 jobs. They did it 
because it’s doable. 
 
How about, let’s have a deficit budget this year and try and 
cover it up with smoke and mirrors. We’re going to need a lot 
of smoke and many mirrors, but we can cover it up because it’s 
doable. 
 
Let’s increase surgical waiting lists. Hey, we can do that. Let’s 
reduce the number of nurses. Let’s say in three years, let’s 
reduce them by 1,192. That’s quite doable. And let’s blame the 
federal government; let’s blame the Saskatchewan Party; let’s 
blame whoever else for the lows of this province. They can do 
that. It’s doable. 
 
So let’s not forget, let’s not forget, Mr. Speaker, from the NDP 
side of the House, the biggest one of all — let’s grow 
government. We can and we will because it’s doable. And 
that’s what they did, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So we have a plan. Even the Minister of Economic 
Development has read our plan so he talks about. And we have 
a plan to grow Saskatchewan not to chase people out. So what 
do the citizens of Saskatchewan really want? A Saskatchewan 
plan to grow the province or a doable plan that the government 
has been doing that I just talked about? I think the obvious 
choice is very, very clear to most people in this province, the 
majority — maybe not the odd socialist. 
 
I’d like to talk a little bit about an article in the paper, and I 
know our leader the other day referred to this article, but there’s 
a couple of items in the article that I would like to further touch 
on and it’s from Randy Burton. 
 
I think it would behoove members on the other side to read the 
whole article because I think it says quite a bit in there. He talks 
about the provincial government. When it should be leading the 
way, the provincial government is wallowing in indecision. 
And, Mr. Speaker, I have a quote that I make quite frequently 
and that is: “Flexibility is the key to power, but indecision is the 
key to flexibility.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, we see this government operating on two tracks 
simultaneously — one of them promoting government’s role in 
the economy; and the other role, tearing it down. A quote from 
the article: 
 

What Calvert and company ignore is that government has a 
central role to play in establishing the climate that 
encourages a positive attitude. 
 

And that, Mr. Speaker, is not being done. 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 119 

 

Mr. Speaker, another article from the Saturday Leader-Post. 
There’s some good articles and good quotes in it that I think are 
quite important. And I quote: 
 

Rumour has it Premier Lorne Calvert chose the title, 
Province of Opportunity, for his second throne speech 
because Province of Reduced Expectations didn’t quite 
have the right ring to it. 

 
I again quote: 
 

Well, for one thing, we should stop studying everything 
and start doing something. 

 
I spoke about that a little bit earlier. 
 

For example, introducing a “Greenprint for Ethanol 
Production” doesn’t sound like something that’s going to 
see the construction of ethanol plants in Saskatchewan any 
time soon. 

 
Again, we can study and study and study, but until there’s 
action, nothing is going to get done. 
 

Let’s get moving on developing more intensive livestock 
operations in the province. Rather than buying . . . 15 
million (in) shares in Premium Brands, the province should 
be building the infrastructure to support the industry, such 
as roads, irrigation, tax incentives. 
 

Funny. That sounds familiar, doesn’t it? 
 

Imposing new red tape and new costs on businesses, such 
as higher minimum wages and tobacco restrictions on 
retailers and hoteliers is no way to build our economy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, another article in Saturday’s paper I’d like to 
touch on also, and it’s headlined: “Sask. population drop 
blamed on Crowns, taxes.” Again we have a government that is 
out of touch with reality. 
 

Saskatchewan’s population will continue to drop unless 
government stops squeezing out the private sector with 
Crown corporations, red tape and high taxes . . . 
 
“Government must shrink; the private sector must grow,” 
said economist Graham Parsons . . . 
 
For much of the last century, “Saskatchewan experimented 
with policies towards the economy . . . (and) systematically 
weakened the province,” said Parsons. 
 
“Jurisdictions, like Ireland, with low tax rates, few trade 
barriers, modern infrastructure, deregulated markets, and a 
vibrant private sector tend to enjoy strong economic growth 
. . . 
 
The lessons are quite clear: . . . (Strengthening) the private 
sector, allow it to grow and it will happen.” 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to now talk a little bit about my 
constituency of Wood River. 
 

We heard the minister earlier blowing steam about profits and 
putting cell phones into rural Saskatchewan. That’s a huge issue 
in my constituency. Will we get cell phones? Not as long as we 
have this government in. They want to do it on a business plan; 
they talk about it doesn’t work because there’s not enough 
business, as they chase more people out of the constituency. 
 
Ethanol is a huge topic. And this is where the worry comes into 
my constituency. We have five separate entities in my 
constituency that are looking at ethanol production. The 
common theme from every one of them is, get government out 
of our way. Every organization that I talk to involved in ethanol 
say, get government out of our way. 
 
And no, Mr. Speaker, they do not want money from the 
government because if money from the government comes in, 
the government will want to take over the ethanol industry and 
they do not want that. They are, they are definitely worrying 
that the government will form a Crown corporation and start 
doing their own little . . . (inaudible) . . . out in the area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to talk a little bit about the 
cell phones and high-speed Internet. In the town of Coronach I 
asked — we had a meeting with SaskTel — and I asked them if 
at, the time, that cell coverage would come to that area. The 
answer was maybe in a year, maybe not, we don’t know. 
 
About a week or two later, I got a . . . I received a letter from 
one of the people in Coronach saying, can you find out for us if 
we will get high-speed Internet? So I called SaskTel and said, 
I’d like to see a plan or hear your plan of when high-speed 
Internet can be expected down into this community. There was 
no plan; they had no idea. So the community went ahead and 
put in high-speed Internet on their own. 
 
Now here is a socialist system that supplies to everybody in the 
province but would not put high-speed Internet into this town, 
or cellphones into this town. So they’re going ahead and doing 
it on their own. 
 
Now I understand that SaskTel has some interest in doing it 
now because they are going to do it on a private basis. So now 
we can go and compete with the private sector on it. 
 
In Willow Bunch, a bus in Willow Bunch — we talked about 
this in Crowns — the little town of Willow Bunch lost its bus 
service a number of years ago. Will it come back? Who knows. 
I asked them, I asked them specifically if they would put a bus 
service back into Willow Bunch and they said it didn’t make a 
business sense. They had 1.8 passengers per day and they 
would not put the bus back in. And yet, on the other hand, there 
was one that had point five a week that they included. I wonder 
how, I wonder how they voted. 
 
We’ve talked with the Minister of Municipal Affairs about 
issues with a local dam in the Killdeer area and the answer I 
received back is that they will close the gates on this dam. It 
had been left open for a number of years and noxious weeds 
were spreading and actually going into the United States and so 
they are now closing the dam. But even from the minister they 
said, we want to find out if anybody in the local area will take 
over this facility. 
 



120 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

Well my recommendation to the people in the local area is, 
don’t touch that with a 10-foot pole. Why would you? The 
government came in and built a dam and then want to walk 
away from it. Why about the environmental concerns? What 
about the noxious weeds concerns? So I think we have to hold 
the government’s feet to the fire and make sure that something 
is done and done properly with this facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we talk about health care and we just heard the 
Minister of Energy and Mines talking about being on the board 
or the committee for health care. And I would just like to 
reiterate one of the statements I made last year and how health 
care is going in rural area and in my constituency. 
 
The hospital at Climax — we will remember and I will refresh 
— we heard that the rumour was spread that palliative care was 
going to close. So with the palliative care rumour out, that it 
was going to close, those with loved ones there said rather than 
transport them back and forth on Friday to another facility and 
back Monday, we won’t put them in that facility. Lo and 
behold, it was a month or two later, the then associate minister 
of Health said, well it’s not being used, therefore we closed it. 
What came first, the chicken or the egg? 
 
So now that’s happening again, is why I bring that one up. 
 
We have in Lafleche a long-term care facility. Unfortunately 
four people passed away so there’s four beds available. Are 
they using them? No. They took about a month to paint them so 
there is a list of people to get in but they took so long to have 
them painted, these people were again backed up and backed up 
on the list. 
 
So when they finally got them painted, people are starting to 
move in, but on 30 days, on respite. So they will not let them in 
for long-term care. So what is this going to mean? Somebody 
will get up and say there is no waiting list for long-term care so 
we can close the facility. Again, it’s kind of a backward way of 
looking at our health system. 
 
As I travel the constituency, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues 
that are very, very near and dear: the closure of more rail lines 
is imminent; the tobacco law. 
 
And we hear the tobacco law, how flawed it is. And that’s a real 
concern in the rural area. It’s a concern all over, but in my 
constituency it’s a very, very deep concern that this tobacco law 
has to be changed. For goodness sake, we allow, we allow kids 
under age to smoke, we just don’t let them . . . allow them to 
see them or to purchase them. But they can stand outside a 
facility and smoke. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we need to do is create an atmosphere for 
business and create jobs in the rural areas. And how do we need 
. . . how do we do that? It’s by getting government out of the 
hair of business. 
 
We need some water policy for the drought areas. I had a call 
today where an individual, his cattle had no water and he had to 
dig a well. He looked at how he could do it. He went through 
the government agencies, was told that there was programs that 
he could get money. He went to the bank, borrowed $20,000 so 
he could put water in to water his livestock herd. He did not 

want to sell it. 
 
So when he finished the water project so he could feed his . . . 
or water his cattle, he submitted a bill to the government with 
all the proper documentation. The answer back is, well we don’t 
have any money. So here he is holding the bag again — another 
great government program. 
 
The other big issue in my constituency is people are wondering 
when the next election is. We lost people in my constituency, 
Mr. Speaker. From the census, we are down about 1,400. Where 
are they? They are going out for jobs. Can we bring those jobs 
back to rural Saskatchewan? Yes, we can. All we have to do is 
get government out of the way of business. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, I want to touch base on one of the 
impediments to business. And it was in the Minister of Labour’s 
own constituency. It was a business coming in from Calgary 
and they had a visit with the mayor of Moose Jaw and decided 
not to come. For two reasons, only two reasons this business 
would not move in. One was the labour laws and the other was 
the labour attitude of this province. That’s how we are stifling 
business in this province. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, we hear rhetoric from the 
government side says we are out there listening to people. We 
are out there listening to people around the province. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I would like to just . . . I would like to refer to a letter 
how this government listens to people. And the Minister of 
Education is probably very familiar with this. It’s from the 
school of Wood Mountain, the mayor of Wood Mountain. 
 
And there has been some correspondence that’s gone back and 
forth but here is a letter from the deputy minister — the 
minister would not even sign off on the letter — but from the 
deputy minister. It says: 
 

Neither the minister nor the department has any further 
comments to add in response to your various concerns and 
arguments. 
 

In other words, shut up and don’t bother us. That is how this 
government listens to people. Shame. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve already heard about the Minister of 
Economic Development’s statement — less people means more 
money for those of us who are left. Well, how ludicrous can 
that statement be? And then, and then the spin doctors went out 
and tried to spin it saying he was taken out of context. Well, 
Mr. Speaker, how can you be taken out of context if it’s on a 
live TV interview? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP, I think they do have a plan to keep 
people in Saskatchewan, albeit facetious. We’ll let the car 
thieves increase. We’ll let the young people steal the cars and 
not stop them. That way people won’t have vehicles to leave the 
province. Pretty poor way of trying to keep people in the 
province. 
 
In closing, Mr. Speaker, I just want to touch base on the 
election promises that have been broken. I touched on some 
already but I think it’s worthwhile. 
 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 121 

 

The promise: we’ll create 30,000 jobs. The record: 12,000 jobs 
lost. The promise: we’ll keep the budget balanced. Record: 478 
million deficit 2001-2002. Promise: surgical waiting times to be 
cut by at least 30 per cent. Well, Mr. Speaker, waiting lists have 
increased over 50 per cent and Saskatchewan is the proud 
owner of the longest waiting lists in Canada. 
 
The NDP promised less crime. Well we’ve all heard of that. 
Regina is the car theft capital of North America. I don’t believe 
that’s less crime. The NDP promised to hire 200 more police 
officers and what do we have? Forty-five more hired and that’s 
probably just to make up for the people that have retired. 
 
And one I’ve alluded to already, the NDP promised we will hire 
500 new health care providers, and what have we seen — 1,192 
fewer nurses than 1999. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has no plan. It has a lot of 
rhetoric and no plan. Therefore, Mr. Speaker, as one would 
expect, I will be supporting the amendment and not the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I’m 
happy to have you back at the helm. Just a brief starting 
comment, because I can’t resist, about the member opposite 
from Wood River’s comments: once a bomber, always a 
bomber. There was so much stuff flying around this room it was 
hard to know what he was trying to hit where. If I ever figure 
out what he was trying to say, Mr. Speaker, I’ll respond to it. 
 
Now as well on a more serious note, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
welcome back the member from Battleford-Cut Knife and wish 
him well. I know that that kind of a struggle takes a great deal 
out of a person, and certainly have watched people close to me 
deal with serious illness and so I just say that we’re glad to have 
you back and glad things have turned out well for you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — And I do want to start by thanking Her 
Honour for her most excellent address and, as well, a special 
thank you to the member for Saskatoon Greystone who moved 
the Throne Speech and I think, among other things, provided a 
very excellent overview of environmental and community 
issues in Saskatchewan that hopefully this House will be very 
thoughtful about. 
 
And a second special thank you to the member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld who seconded the Throne Speech and brought the 
perspective of a newly elected person with a passion for 
community that comes out of working in Saskatoon schools and 
community organizations and certainly understands the 
importance of programs that strengthen family and community. 
I was pleased as well, Mr. Speaker, to see that I have a little bit 
of oomph there as someone who also understands the 
importance of the cultural community. So I’m looking forward 
to more discussions on that front. 
 
But one of the things that was common to all the speeches, Mr. 
Speaker, was hope; accomplishments for the present and hope 

for the future. And I think responses to the Throne Speech do 
provide an excellent opportunity for elected members to 
respond while adding their own ideas, their own thoughts, 
because elected people are never content to rest, Mr. Speaker. 
We go into this kind of work because we want to make the 
world a better place and I think, until every child has an 
opportunity to fulfill their potential, we won’t be done. 
 
So never content to rest on their laurels, Mr. Speaker. I think 
that hope springs eternal and I look forward to hearing all the 
speeches of the members. 
 
But at this time in the world’s history, I think we should be 
particularly thoughtful about our democratic opportunities. You 
know, there’s people who study democracy and they study why 
some areas have more economic and social success than others. 
And they’ve determined that democracies are places where 
economies flourish. And some of this is obvious. 
 
We know that strife and conflict detracts from putting our 
energies into moving forward. And we certainly have seen the 
effect that strife and conflict can have on tourism, on service 
industries, on all of the kind of things where people travel in the 
conduct of creating wealth. 
 
But strife also pushes people away, whether they’re visitors or 
whether they’re people who live in a community. And when it 
escalates into armed actions, it creates wounds between families 
and cultures and regions that are difficult to surmount even in 
the common interest. 
 
I don’t know if you know, but today was a day of remembering 
Dalton Camp on the radio. And Flora McDonald was actually 
on with some remembrances during the time I was in the car 
and she was recollecting a discussion she had with him — with 
Dalton Camp — within the last week or two. And so the 
reporter said, well what did you talk about? And she said, well 
he said to me, you know Flora, you’ve got to get in there and do 
something about this conflict in Afghanistan. She said it’s . . . 
some of the approaches have just gone too far and I can’t do 
anything about it from where I am, so I’m counting on you to 
do something about this. 
 
And regardless of a person’s particular views about that, I think 
the point that she said that was very constant throughout Dalton 
Camp’s life was that he urged people who took on the mantle of 
elected office to actively work and fight for the things they 
believe in and care about. And I think that’s a very good 
message to come out of his life. 
 
Now the second part of a democratic and civil society that the 
researchers have identified is volunteerism. And we know that’s 
alive and well in Saskatchewan. People have been quoting this 
article, “Saskatchewan: not the biggest, just the best.” Certainly 
there’s some of us who think that small is beautiful, especially 
those of us who are 5 foot 2. But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, 
that the 2001 census report had some very good things to say 
about Saskatchewan — about charitable giving, volunteering, 
and community involvement, or in other words, caring — 
people who care enough to help, who care enough to become 
involved. In fact I hope, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition hears 
this phrase: caring enough to become involved rather than 
simply sitting back and sniping from the edges. 



122 Saskatchewan Hansard March 19, 2002 

 

But one of the striking discoveries the researchers made was 
how high Saskatchewan rated in all of the categories. Charitable 
donations: we give an average of $308 per capita. That was 
double many of the other provinces. In volunteer work, 45 per 
cent of people give up their time in Saskatchewan, 60 per cent 
join in community activities and associations. Everywhere 
Saskatchewan was well out in front of all of their other 
counterparts. 
 
Four times as likely to be involved in church and twice as likely 
in sport or cultural activities. Now civic participation, Mr. 
Speaker, is a form of social glue, although you have to be 
careful not to get too far into the glue. But it’s the kind of thing 
that makes Saskatchewan have a high quality of life and have 
the regard that we have from many people around the world. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — So, Mr. Speaker, according to both the 
research and the pundits, we have the ideals . . . conditions in 
Saskatchewan to use our democratic process to the fullest. And 
that’s what I intend to do today, Mr. Speaker, and tomorrow, 
and possibly the day after, depending on how long it takes me 
to tell everybody all the good things that are going on in this 
province. 
 
And first of all, I want to spend a few minutes talking about my 
constituency because they are very dear to me, Mr. Speaker. I 
think they’re the very best. And whether it’s north-central, the 
Transition Area, core, Cathedral, the Italian Club area, or 
McNab Place, every part of our constituency places a very high 
value on community. It’s expressed through community 
services, community schools, social housing, heritage 
preservation, energetic small business, celebrations of 
community, tree banding, community garbage pickup, festivals 
of talent. 
 
And SaskCulture, who is one of the organizations that operates 
under the lottery system in this province, they have a motto, it’s 
Culture Builds Community. And certainly both the Cathedral 
Village Arts Festival and the Core Community Festival, which 
are two of the more established festivals in our area, are a big 
part of bringing together diverse cultures in the community, but 
as well, showcasing all the talents and skill of people in the 
community. 
 
And every person who’s ever visited Regina Centre has 
commented on how it feels good to be there. So I’m just going 
to say that I’m very pleased to represent Regina Centre. And 
I’m going to get on with the Throne Speech debate. I can’t 
adjourn yet. 
 
And I’m going to follow the lead of several presenters and use 
the four pillars of the Throne Speech to support the areas I want 
to emphasize. But like . . . in the words of Robert Frost, many 
people have explored many topics and I’m going to take the 
road less travelled and try to talk about some of the things that I 
think have maybe not had as much attention. But I will mention 
that no one governs alone and no one builds a community 
alone. 
 
So the areas I will be talking about will reflect substantial 
working partnerships with educators, mayors and city councils, 

health districts, community associations. And as laid out in Her 
Honour’s most excellent address, the four pillars of the Throne 
Speech are: investment in the economy and the environment, 
investment in infrastructure, provision of quality education, and 
healthy and self-reliant families. Now I think I just have time, 
Mr. Speaker, to start on investment in the economy and the 
environment. 
 
But a bit about the opposition first. You know, a wise 
businessman once said that success in business is 90 per cent 
attitude. Now the other 90 per cent is hard work. And I know 
that’s not my math that’s at fault, Mr. Speaker. I know that 
that’s 180 per cent, but I believe that it takes 180 per cent to be 
successful in a small business. 
 
And I also know . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh there’s lots 
the opposition doesn’t know about me. I’ve run many 
businesses. 
 
But anyway . . . I know that the Sask Party was out recently in 
rural Saskatchewan on their busted tour and they were 
ostensibly out there to talk about growing the economy but it 
became apparent very quickly, Mr. Speaker, that they needed to 
be out there growing their meetings because there wasn’t very 
many people who came. 
 
Now yesterday, Mr. Speaker, the member from Rosthern tried 
to make a great deal about the shortfall in this year’s revenues. 
Now first I want to remind the opposition, Mr. Speaker, that the 
balanced budget legislation recognizes the cyclical nature of 
Saskatchewan’s economy and because of that requires that the 
budget be balanced over four years. 
 
And so now the member portrays this as a huge calamity, but 
you know, Mr. Speaker, I remember last year — I’m getting a 
little bit older but I can still remember last year — and last year 
the members opposite couldn’t have enough to say about 
Alberta. But you know I don’t think we’ll be hearing much 
about Alberta this year because here’s a little fiscal reality — 
Alberta style. Alberta may delay business tax cuts. 
 
Now if the House Leader would not participate in the speech we 
would get a little more done here, Mr. Speaker. But I think I 
would like to quote just a little bit from this: 
 

Klein admits Tuesday’s budget will be a far cry from his 
blueprint last year which suggested Alberta 6.5 billion 
accumulated debt would be paid off in a few years. 

 
And why is that? Why is that? Because Finance minister 
Patricia Nelson warns her new budget will reflect reality. I’ll 
say that again, Mr. Speaker. Finance minister Patricia Nelson 
warns her new budget will reflect reality. Now I think that if 
Alberta has conceded that reality exists out in the world — 
fiscal reality — that certainly the cheerleaders from the Sask 
Party would agree that, that some reality exists as well. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we do have a plan. We believe it’s the right 
plan. And unlike the members opposite who think they don’t 
need one, I remember a party who thought they could run 
government with notes they made on the back of their cigarette 
packages. Well it’s even worse, Mr. Speaker. A lot of them 
have given up smoking. Now those plans are written nowhere. 



March 19, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 123 

 

And I have to tell you that, that we do have a plan. It involves 
investment. It involves an appropriate tax structure, improved 
highways, leading edge communication technology, good 
water, schools, health care facilities, and it’s a plan, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s sustainable. 
 
Now I know that people will be hanging on every word so I am 
just going to close with a few words about reality. Alberta 
knows a few things the opposition doesn’t. One of them is that 
75 per cent of our trade, Mr. Speaker, is with the US. So if the 
US economy is struggling, I suspect it’s possible that it may 
affect our economy. 
 
When people are saying that corporate tax revenues have been 
affected by September 11, then certainly it’s a fact that every 
province’s corporate tax revenues have been affected. 
 
And when Alberta is reeling from lowered oil and gas prices, 
then as one of the next largest producers in Canada, it would 
only stand to reason that we would have some difficulties. 
 
But tomorrow, Mr. Speaker, my theme is going to be action and 
hope, based on a plan. And I’d like to move adjournment of the 
Speech to the Throne for today . . . debate . . . Speech to the 
Throne. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 


