















































Hansard: June 21, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2237 
 June 21, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 10:00. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of northeast Saskatchewan 
concerned about the condition of Highway No. 23 west from 
Junction 9 to the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
No. 23 to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Porcupine Plain and 
Tisdale. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition on behalf of citizens concerned with overfishing 
with nets at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Langenburg. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present regarding the conditions of the 
highways in our province. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent loss of life 
and to prevent injury, and also the loss of economic 
opportunity in this area. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as in duty bound, the petitioners will ever 
pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed from many, many residents 
of the community of Lang. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the increased premium hikes to 
crop insurance and reduced coverage. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of North Battleford and Biggar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise again today with a petition from citizens in rural 
Saskatchewan that are concerned about the lack of cellular 
telephone coverage, and the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone service to all communities 
throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of 
Meyronne. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received: 
 

A petition concerning a change of name to the Moose 
Mountain Health District; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper nos. 7, 11, 129, 132, 134, 164, 165, and 169. 

 
PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Agriculture 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to table the final report on the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture on farm land ownership. I will be making a motion 
to that end at the end of my remarks. 
 
On April 12, 2002, the Standing Committee on Agriculture 
received its order of reference that it examine and make 
recommendations to the Assembly with respect to the 
agriculture land holdings provisions as set out in The 
Saskatchewan Farm Security Act. To that end the committee sat 
and received verbal presentations from farmers, interested 
groups, and individuals. The committee also received a number 
of written submissions. 
 
Witnesses expressed their hopes and their fears, and there are 



2238 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

historical reasons that contribute to the breadth of the anxiety 
concerning Saskatchewan agriculture that witnesses expressed 
during the hearings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question simply put: should Saskatchewan 
farm land ownership rules be loosened? The witnesses 
demonstrated strongly held opinions on both sides of the issues 
as did the committee members. It was obvious to the committee 
members that all Saskatchewan people have a special place in 
their heart for Saskatchewan agricultural land. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the work of the committee was about listening to 
people of Saskatchewan and hearing their views about what 
changes, if any, they thought were needed. It was clear that all 
presenters wanted to have a strong agriculture industry in 
Saskatchewan, an industry that provided people with the ability 
to live on the land and in the rural communities across our 
province. They wanted an industry where young farmers and 
their families could be a part of their community, while retiring 
farmers could retire in dignity. 
 
To achieve this, the suggestions of the presenters were as varied 
as were the opinions of the committee members. One thing that 
all presenters pointed out was to achieve the effects of the 
desired agriculture industry, the farm land ownership issue was 
only one piece of a much larger puzzle. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to take this opportunity to thank the 
other members of the Legislative Assembly that served on this 
committee with me. Those members were: the member from 
Watrous — the Vice-Chair of the committee — the member 
from Saskatoon Nutana, the member from Saltcoats, the 
member from Cypress Hills, the member from Saskatoon 
Idylwyld, the member from Saskatoon Meewasin, the member 
from Melville, and the member from Redberry Lake. 
 
Other members that sat in on the committee were the members 
from Saskatoon Southeast, Saskatoon Northwest, Saskatoon 
Greystone, Regina Victoria, Regina Qu’Appelle Valley, and 
Lloydminster. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these members are to be commended for the time 
and the efforts they devoted to a very worthwhile cause. 
 
I would like to thank the staff of the Office of the Clerk of the 
Legislative Assembly for their diligent work on this committee, 
and the assistance provided to the committee by researcher 
Avrum Fenson in preparation of this report. 
 
The committee wishes to extend its appreciation to all 
individuals and groups who made oral presentations and 
submitted written briefs. 
 
To that end, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move, seconded by 
the member from Watrous: 
 

That the report entitled Report on Farm Land Ownership of 
the Standing Committee on Agriculture be now concurred 
in. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 72 ask the government the following question: 
 

What are the details of the contract that the provincial 
government had with the investigator looking into 
allegations of harassment against former minister of 
Environment and the MLA for Saskatoon Southeast? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the House six adult students that are sitting up in the west 
gallery, and they’re from the Regina Open Door Society. And 
they are students of English as a second language and language 
instructions for newcomers to Canada. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, they’re here today to take in part of the 
proceedings of the House and I’ll have the opportunity of 
joining them a little later on for a photo and a brief visit. And I 
just hope they all enjoy their time here, and I’d ask all the 
members to offer them a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. This 
morning seated in your gallery are 10 organic farmers from 
Costa Rica, and accompanying them today are Kyle Syverson, 
who is the interpreter, and Ross Korven, who is the coordinator 
of the program. 
 
These organic farmers, Mr. Speaker, from Costa Rica are here 
on an exchange. Our Saskatchewan . . . 10 of our Saskatchewan 
farmers were in Costa Rica in January or February of this past 
year. 
 
Earlier this week the members from Saskatoon Sutherland and 
from Nutana and from Regina Elphinstone and Saskatoon 
Greystone had an opportunity to meet with our organic farmers 
and talk with them a bit about the work that they’re doing in 
their country and the things that we could learn as we build the 
agricultural industry in both of our countries as it relates to the 
organic, as it relates to the organic industry. 
 
They’re here to study our practices and us to learn from them. 
And I want this morning to ask all members of the House to 
join with me and say bienvenido à Saskatchewan as you’re here 
in the House, and enjoy the Farm Progress Show in our 
province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, it is my pleasure to rise here and join the 
Minister of Agriculture in welcoming our guests from Costa 
Rica. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Ross Korven is of course to myself no 
stranger. Mr. Korven has often been involved in the promotion 
of our beautiful province of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. Speaker, 
many years ago when I was chairman of the school board for 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2239 

 

the Prince Albert Rural School Division, Mr. Korven had the 
opportunity to bring a multitude of students from Mongolia to 
further advance their opportunities in understanding the English 
language. And certainly those students are probably forever 
grateful for that opportunity. And certainly the students in 
Prince Albert were enriched because of that process. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, we 
too want to welcome the farmers from Costa Rica and hope 
they enjoy their time in Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Aboriginal Day 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today, Friday, June 
21, is National Aboriginal Day and festivities are taking place 
throughout the country, our province, and in this, our fair 
capital city, Regina. 
 
Canadians have been celebrating National Aboriginal Day since 
1996 when June 21 was designated as a special day to honour 
First Nations, Inuit, and Métis culture and to recognize the 
outstanding contributions Aboriginal people are making and 
have made to Canada. 
 
June 21 was chosen because of the cultural significance of the 
summer solstice and because many Aboriginal groups had 
already marked this day out as a time to celebrate their heritage. 
 
In Regina, one of the celebrations is a street party hosted by the 
Aboriginal Family Services Centre and it gets underway at 5:30 
on 5th Avenue and Rae Street. A short program will be 
followed by a display of dancing and singing from various 
groups. Rumour has it that there may even be a dunk tank, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Throughout the day there will also be festivities in Wascana 
Park. Inuit throat singers will be one of the highlights in the 
afternoon, followed by other outstanding cultural performances. 
Arts and crafts will be displayed alongside food venues and 
there will also be entertainment and activities for children. 
 
Certain members of the media will even be on hand to try their 
hand at making bannock, a tasty contest I’m sure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There is also the historic SIFC (Saskatchewan Indian Federated 
College) powwow at their beautiful new college building. There 
is a barbecue at the Indian Métis Christian Fellowship centre, 
and Regina Treaty Indian Services is hosting a round dance 
tonight at The Gathering Place. 
 
There are many reasons to celebrate National Aboriginal Day 
and just about as many opportunities to join in the fun. I urge all 
members to join in the celebrations for National Aboriginal 
Day. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

(10:15) 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today, June 21, is National Aboriginal Day across Canada. 
National Aboriginal Day was first proclaimed by Governor 
General Romeo LeBlanc in 1996. June 21 was chosen because 
of its cultural significance with the summer solstice, which is 
the first day of summer and the longest day of the year. 
 
Many Aboriginal groups have set aside June 21 to celebrate 
their heritage. Today, National Aboriginal Day is part of the 
national, nationwide Celebrate Canada festivities held during 
the 11th period . . . 11-day period from June 21 to July 1. 
 
Mr. Speaker, National Aboriginal Day is not only a wonderful 
opportunity to learn more about the diverse cultures and the 
outstanding contributions of the First Nations, Inuit, and Métis 
people of the country, but it is also a great opportunity to 
celebrate the many celebrations and traditions that will be 
taking place in the province of Saskatchewan. In fact, Mr. 
Speaker, the theme of this year’s National Aboriginal Day is 
sharing traditions. And with so many events happening close to 
home, I encourage residents of all communities to take part in 
some of the festivities. 
 
Right here in Wascana Park, Mr. Speaker, there will be First 
Nations and Métis entertainment, Inuit games, cultural 
demonstrations like teepee camp, pottery making, storytelling, 
sports, children activities, arts and crafts, live performances, 
and of course lots of food and fireworks. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we owe much to the First Nations, Métis, and 
Inuit people of Canada, and National Aboriginal Day is our way 
of recognizing the many contributions to this country. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

New Hospital Opening in Melville 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to inform 
the House today about a milestone in my constituency. Later 
this afternoon I will be in the city of Melville to help open a 
new hospital. Yes, that’s right, Mr. Speaker — a new hospital 
for the city of Melville and surrounding communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — The new St. Peter’s Hospital will serve 
short-term patients and long-term care residents and bring 
health care into the 21st century as a lasting legacy to our 
children and future residents. 
 
City of Melville residents and thousands from local villages and 
RMs (rural municipality) have planned, lobbied, and fundraised 
for over a decade for a new hospital. They have held 
community suppers, celebrity roasts, silent auctions, and talent 
shows. They’ve worked also through some setbacks and false 
starts. And yes, Mr. Speaker, they’ve even worked through the 
scare tactics of the opposition. 
 
The ex-Tory member and self-proclaimed Sask Party candidate 



2240 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

for Melville left a legacy of a broken pipe from the old hospital 
to future representatives. Well I’m happy to report that pipe is 
being laid to rest by this member of the coalition government as 
the hospital is open today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, even the member from 
Melfort labelled this project as a white elephant of the Fyke 
report. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m jubilant at the prospect of this afternoon’s 
event. I look forward to visiting with the citizens and touring 
the facility today. The Miller Elementary School children are 
performing an original song today titled “It Takes a Whole 
Community to Build a Hospital.” 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this coalition government will continue to 
support communities in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Steelman Student Wins Excellence Award 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
leadership, innovative thinking, community involvement, and 
academic excellence are the measures by which Amber Klatt of 
Steelman, a student at Lampman School, was judged in her 
application to the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. I 
find it . . . find it very difficult, members, to be able to hear the 
statement. I just ask members . . . And the member may start 
over if she wishes. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Leadership, 
innovative thinking, community involvement, and academic 
excellence are the measures by which Amber Klatt of Steelman, 
a student at Lampman School, was judged in her application to 
the Canadian Millennium Scholarship Foundation Excellence 
Award program. 
 
She passed with flying colours, receiving 1 of only 600 awards 
to be handed out across Canada this year. The foundation 
received over 7,000 applications from across Canada in this 
year’s awards. Following a three-month selection process, 
awards were distributed at the national, provincial, territorial, 
and local levels. 
 
Amber will receive $4,000 to be applied towards the cost of her 
studies in science at the University of Saskatchewan this fall. 
 
Amber is an all around athlete and a repeat winner of her 
school’s leadership and spirit awards. She has been active in the 
SRC (student representative council) at her school, is the voice 
of the youth’s viewpoint on her local health advisory board, 
brought motivational media to her schools as a part of Students 
Against Drunk Driving and has organized luncheons for the . . . 
marking the International Women’s Day. And at the recent 
grade 12 graduation, Mr. Speaker, which I was honoured to 
attend, Amber was class valedictorian. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member from Cannington has asked that I 

send his congratulations to Amber as well. And I would like, at 
this time, to ask all members to join me in recognizing the 
achievements of Amber Klatt. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Jazz Festival 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the world of jazz, 
there has been a Count Basie; a Duke Ellington; a King of 
Swing, Benny Goodman; a Prez, Lester Young; and at least one 
Lady, Billie Holiday 
 
Now after apprenticing for five years as a volunteer, I’m happy 
to announce that, beginning today and continuing to the end of 
the month, I am the official MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) for the SaskTel Saskatchewan Jazz Festival. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — The festival is headquartered in my 
constituency, with continual concerts around the city, with 
excursions to Regina, North Battleford, Moose Jaw, and 
Lloydminster. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as the MLA for jazz, I want to invite all 
members and everyone within a downbeat of my voice to head 
to the riverbank around the Bessborough and have a 
toe-tapping, finger-popping time of your life. As my colleague 
from Sutherland said earlier this week, the sun is out, summer 
officially began about an hour ago and it’s time to think about 
relaxing. 
 
As has been the case for 16 years, you will be able to hear a 
tremendous variety of improvised music — Dixieland, 
traditional jazz, zydeco, blues, gospel — you name it, Mr. 
Speaker. There are international stars, up-and-coming 
musicians, and an amazing collection of local talents, one of our 
secrets that this festival goes a long way towards revealing. And 
in the spirit of this most democratic musical genre, there are 
free concerts daily on the riverbank. 
 
As always this Saskatchewan event is successful because of the 
hard work and planning of its staff headed by President Karen 
Kowalenko-Evjan and its corporate, individual sponsors, and 
primarily because of more than 200 volunteers, all of whom 
come together to present this week-long gift of wonderful music 
to us all. 
 
So see you in Saskatoon, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Prosecution Settlements 
 
Mr. Hillson: — The first malicious prosecution case arising out 
of the allegations of satanic child abuse was settled this week at 
a cost of $1.3 million. Yet the Minister of Justice, while signing 
the letter of apology, said there was nothing more than errors in 
judgment and continued to deny that any malicious prosecution 
had occurred. 
 
Meanwhile this week a malicious prosecution judgment came 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2241 

 

down in Alberta. Jason Dicks had spent 22 months in prison. 
The prosecutor, who is no longer with the government, had lied 
to the court and made use of a forged letter in building his case. 
If a case that sent a man to jail for two years and involving the 
most despicable prosecution tactics results in a payment of not 
much more than half of what Saskatchewan paid, then what are 
we paying for? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are still approximately another 15 similar 
case arising out of bizarre allegations of ritual satanic child 
abuse. The Popowich settlement suggests that Saskatchewan 
taxpayers could well be on the hook for 10 to $20 million. To 
pay out that sort of money without a full-scale inquiry, and 
while the government continues to deny that anything very 
much went wrong, is as illogical as the initial allegations that 
ritual satanic child abuse and the eating of babies was a 
widespread phenomenon in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need the answers. The Minister of Justice 
needs to tell more to the people of Saskatchewan who will have 
to dig deep in their pockets to pay for the bungling. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I go further I would just advise the 
member, in future when he’s making statements with respect to 
people who are in or out of the Assembly — and I’m not 
disputing facts — but I would ask him to watch the language 
that he uses and there are certain words that we don’t use in this 
Assembly. 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Financial Assistance for Agriculture 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, while 
the federal government is talking about billions of dollars for 
agriculture, it’s now clear that very little of that money will 
actually find its way into the hands of the Saskatchewan 
farmers. 
 
Yesterday the Minister of Agriculture said it only amounts to 
about $2 per acre in Saskatchewan; $2 an acre, Mr. Speaker, 
isn’t very much money. 
 
Today we hear that this package was designed by a federal 
deputy minister whose goal is to drive farmers out of farming. 
And, Mr. Speaker, this package will go a long ways in 
achieving that goal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, has the minister confirmed these numbers? Does 
the federal Liberal’s big announcement only work out to about 
$2 an acre for Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I’ll ask the Minister of Agriculture to 
address some of the more specific questions that I know the 
member will have this morning. But I do want to report to the 
member that we have not been made privy to specific amounts. 
 
Interestingly enough I spoke with a journalist this morning who 
had an interview yesterday with the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, gave forewarning to the federal Minister of 
Agriculture that he wanted to know specific numbers around 

Saskatchewan, and the federal Minister of Agriculture to that 
journalist said, I have no idea; I don’t know the numbers. 
 
So we are here in a difficult spot when a federal government 
announces a major agricultural program and cannot provide, 
from the minister, the numbers to journalists or in fact to 
members of the opposition or to members of government. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is this, Mr. Speaker, and I want to 
point this out to members; I’m sure all members will enjoy this. 
This I have in front of me, Mr. Speaker, is the front page of 
today’s Globe and Mail; it has a picture of the Prime Minister 
of Canada standing here just after announcing this farm 
program, wearing a nice little red hat I see. Right behind the 
Prime Minister, Mr. Speaker, is a barn that’s on this farm where 
they announced the program. And I just want members to note 
the name of the barn . . . the name of the farm. It’s called the 
Buckstop Farms. 
 
That’s absolutely right. This is exactly where the buck stops — 
right here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I think that the Premier should 
perhaps pick up the phone and find out how much money this 
does amount to, rather than asking the media, because it’s 
extremely important that producers in Saskatchewan know. If it 
does indeed turn out to be $2 an acre, that isn’t very much 
money — especially when you consider that this spring the 
NDP (New Democratic Party) jacked up the crop insurance 
rates by about $4 an acre. They cancelled spot loss hail and that 
amounts to about $3.50 an acre. The NDP government 
cancelled the land property tax rebate. That cost the farmers 
about 50 cents an acre. 
 
So when you add it all up, even if we get the federal share of 
this money and it does indeed turn out to be $2 an acre, the 
Saskatchewan farmers will still be worse off than last year by 
about $6 an acre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is Saskatchewan farmers aren’t 
getting much help from either level of government. Why did the 
NDP pick this year of all years to attack the farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, the member from Watrous 
will know that in this year’s budget we provided for farmers in 
Saskatchewan this year a crop insurance program, Mr. Speaker, 
that kept our premiums and their premiums on the crop 
insurance program whole. That’s why we put the $14 million 
in, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That member will know that we took and implemented in 
Saskatchewan today a forage program and a pasture program 
through crop insurance — unprecedented in Canada — because, 
Mr. Speaker, we were concerned about the drought in 
Saskatchewan. We made an investment in the crop insurance 
program to ensure that that happens. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we also enhanced . . . ensured that . . . making 
sure that the crop insurance program, the premiums would be 



2242 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

such that farmers today would be able to insure in this province. 
And the numbers of our crop insurance portfolio show that we 
have more people, Mr. Speaker, today that are enrolled in the 
crop insurance program than they were last year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So today on this side of the House, this government’s made an 
investment in farm families and farm communities, Mr. 
Speaker, because we’re concerned about Saskatchewan farm 
families — investing in agriculture while our federal friends, 
Mr. Speaker, are cutting agriculture in this country. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Well, Mr. Speaker, in light of what the 
minister just said, as the minister will well know, he cut his 
budget — his agriculture budget — this year over and above 
last year. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party supports the position of a trade injury 
is a federal government responsibility. But we don’t support the 
NDP attacking farm families and ignoring its own areas of 
responsibility. Four dollars an acre for crop insurance; $3.50 for 
spot loss hail; 50 cents an acre for property taxes — and that’s 
how the NDP government supports the agriculture. That’s why 
we’ve received over 3,000 . . . 
 
(10:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask 
members to refrain from yelling across the way during the 
questions and during the responses. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, that’s why we’ve received 
over 3,000 postcards from farm families condemning these 
increases. Mr. Speaker, we support the province’s position on 
trade injury, but the NDP is undermining its own credibility 
when it jacks up farm input costs by about $8 an acre. 
 
Why is the NDP attacking the farm families of this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yesterday in this Assembly, I listened very 
carefully to what the Leader of the Opposition said as it relates 
to the trade injury, Mr. Speaker, and listened very carefully to 
the Leader of the Opposition when he said that he became 
engaged and intervened in farm policy in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And he quoted from Hansard, and I have it in Hansard, Mr. 
Speaker, on three occasions, he says, our party got engaged on 
May 1 of this year — May 1, Mr. Speaker — in developing 
what Canadian-Saskatchewan agriculture policy should be, Mr. 
Speaker. 

 
And I can tell you, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House, we 
have been engaged on the US (United States) farm Bill and 
subsidies since June of last year. And I tabled for the members 
opposite in this House, not more than a week ago, all of the 
work that this government has been doing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the Leader of the Opposition and the member from 
Watrous yet today have not delivered, Mr. Speaker, one scrap 
of paper, not one scrap of paper, on what the agricultural policy 
in this province should be because, Mr. Speaker, they’re 

bankrupted when it comes to agricultural policy . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
Treatment Outcome Study 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker. 
We raised questions about the trade injury in this House 
because that government has abandoned farmers in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance). Yesterday, CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) TV aired a report about 
an insurance treatment outcome study that has been 
commissioned by SGI. Some SGI claimants have raised 
concerns that they were enrolled in this study by SGI without 
their consent, and that this personal information they had shared 
with SGI was turned over to researchers. 
 
From December of ’97 to November of 1999, everyone who 
filed a personal injury claim with SGI was automatically part of 
this study, a study which gathers data by asking insurance 
claimants a lot of very intimate, personal questions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why SGI enrolled its 
customers in this study without their prior knowledge, without 
their consent, and without explaining the study to them? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While I don’t 
remember whether it was earlier this week or last week, the 
members opposite were asking questions about questions, Mr. 
Speaker. Today the member is asking five-year-old questions so 
boy, those guys really need to get some new questions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, this issue was in fact . . . 
this issue was in fact raised almost five years ago. This issue 
was addressed through Crown corporations. That committee 
dealt with this issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The point of the study, Mr. Speaker . . . the point of the study 
was to determine by . . . determine for, I should say, SGI — the 
university was doing this for SGI — to determine what was the 
best mechanism for rehabilitation since we moved to the 
no-fault process, Mr. Speaker. It was nothing more than that. It 
was to provide better injury rehabilitation for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the questions may be old 
because the incompetence of this government goes on and on 
and on. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, the other disturbing issue 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2243 

 

here is that some of the insurance claimants who became 
involved in this study believed, and were told, that if they didn’t 
participate, if they didn’t supply some of the extremely personal 
information, that their insurance benefits would be terminated. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only did these people not understand what the 
study was about, what the information was going to be used for, 
or why this information was even needed, these SGI customers 
felt threatened. If they didn’t co-operate, they might have their 
benefits and treatments cut off by SGI. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if one of these claimants had refused to 
participate, would they have lost their benefits? If the answer 
from the minister is no, then why did these people feel 
threatened? Why didn’t SGI do more to communicate with their 
customers and explain the studies and their rights to refuse to 
participate? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I can’t speak for what 
some individual might have said, but I can assure the member 
and I can assure the public of Saskatchewan that there was 
never a policy in place that would cut off benefits for 
individuals who wouldn’t participate in this program, Mr. 
Speaker. That would never be the case, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say as well, Mr. Speaker, that with respect to the 
release of this information to the University of Saskatchewan 
for this study for the purposes of determining what would be the 
best rehabilitation processes, this process was reviewed by the 
university’s ethics committee, Mr. Speaker. It went through 
their ethics committee. It was reviewed by the university’s 
protocol, Mr. Speaker, and determined to be appropriate, Mr. 
Speaker. I would ask the member, Mr. Speaker, to at least 
acknowledge that point. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It used to be 
that a minister was responsible for the statements and actions of 
his department. I gather this minister is not responsible for 
anything. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when a Saskatchewan person enters a personal 
injury claim with their government owned insurance company, 
they have a right to expect that their personal information will 
be protected. But now we understand that not only did they turn 
over personal information to the researchers conducting this 
study . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Members, it’s 
okay to have the occasional ebb and flow, but let’s not just try 
to keep the level of noise up to here because it’s very difficult to 
hear and shows a disrespect to the Assembly itself. And I ask 
members to be . . . Order, order. So I just ask members to keep 
that in mind and to be respectful of the House and to be 
respectful of other members. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. While the 
minister of SGI doesn’t want to accept responsibility or answer, 
it seems a lot of his colleagues would like to. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this demonstrates a clear disrespect on behalf of 
SGI towards personal injury claimants. And according to one 
Canadian bioethicist professor, this is clearly unethical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did SGI not only violate the rights of 
personal injury claimants in this manner, but also break basic 
ethical standards? Will the minister apologize for this breach to 
the personal injury claimants who participated in this study 
against their will? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well again, Mr. Speaker, this issue was 
dealt with by Crown Corporations and in fact has been voted off 
by the Crown Corporations Committee. 
 
The intent of the study by the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, on behalf of SGI was to determine which were the best 
processes for rehabilitation. It wasn’t any, the intent was no 
more than that, Mr. Speaker, it was to save the public money, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think I would say though, Mr. Speaker, in acknowledging the 
member’s point that in light of new national standards that have 
come, that have been developed since that study took place five 
years ago, I think it is fair to say and acknowledge the point that 
he makes that this process may not have been adopted today if 
this same request was made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Claims by Government Agencies 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, my question is 
also for the minister of SGI. Mr. Speaker, a couple of weeks 
ago the minister stood in this Assembly and claimed that he had 
not been fully briefed on the surveillance practices of SGI. And 
he also announced his . . . shortly after, that SGI would be doing 
an investigation on his not being able to be briefed, and also on 
SGI surveillance policies, specifically the surveillance policies 
of Virginia Cook, an SGI claimant from the Griffin area. 
 
Earlier this week, Mr. Speaker, the minister indicated he 
expected the release of this report by the end of the week. Mr. 
Speaker, it is now Friday and we haven’t heard anything from 
that minister on this report. 
 
My question is to the minister: has he received the report; but 
more importantly has he been correctly briefed on this report? 
Will he release that report today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I am able to 
tell the member that just as I was walking into the Chamber this 
morning, I was told that the president, the president of the 
corporation, SGI, has received the report from Price 
Waterhouse late last night. In fact, if I’m able to leave the 
Assembly after question period sometime today, I will be fully 
briefed, and I will be fully . . . I will . . . provided the full report, 
probably within an hour or so, Mr. Speaker, and then we’ll be 
responding publicly. 
 



2244 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting. This report cost the taxpayers $50,000 of taxpayers’ 
money to find out why that minister wasn’t briefed properly. 
 
Yesterday, or earlier this week, we heard of another report, 
$25,000 on why a minister abused or mistreated their staff. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask . . . I was just going to ask 
one member from Prince Albert to kind of hold it down, but I’d 
ask the other member, his neighbour from Sask Rivers to do the 
same thing, and that is just to tone it down a little. I would 
prefer now to ask the member from Indian Head-Milestone to 
continue. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, this session so far, in just two 
reports, has cost the taxpayers $75,000 for the incompetence of 
that government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Speaker, I ask that minister, an hour 
after question period, if he will be briefed properly and then 
give a report on the report done by SGI. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ve outlined the 
process, but let me say this. The member suggests that the cost 
for the report that Price Waterhouse is charging is somehow 
inappropriate. Mr. Speaker, let’s wait to see what that report 
says. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s important . . . The members, the 
members opposite, I’ll give them credit; the members raised 
legitimate questions on this issue, Mr. Speaker, asked that the 
processes, I think, be reviewed as well. 
 
And I think that was appropriate. They’ve been reviewed. Let’s 
wait to see what the report says to decide whether or not the bill 
for that is inappropriate. I think probably it’s not inappropriate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, not 
once did we question the cost of the report. What we are 
questioning is a lack of ability in this cabinet to run a 
government without having report, after report, after report on 
. . . (inaudible) . . . incompetence. It’s not the cost of the report, 
it’s the number of reports this government has to have 
commissioned because of incompetent ministers that this 
Premier keeps putting back into cabinet. Out of cabinet, back 
into cabinet — that’s what’s costing the taxpayers money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will this Premier admit that his incompetence has 
cost the taxpayers $75,000 in this session alone? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, you certainly get the 
feeling that anybody could sort of stand up and answer the 

question because I’m not sure what the question was. 
 
But let me say that with respect to competence, Mr. Speaker, 
when I listen to the member from Swift Current day after day 
get up and make positions on, as an example, the energy issues 
and then they go outside of the House and say something 
different, Mr. Speaker; when I listen to different positions from 
the Agriculture critic, Mr. Speaker, about their position on 
agriculture, Mr. Speaker; when I listen to a whole host of 
issues, including, Mr. Speaker, the leader of the party who 
holds one position, Mr. Speaker, as it pertains to the Indian 
gaming agreement, Mr. Speaker, and the party holding another 
position, Mr. Speaker; as it pertains to ethanol, Mr. Speaker; I 
don’t have enough time to go through all the contradictory 
statements that that party makes on different issues, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
I would suggest that they in their party should spend a little bit 
of time getting fully briefed by their officials, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(10:45) 
 

Funding for New Police Officers 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well this isn’t the 
first time we’ve seen the minister of SGI confused, he’s 
confused all the time. He won’t even pay attention to his 
briefing, but we’ll see how well he does this afternoon. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, my question’s for the Minister of Justice. 
Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party caucus met with the 
Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers. It was a very good 
meeting except that they were disappointed that the NDP has 
failed to live up to its 1999 campaign promise to hire 200 new 
police officers. According to the police, the NDP has only 
provided funding for 71 new officers to date. That’s 129 
officers short of their 1999 promise, Mr. Speaker. And the 
Justice minister is making no commitment to live up to his 
promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are the total of 200 police officers the NDP 
promised? Why is the NDP breaking its promise? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I wonder why the 
member keeps asking this question. But it does enable me to 
remind him about his promise, which was to have zero money 
for policing, Mr. Speaker; to have no money for justice, no 
money for health, no money for education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What has this government done, Mr. Speaker? Mr. Speaker, we 
contributed last year $88 million to maintain and enhance 
policing services in this province. Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, that’s $7.3 million in 
new funding. Mr. Speaker, this is record funding for policing 
for safety and security in this province ever, Mr. Speaker. 
 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2245 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — So the member likes to keep hearing 
that and the contrast between the Sask Party’s commitment to 
policing in this province and this government’s commitment, 
Mr. Speaker, could not be more stark. 
 
And he says he had a meeting with the police officers and they 
talked about the policing promise. 
 
We had meetings with the police officers too, Mr. Speaker. And 
he will remember when the budget came forward the head of 
the Regina Police Service said that she was delighted with the 
progress we’re making. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the police 
officers aren’t nearly as delighted with this Justice minister and 
what he’s doing today and what he’s been doing yesterday and 
what he’s been doing for the last long time, and that is breaking 
his promise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the police federation gave all MLAs a briefing 
package and it included an NDP fundraising letter from the 
Premier which began with the statement, a promise is a 
promise. It was tucked on top of that wee little bus that you 
remember was on that letterhead, Mr. Speaker. The officers said 
they wanted to remind the Premier of his words so he will keep 
his promise of 200 new police officers to Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Premier said a promise is a promise. Why is he 
breaking his promise of 200 new police officers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, as the member knows 
we’ve been making progress on this promise, Mr. Speaker, with 
70 — I think it is 71 — new police officers, Mr. Speaker. If the 
member looks at the RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) 
budget he will see that there are more police officers in our 
communities than ever before. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — And, Mr. Speaker, as we move 
forward we will ensure that we do hire more police officers as 
required by the people of the province. We’ve made significant 
progress — 70 more than this government . . . this party would 
ever have offered, Mr. Speaker. And we will continue to do the 
very best we can to have even more police officers on our 
streets and in our communities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Yesterday as we 
met with the Saskatchewan Federation of Police Officers one of 
the things that we discussed and is a concern of theirs is that the 
police officers are often exposed to blood and other bodily 
fluids. Mr. Speaker, they have to dodge more things than bullets 
and cars stolen in the city of Regina — bodily fluids of suspects 
and other people that they come in contact with. 

When this happens, police officers have no way of knowing, no 
way of knowing, Mr. Speaker, if they’ve been exposed to 
hepatitis, HIV (human immunodeficiency virus), or other 
communicable diseases. There is no requirement for the person 
to provide a blood sample. And hospital personnel, as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, are prohibited from disclosing information 
obtained from those blood samples. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the police federation is asking the government to 
introduce legislation that would require blood testing of the 
source person when the exposure results from a criminal act — 
the kind of legislation that was recently passed in Ontario to 
provide protection for officers in that province. Mr. Speaker, 
will the minister introduce similar legislation in this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, this important matter is 
being considered by the Uniform Law Conference which is all 
of the officials in justice from across Canada. They’ll be 
looking at this this summer. And, Mr. Speaker, in the fall the 
ministers of Justice at their annual meeting will be considering 
this question too. 
 
And I want to say to the member that this government takes 
second place to nobody in considering its commitment to the 
police in this province. And we trust and we respect the work 
they do and we will do everything we can to protect them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 210 — The Attachment of Debts 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Mr. Heppner: — I give notice that I will be moving first 
reading of the Bill No. 210, The Attachment of Debts 
Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table written 
responses to questions 361 through 382 inclusive. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 361 right through to 
382 inclusive have been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 



2246 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Osika that Bill No. 73 — The Status of 
the Artist Act/Loi sur le statut de l’artiste be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s a pleasure to get up today to talk about Bill No. 73, An Act 
respecting Artists. As I go through the Bill, Mr. Speaker, it’s 
very typical Bill introduced by this NDP government — it’s a 
lot of fluff and absolutely no substance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just comment on some aspects of this 
Bill, and I know I’ll be raising more questions in the Committee 
of the Whole. There’s a couple of issues that I’d like to address 
primarily. One of the statements in the Bill, in article 3: 
 

3 The following are affirmed and recognized; 
 

(a) (and it’s) the important contribution of artists to the 
cultural, social, economic and educational enrichment of 
Saskatchewan. 

 
We totally agree with that, Mr. Speaker. The value of the 
artistic talents of this province and what this does for the 
province is definitely recognized. I’m not so certain why it 
would be showing up in a Bill other than for just the recognition 
factor. But it is part of the Bill and we definitely recognize the 
importance of artists being very valuable to our culture and to 
the economic framework of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some issues with this Bill that I’ll question in the 
committee. But when I look at such aspects of the policy 
respecting artists and I have to question, as soon as I read this 
Bill in the policy respecting artists, it starts out in section 5: “the 
right of artists to free speech and freedom of artistic and cultural 
expression.” 
 
The first thing that comes to mind, Mr. Speaker, this is included 
in a Bill, right of artists to free speech and freedom of artistic 
and cultural expression. Does this mean that before, that artists 
did not have this? This is the question that I have in this Bill. 
 
It almost looks like there’s a whole aspect of this Bill just to 
make the Bill a little bit longer and larger. Because I would 
suggest, Mr. Speaker, that under the rights and freedoms of 
individuals, that everybody has the right to free speech and 
freedom of artistic expression. 
 
Along in policy respecting artists also, there’s a number of other 
issues in here. The ability of artists to obtain education, 
professional development, and training. And one has to again 
look at the fact that they’ve always had that ability, Mr. 
Speaker. By putting it in the Bill, does it mean that they did not 
have that ability to do this before? 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the member from Watrous on her 
feet? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in 
your gallery are some very special guests, especially to one of 
our Pages, Michelle. It’s her parents, Christine and Darwin 
McNichol. And they live in my constituency, so I’m very proud 
to be able to introduce them in the House today. 
 
And I invite all members of the House to please welcome them 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Status of the Artist Act 
Loi sur le statut de l’artiste 

(continued) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
just want to continue on this discussion and debate with this 
Bill. 
 
Part (c) of part 5: 
 

(c) the right of artists to form advisory bodies in which they 
may express their views and advance their cause . . . 

 
Again, Mr. Speaker, does this mean that the artistic community 
did not have that right before? 
 
These are all clauses in this Bill that actually apply to every 
individual and every person in this province and in this great 
country of ours. But it’s included in the Bill for some reason; 
I’m at a lack as to why we would include this. We could go on 
for pages and pages and pages of stuff we could put in — the 
right to drive a vehicle, the right to own property. 
 
It’s just a whole bunch of rhetoric that’s in this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, including: 
 

(h) the desirability of making artistic works available to the 
public. 

 
Well again, it’s in the Bill. Does that indicate that that is not 
available now to our artists and our artistic community? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there’s an awful lot of stuff in this Bill that is 
. . . in fact is just part of being a Canadian and a Saskatchewan 
resident. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I go on, on this Bill and I look at the advisory 
committee. And this, Mr. Speaker, is supposedly where the 
meat of the Bill, the teeth of this Bill — it’s in section 7. And 
I’ll read, it says: 
 

7(1) The minister may establish one or more advisory 
committees to investigate and report to the minister with 
respect to the following matters concerning artists: 

 
And it goes on. 
 
But here is the meat of the Bill and it says, the minister may. 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2247 

 

It’s like the Minister of SPMC’s (Saskatchewan Property 
Management Corporation) letter of intent. You may intend to, 
you may not. This Bill — you may or you may not. There’s 
absolutely no substance to this Bill. 
 
And we spoke to members of the artist community and this was 
brought forward. The minister may establish. There is no 
timeline. There’s no teeth to it. The minister may also may not 
want to. It’s just that the minister may. And so absolutely no 
substance to this Bill whatsoever. 
 
If the minister . . . If the minister really wanted to introduce a 
Bill for the artistic community to have a little bit of punch to it, 
why would the minister not say, the minister shall. And there’s 
a huge difference between the two words, may and shall. May 
— you may or you may not. Shall — it’s an obligation. And 
this government does not like to be obligated to anything. It’s 
straight rhetorical Bill. 
 
(11:00) 
 
And also if the word shall was included in this Bill in a timeline 
it would definitely have some meat for the artistic community. 
And I would suggest that the minister may look at putting in an 
amendment to . . . the minister shall establish one or more 
advisory groups, within six months of this Bill receiving 
Assent. Now this Bill would have some substance to it, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another part of this that comes to mind 
immediately when I read it. And it says that, in regulations, 
Lieutenant Governor in Council considers necessary to carry 
out the intent of this Act. Mr. Speaker, I read this Bill, I’ve gone 
through this Bill, and I can’t figure out what the intent of this 
Bill is. There’s no substance whatsoever to the Bill. And I know 
the artistic community wishes to have this. It’s a step in the 
right direction. And I think there is a step but there’s absolutely 
no substance to it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would just like to just talk for a minute on a little 
bit of the history of this Bill. In 1990, Bill C-7, Status of the 
Artist Act was first introduced. And in 1992 it was passed by 
the federal Parliament. Mr. Speaker, I repeat — 1992. 
 
Now, now, Mr. Speaker, in the introduction of this Bill by the 
member from Melville, he says, and I quote: 
 

Through this government’s leadership and example, the 
Bill will set a groundwork for artists. 

 
Ten years? Is that the member’s definition of leadership? It’s 
leading from behind. Very, very typical of people over there 
leading from behind — 10 years. This Bill was introduced and 
passed in the federal government and now the minister has the 
audacity to say we’re the leaders in this, 10 years after the fact, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Bill suggests it’s creating a platform to 
initially . . . initiate dialogue on social and economic issues 
involving artists. Creating a platform to initiate. How 
wishy-washy can one get — we’re creating a platform to 
initiate. Again, there’s no teeth whatsoever to it — we’re 
creating a platform to initiate. We’re going to create a platform 

to allow somebody to create an advisory committee that can 
advise the government on what they should be advised on. So 
there’s absolutely no substance to this Bill whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, at this time, although the Bill is in 
the right direction, and after meeting with the . . . with members 
from the artistic community, they would really like to see this 
Bill go forward. They understand that there’s no meat to this 
Bill whatsoever, there’s no substance to this Bill, but they 
would like to see it go forward because it’s a step in the right 
direction. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I support the artistic community, and 
would suggest that we put this Bill to the committee, and I’ll 
ask questions more directly in the Committee of the Whole. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to have leave to introduce 
some guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, up on your gallery we have two 
special guests that have come to visit. We have of course, John 
Cocarell, and also with John is Carmen Biletski. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’ll be getting married this summer. For many 
of you, you’re probably why I’m introducing John — he’s my 
nephew. His mother is Marion Cocarell, the principal of the 
school in La Ronge, and Carmen is from Southey. And I think 
that I’ve . . . I thought it was a very special, you know, occasion 
for them to come and visit the legislature, you know take part in 
a bit of democracy you know, before their wedding. 
 
For me personally, and with my family, we’d like to wish them 
the best in their marriage, and also to continue the good work 
that both of them do for this province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 73 — The Status of the Artist Act 
Loi sur le statut de l’artiste 

(continued) 
 

Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at next sitting. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Education Amendment Act, 2002 
Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Learning to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my immediate right is Michael Littlewood, executive director, 
legislation and school administration. To my immediate left is 



2248 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

Rosanne Glass, director, community education. And to her left 
is Kim Mock, legislative policy analyst. These are the three 
officials with me this morning, Mr. Chair. 
 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Welcome, Mr. 
Minister, to your officials. I am pleased to be able to ask a few 
questions on this Bill today. It’s not too controversial — 
probably not controversial at all — but there are some 
clarifications required on some of the aspects of the Bill. 
 
I would like first of all just for you to briefly explain to me what 
this Bill does to the francophone divisions? There’s just a few 
sentences in the Bill talking about the restructuring of 
francophone school divisions and maybe you could just clarify 
for everyone what this actually does. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, as the member opposite 
would know, when restructuring of school divisions occurred in 
the francophone school division community about three years 
ago, school divisions were amalgamated from nine down to 
one. That required a whole bunch of drafting changes in a lot of 
pieces of legislation to reflect the fact that there was now one 
francophone school division. 
 
And this was one particular area within the Act that we missed 
when we did the previous drafting, so this is just correcting a 
drafting error that was missed when the original amalgamations 
occurred. 
 
So I think the member opposite will find that that is really just a 
little bit of a housekeeping thing and really of no consequence, 
other than to draw it into line with the previous drafting 
amendments that were done. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Making an error is I 
guess something that happens on that side of the House. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you . . . I also wanted to ask you about the 
amalgamated school divisions that they now have a right to 
apply different mill rates for up to two years. How many school 
divisions are using this provision at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. When we 
talk about restructuring and the initiatives that this government 
has undertaken to support restructuring of school divisions in 
the province of Saskatchewan, one of the issues that we found 
that had come up when school boards were in discussions about 
restructuring, was that in situations where there was a 
significant difference in the mill rates, say between an urban 
board and a neighbouring rural board, was such that it could be 
seen as a disincentive to amalgamation. 
 
So we took the advice of many of the boards of education in 
terms of allowing them to have a variable mill rate for a 
phase-in period for a board that had undergone restructuring. So 
we took that advice to our restructuring coordinating 
committee, and the recommendation from that committee was 
that we do include that in the legislation when we brought 
forward the amendments to The Education Act. 
 
And this is something that the stakeholders have asked for and 

in certain conditions . . . or in certain possibilities it might be 
applied. None of the current discussions are at the point where 
they could say that this is something that they would do, 
because they’re not at the point. Some of them have passed 
motions of intent to amalgamate. A lot of boards are in 
discussions but they’re not at the point where they would say 
that this is something they would apply. But they are waiting to 
have this particular piece of legislation so that they can put that 
into the mix of how this would fit into the overall package of 
restructuring within the area that they’re talking about. 
 
So this is something that the stakeholders have asked for and 
what it will do is provide another piece of the puzzle in terms of 
providing incentives and opportunity for school boards to 
restructure. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I know that this is an 
issue and it’s not just between urban boards and a connecting 
rural board, but lots of times there’s rural boards right beside 
each other who have very different mill rates. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, the last group of questions I want to ask you 
about is the Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund. I know that this 
is an incentive that a lot of people are quite excited about, but 
there are also a large number of schools are disappointed 
because they’re not able to get into this . . . into the list at all 
because they’re not a community school. 
 
I’m wondering why a decision was made to make sure it was 
just community schools that had the opportunity for the students 
to receive this scholarship. 
 
(11:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Certainly 
when we look at a couple things here, the Prince of Wales on 
his visit, and for some time before that, has always expressed an 
interest in issues of education but also in issues of youth . . . 
children and youth at risk. 
 
Our Community Schools Program is initially and was designed 
to deal primarily with core neighbourhoods. The philosophy has 
recently been expanded by the Role of the School. And what 
we’re seeing now with our community schools expansion is that 
we have more community schools coming on stream all the 
time. 
 
But the desire of the Prince of Wales scholarship was to be 
specific for education but also to deal with youth at risk. So the 
Prince of Wales scholarship really reflects the desire of the 
Prince of Wales and what we would like to see happen in this 
province. 
 
And we also recognize, as part of the question that the member 
opposite was alluding to, is that with this Act we are in essence 
setting up a foundation that will grow with time. And obviously 
that means more of these scholarships will become available as 
time goes on. And depending on how well the endowment-type 
provisions will grow, we could have lots of community . . . 
these particular Prince of Wales scholarships available in the 
future. 
 
So it really was . . . it really did reflect the desire of the Prince 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2249 

 

of Wales in terms of how this was targeted to community 
schools. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, when we get into Learning 
estimates after this Bill, we’ll have an opportunity to discuss 
community schools and the fact that part of the Role of the 
School talks about all schools having the philosophy of the 
community school. 
 
So then we’re going to be opening it up to more schools and are 
. . . is there going to be separate opportunity for schools that 
have children that are . . . have . . . are at risk or have special 
needs? Will they be picked out separately? 
 
But right now I guess the concern that I’ve had mostly are from 
schools that are saying, okay, $500 may not be a lot of money 
but it’s something that would be helpful towards furthering 
education. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked about community partners and the fact 
that the Prince of Wales Scholarship Fund could grow and . . . 
as more partners are actually putting money into it to provide 
opportunities for students. How many community partners do 
you actually have involved in this scholarship program at this 
time? And if there is more, can you tell me how much money 
has been donated to this fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, obviously it’s not possible 
to receive donations until the legislation is passed that creates 
the foundation. But it certainly is the intent of the department, 
with its community partners, to promote the activities of the 
Prince of Wales scholarship and to actively solicit donations to 
the fund. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Have you got people 
hired in your department right now that will be administrating 
this fund and actively promoting it so they have more money 
for the fund when it becomes available under legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly at this point in time there 
have been no additional staff hired. And I would probably 
suggest to the member opposite that it’s likely that we probably 
wouldn’t be hiring additional staff because this is a bottom-up 
approach. 
 
We will be working with the Saskatchewan association, the 
Saskatchewan Community Schools Association. Not only have 
they provided names in terms of the selection committee but 
also in terms of how this evolves over time. 
 
This will be driven by communities and not driven by the 
department. So we’ll see how this grows over the years. If 
certainly there is a requirement at some point in time for 
additional administrative staff then we would look at that, but I 
don’t anticipate that in the very near future. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, that means that right now the 
Department of Learning will be paying for the staff that will be 
administrating this fund. How much money is there in this fund 
at this time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Currently we’re offering 10 
scholarships at $500 each. The fund obviously doesn’t exist 

because the legislation hasn’t been created, but that’s the 
commitment. 
 
So we’re not talking about a lot of dollars. I think the concept is 
important and the ability to expand in the future is important, 
but currently the amount of dollars available is not that great at 
this point in time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then there isn’t a fund that you 
are using that you just pay so much interest every year and the 
principal is sitting there. It’s just an amount of money that the 
Prince of Wales is actually giving out each year that you’re 
dividing up. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The department is providing that 
additional $5,000 and that is in the funding of the department. 
What we will be doing is once the endowment or the foundation 
is created, then the dollars that come into that fund of course 
will be administered. And however that is dispensed in terms of 
. . . or how it’s managed with regard to interest bearing, that 
will be determined by the group that controls that particular 
foundation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and to the staff. I 
have no further questions. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 7 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002 
 

Clause 1 
 
The Chair: — Does the minister have any additional officials 
to introduce? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I have the same officials 
with me as with the previous Act. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and to the minister. I 
just have a couple of short questions for this Bill. How many 
registered music teachers is this going to affect in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, there are approximately 
225 current members. 
 
Ms. Draude: — And, Mr. Minister, is this proposed legislation 
similar to other jurisdictions or is this something that’s new in 
Saskatchewan, or the type of legislation new in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, of course this Act has 
been in existence in terms of some time within the province of 
Saskatchewan. And what we’re doing by this current Act is 
really aligning it with similar professional associations in terms 
of the legislation that governs their particular organization. And 
it really is in keeping with how this is applied in other 
jurisdictions across Canada. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member for Estevan on her feet? 
 



2250 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

Ms. Eagles: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of this 
honoured Assembly, 14 grade 4 students from Midale Central 
School. They are seated in the east gallery. 
 
And amongst the students I have a niece, Cassidy Eagles, and a 
great-niece, Jessica Swedburg. And they are accompanied by 
the teacher, Jana Epp; chaperones are Louise Vandenhurk, 
Tammy Swedburg — who happens to be my niece — Tom 
Littlejohn, Rhonda Penny, Dixie Martinson, Cindy Werner, and 
Colleen Scharnatta. 
 
I ask all members to join me in welcoming them. I hope you 
enjoy the rest of your day in Regina and have a safe trip back to 
Midale. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002 
(continued) 

 
Clause 1 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, you’d indicated that this Act is 
something that the association has been asking for. I’m 
wondering if this has taken a considerable amount of time to 
come forward or is it something that . . . Has it been delayed for 
any reason or is it something that was brought forward as soon 
as the association asked for it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, the thing is that 
there is a routine within the department, of course looking at all 
the legislation that it’s responsible for and reviewing that. And 
it was about four years ago that it was noted that the current 
piece of legislation, which I think had not been opened up since 
1979, needed to be looked at. 
 
So the Registered Music Teachers’ Association was contacted 
by the department. They were very enthusiastic about being 
approached with regard to updating their professional 
legislation. 
 
And that’s taken, over the last three or four years, to get it to the 
point where everyone was quite happy with the Act. And we’re 
very close to having it approved and I know that all of the 
music teachers out there are very pleased with this piece of 
legislation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I just have one final 
question, and I’m not sure if it’s something that you will be able 
to answer or not because it’s not within this Bill. But if you’re a 
member of the Saskatchewan Music Teachers’ Association, 
does that give you any type of association with other provinces? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With 

membership in the provincial association, membership in the 
Canadian Federation of Music Teachers’ Associations is also 
included with that membership. So the portability is across 
Canada. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and to your officials. 
 
The Chair: — Members, the Bill is quite a lengthy Bill. Is 
leave granted to deal with it in parts? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Clause 1 agreed to. 
 
Clauses 2 to 49 inclusive agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(11:30) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 34 — The Education Amendment Act, 2002 
Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1995 sur l’éducation 

 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, I move that this Bill be 
now read the third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
The Speaker: — Before we go to Committee of Finance, why 
is the member from Estevan on her feet? 
 
Ms. Eagles: — To introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this honoured Assembly, I’d 
like to introduce 38 grade 4 students from Pleasantdale 
Elementary school in Estevan. They are seated in the east 
gallery. 
 
And they are accompanied by their teachers, Denise Epp, Karen 
Conquergood, Heather Vermeersch, and Kelly Hilkewich. 
 
And we are just going into estimates here with the Minister of 
Learning, so you might find that very interesting. It’s actually 
one of the quieter parts of the day here at the legislature, a lot 
quieter than question period. But I’m sure you’ll enjoy the 
proceedings and I look forward to meeting with you in a few 
moments. 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2251 

 

I ask all members to join me in welcoming the students and the 
chaperones and teachers from Estevan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Learning to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To my 
immediate right is Mr. Ken Horsman, associate deputy minister 
of Learning; and to my immediate left is Mr. Wayne McElree, 
assistant deputy minister of Learning; and to his immediate left 
is Dr. Michael Littlewood, executive director of legislation and 
school administration. And I have Mr. Don Sangster just behind 
me on the right, executive director of school finance; and 
behind me just to my right as well is Mr. Cal Kirby, executive 
director, facilities planning. 
 
We’ve also got Ms. Edith Hazen, acting associate executive 
director of student financial assistance, behind the bar. I’ve got 
Ms. Frances Bast, directly behind me, director of financial 
planning and operations, corporate services; Dr. Margaret Lipp, 
executive director, curriculum instruction, in the back of the 
room as well; Kevin Veitenheimer, manager of financial 
planning and administration, university services, in the back of 
the room as well; Ms. Marilyn Jenkins, director of public 
library services in the back of the room as well; Mr. Gord 
Sisson, director of financial policy and program support, 
corporate services. And I think that’s all of the officials today. I 
think I’ve got them all. Okay. That’s the crew today. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and I’d like 
to welcome the minister and all of the officials to the estimates 
today. Mr. Minister, I just have one or maybe two questions. It 
depends on the reply. 
 
I wrote a letter to you on . . . two days ago after I met with Nick 
and Bonnie Pana and I’m sure you’re familiar with the 
background of the Pana situation. They have children that they 
wish to send to the Glentworth School but they’re obliged to 
send them to the Limerick School at the present time. And I 
know in correspondence that I had received from you, they had 
signed a waiver at some point in the past. One of those waivers, 
as an example that when I spoke to them, they say they may 
have signed. They don’t remember. And when the Wood 
Mountain School closed I think there’s probably a rush of 
things that went on and they signed this piece of paper that they 
don’t even remember signing that gave their tax base to the Red 
Coat School Division. 
 
Now, Mr. Minister, I know in previous correspondence that I 
had with you, you had suggested or stated in your letter that you 
would get in contact with the Panas in the near future. And your 
letter was dated May 2. Well in fact they have not had contact 
from you or anybody else in the department as yet and the 

school year is drawing very much to a close. And they would 
like to have this resolved before the school year ends, for a 
number of reasons, that they would like to be able to make 
some decisions on their own based on what this decision might 
be. 
 
And another factor in this, Mr. Minister, and I pointed it out in 
the letter I sent to you with a map, how the boundaries were 
drawn. You’d have to see the map and look at it and see how 
irregular the boundaries are. To me there’s no rhyme or reason 
how the boundaries were drawn. It’s kind of willy-nilly, quarter 
section and over couple miles and up and over a couple miles 
the other way. And so there’s no, there’s no explanation that I 
can see, for the boundary map. 
 
And in addition, in addition, Mr. Minister, there are people that 
are in the other school division that in fact are going to 
Glentworth School. They have asked for authority to go . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . and the member’s heckling is quite 
willy-nilly too I might add, Mr. Chair. It’s absolutely senseless 
and pointless because you can’t understand what the heckler is 
saying. 
 
But again, drawing up these boundaries and, in fact, with people 
already from the other school division that are going to 
Glentworth School and people from within a couple of miles of 
where the Panas live that are actually going to Assiniboia 
school. And as I stated in my letter, distance is also a factor 
because it’s 18 miles to Glentworth and 28 miles to Limerick. 
 
So with all that being said, Mr. Minister, and I’ve given you all 
of this information in the letter, can I get some assurances from 
you today that you will speak to the Panas immediately and 
there will be resolution to this issue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, certainly this is an 
issue that I have been made aware of. And there is some history 
to this issue that dates back several years. 
 
What I can tell the member opposite today is that I have 
referred the issue with regard to the Pana family directly to our 
educational Boundaries Commission, and the Boundaries 
Commission I have been told will be contacting them directly 
next week. 
 
We also have heard that there are several other families in the 
area that also have some concerns with regard to the boundary 
changes that occurred approximately two or three years ago. 
And these will also be referred to the Boundaries Commission 
to see if we can resolve this issue to the betterment of that 
community, Mr. Chair. 
 
(11:45) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
if it’s referred to the Boundary Commission next week, would 
you provide some assurances that I would receive a reply by 
next week, by the end of next week? Because as we know 
school is going to be out soon and we might only be here for 
another month. So I’d sure like it resolved before parliament 
ends. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, what I can do is send the 



2252 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

member opposite a copy of the letter of referral from myself to 
the Boundaries Commission. 
 
In terms of the resolution or recommendation of the Boundaries 
Commission, I cannot commit that they can make that 
recommendation by the end of next week. But certainly we can 
notify the Pana family that it is before the Boundaries 
Commission and that, hopefully, that will be resolved 
expeditiously by the Boundaries Commission, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Minister. I would 
like . . . I’m seeking a little bit more of a commitment on a 
timeline. I mean we could submit it to the Boundaries 
Commission and it could take months, a year, however long, 
and to me that’s not acceptable. 
 
And I would like if you would commit to some sort of a 
timeline that we could expect an answer, whatever that answer 
might be. If it’s going to take a week or 10 days or however 
long it might take, and so I would like if you could commit to 
some kind of a timeline that we could maybe hold the Boundary 
Commission accountable to. 
 
The Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Yates: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to introduce to 
you and to members of the Assembly a young man in the 
Speaker’s gallery, Drew Canham, who has just today completed 
his grade 10 year at Balfour Collegiate. And after writing exams 
this morning, thought he’d come to the Assembly and see what 
we do in this hallowed Chamber, Mr. Chair. 
 
And I’ve had the opportunity to speak to him about . . . during 
he was taking a class in which they were studying the political 
climate in Canada, and we had a chance to talk and have a 
discussion about politics in our province. So Drew came today 
to see for himself and also visit his sister who is one of the 
Pages in the Assembly as well, Mr. Speaker. So to all of you, 
Drew Canham. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I can assure the member 
opposite that I will be asking the Boundaries Commission to get 
on with resolving this issue as quickly as possible. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I also 
have a situation in my constituency that is pertaining to 
boundaries as well. I’m sure the minister is well aware that as 

different small schools have had closures, there’s situations 
where families are in one school division and perhaps live 
closer to a school in a different school division now that their 
nearest school has closed. 
 
The specific case that I have in my constituency is a couple 
named Perry and Colleen Sopatyk and they have been 
corresponding with the Department of Learning. Perry and 
Colleen live close to the boundary between the Lanigan School 
Division and the Saskatoon East School Division and their 
children are designated to attend school at Viscount which is 
within the Lanigan School Division. But they wish to enrol their 
children in Colonsay in the Saskatoon East School Division. 
 
And there’s a number of reasons for their request. And as the 
minister is well aware, there’s situations that have changed in 
rural Saskatchewan. People are getting jobs farther and farther 
away from their homes. 
 
So a quick summary of why they’ve made the request is that 
they do their business in Colonsay, all of their social activities, 
family contacts and so forth are in Colonsay. And probably 
more importantly, Colonsay’s en route to Colleen’s job whereas 
Viscount is in the opposite direction. And that’s a few of the 
reasons that they’ve stated for requesting a change. 
 
And initially Perry and Colleen approached the Lanigan School 
Division with their request to enrol their children in Colonsay 
rather than Viscount but the request was turned down. And as 
the minister can probably appreciate, it’s very difficult for 
families to get approval for boards of school divisions to 
transfer their children to a different school division because the 
divisions are very protective of their enrolment numbers. And 
they are becoming even more protective as we see enrolment 
numbers fall. 
 
So they then began to explore the possibility of changing the 
boundaries between the Lanigan School Division and the 
Saskatoon East School Division so their yard site would fall 
within the boundaries of the Saskatoon East School Division. 
The land involved used to be, apparently, in the Saskatoon 
school . . . or Saskatoon East School Division but at some point 
in time, and the Sopatyk’s are unsure of when, the boundaries 
got moved and their yard site then was in the Lanigan School 
Division. 
 
The change that Perry and Colleen have proposed would 
involve land owned by four other owners, and they have 
gathered written permission from the other landowners to make 
the change. The change would involve 10 quarters of land or 
two and a half square miles altogether. It doesn’t involve any 
other children other than the children of the Sopatyk family. 
 
Perry and Colleen approached the regional director, Lawrence 
Chomos, and they wrote a letter to the Department of Education 
making a request to change the boundaries. Initially Lawrence 
Chomos led Perry and Colleen to believe that the request would 
not be a problem, but after he met with the other regional 
directors he reversed his position and Perry and Colleen’s 
request was denied. 
 
The Department of Education also denied the request in a letter 
dated January 16 and signed by a Ronald Thomas from your 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2253 

 

department. And in that letter, Ronald Thomas cited two 
reasons for denying the request. One was that the Lanigan 
School Division felt its ability to deliver education programs 
would be adversely affected if there was an erosion of its 
division boundaries. 
 
Perry and Colleen argued that this is a bit of an overreaction 
considering only 10 quarters of land are involved. But they also 
offered a suggestion as to how the loss of education taxes due to 
the loss of the 10 quarters of land could be addressed because 
there is land in the same area owned by Ducks Unlimited that’s 
along the school division boundaries. And they’re suggesting 
that that land could be exchanged for the land that Perry and 
Colleen are requesting to be moved into the Saskatoon (East) 
School Division, and this would make the boundary change 
basically revenue neutral. 
 
The other reason that was cited in the letter as to why the 
request was denied was that the Lanigan School Division Board 
was concerned that other families will request land transfers. 
And the Sopatyks believe that that’s quite a stretch because 
there isn’t a lot of families that live along the boundaries. They 
can’t foresee this being . . . having the office of Learning 
flooded with such requests. 
 
The other interesting thing that’s in the letter, Mr. Chair, is that 
it goes on to say, and I quote: 
 

In considering any land transfer requests, the department 
must consider both the specific personal interests of the 
family or families requesting the transfer. 

 
And yet there is no indication that that consideration was made 
in the decision of the family itself. 
 
So Perry and Colleen Sopatyk wrote a letter directed to the 
Minister of Learning dated February 26. Their request was 
simple; they simply asked the minister to recommend that their 
request for a change in boundaries be sent to the Boundary 
Review Commission Board for review. 
 
And the minister replied on March 19, and he said, and I quote: 
 

I will be reviewing this matter in consultation with my 
officials and will then provide a more detailed response to 
your request. 

 
But the Sopatyks have not heard anything from the minister 
since, and it’s now been three months. 
 
So my question would be, has the minister had enough time to 
consider the request by Perry and Colleen Sopatyk and will he 
send their request to be reviewed by the Boundaries Review 
Commission board? If so, when? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, it is my understanding 
that the Sopatyk family has been contacted recently and that 
there will indeed be a meeting on Monday of next week 
between the Sopatyk family and both . . . and representatives of 
both boards of education, along with the Boundaries 
Commission, to discuss these issues. So I’m hoping that we can 
have a resolution to this one as quickly as possible as well. 
 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I’d like to also 
welcome the minister’s officials here this morning. 
 
Mr. Minister, the last time I had an opportunity to discuss 
estimates with you, you still were not in a position to make any 
announcements as far as the Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation, as far as specific announcements to both boards of 
education and the universities as far as how much funding each 
. . . in the case of the universities how much funding they would 
get for capital funding this year. 
 
I’m wondering, are you now in a position to make those kind of 
announcements? Have you contacted the universities in . . . 
recently, within the last week or so? Because I have talked to 
them, I believe about a week ago, and they still had no new 
information from your department. And I’m wondering where 
that process is at, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, and thank you to the 
member opposite for the question. As indicated previously 
when we were in estimates, we were in the process of 
compiling our capital list based on the list that had been 
provided to us from school divisions on the K to 12 capital side. 
And I can inform the member today that the capital list will . . . 
has been compiled and will be mailed out today for the K to 12 
side. 
 
I have recently met with President McKinnon from the 
University of Saskatchewan, as well as officials and, about a 
week or so ago, with the president of the University of Regina. 
And we’re in the final stages of compiling the capital list for the 
universities this year and I would anticipate that we’ll have that 
list finalized within the next week or so. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, would it 
be possible for you, for you to provide us with a list of the 
capital funding projects you’ve approved, your department has 
approved for boards of education? 
 
And if I under . . . you said that list is being mailed out today 
and we would appreciate receiving a list also. 
 
But I heard you say that you are . . . you still haven’t finalized 
any of the capital projects with the two universities. It appears 
that there seems to be some difficulty in getting this new capital 
funding mechanism up and running and I’m wondering what 
the problem is. 
 
Is it a problem of the two departments being amalgamated or is 
it . . . or is it a problem that this whole new structure of capital 
funding was kind of a last minute idea to help balance this 
year’s . . . supposedly balance this year’s budget? And I suspect 
that that’s probably the latter reason as to why this program 
isn’t up and running. And I think we’re all looking forward to 
some of the details, Mr. Minister, of this program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. And I 
can assure the member opposite that there is no delay in terms 
of the capital allocation. We have to wait for the universities to 
present our . . . their list to us. We have recently received those 
lists from the universities. 
 
It is a more expansive list than we’ve seen in previous years 



2254 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

because the amount of dollars available are considerably more 
this year. So the good news is, Mr. Deputy Chair, is that with 
the additional dollars available for capital construction and 
infrastructure in our university campuses, that the universities 
have actually taken considerably more time in compiling their 
lists and we are in the process of allocating those dollars. And 
we’ll have an announcement to make in the very near future. 
 
(12:00) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, we seem to be getting two different 
views on this whole area of capital funding. I understand that 
the universities have had their projects lined up for quite some 
time and they had to resubmit their priority list and . . . which 
indicates to me that there is some delay in the program. 
 
And also when we in this legislature discussed interim supply to 
fund activities of government to the end of June, there was no 
request for funding under the infrastructure . . . Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation which tells me that there 
were . . . things weren’t in place to actually go out and do some 
. . . spend some money and build some facilities at the 
universities which also would indicate to me that you . . . your 
department really hadn’t figured out how you’re going to 
operate this new structure, Mr. Minister. 
 
But you say that you have all the details pretty well worked out. 
I wonder if you could perhaps provide me with some details as 
to, under this new structure of capital funding, what type of 
expenditures will qualify for capital funding under this new 
process? I mean we all realize that a new building or perhaps a 
major renovation to a building, whether it be within the 
post-secondary education system or in the K to 12 system, but 
what about some of the equipment that’s required and so on? 
Could you provide us with some of those details as to what’s 
first of all eligible for the . . . for funding under this capital 
program? And the terms as far as years and those sorts of 
things, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. As 
indicated, we are mailing out the capital list for the K to 12 
sector today — the approved list. Obviously to have the 
approval means that the structures are in place for the financing 
of that capital. So there’s no delay in getting the infrastructure, 
support infrastructure, in place. 
 
With regard to the second question with the eligibility criteria 
for how the capital is allocated, there has been no change. The 
eligibility criteria and how we allocate capital on the K to 12 
side is the same as we’ve done it in previous years with 
categorization in to four broad categories. 
 
With regard to the university sector, we look at the 
categorization with regard to capital equipment. Then we look 
at the minor — what would be considered minor capital 
expansions — and then of course the major capital 
infrastructure. 
 
And depending on what type of equipment, for example, if it 
was say, a new computer server for a university department, 
that would fall into a categorization where that would probably 
be mortgaged over five years. Minor equipment may be 
amortized over 10 years. And then of course when you get into 

the major capital projects, such as a new building, the 
amortization schedule may be as large as 30 years in that case. 
 
But that needs to be worked out because it is a tripartite 
agreement between the university, the Department of 
Education, and the Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation. Because that it is a tri-part agreement, all of these 
capital projects have agreements assigned to them and once the 
ink is dry, then the projects proceed. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Has there been any new 
category of items, particularly in the minor capital items that 
added to that category that in previous years would more 
normally fall into the regular maintenance budgets and that sort 
of thing? I guess my question is have some maintenance-type 
items been moved into capital under this new structure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s no change 
to the procedures this year. We are looking at some changes 
next year. And as the member may be aware that when we 
announced the budget this year, and some of the press releases 
from the Saskatchewan School Trustees Association indicated 
that we would be implementing a new concept with regard to 
how we finance maintenance in subsequent years, and that will 
be next year. 
 
So we have targeted, I think, in the neighbourhood of 9 to $10 
million beginning next year to cover some of the minor capital 
allocations in our K to 12 system that could be, the process of 
approval, could then be speeded up because it would provide 
those dollars to school divisions and they would then allocate 
them and there would be a certain cap in terms of the dollars 
available. 
 
But there would be more leeway in the types of projects and 
types of equipment that could be purchased under this new plan 
that was announced at the time of the budget. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So there will be a shift, Mr. Minister, of some 
items in the K to 12 system. Will there also be a shift of those 
type of items or other items in the post-secondary system? 
 
Certainly in the post-secondary system there’s a greater array of 
equipment and furnishings and that sort of thing that need to be 
furnished at our universities and SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute 
of Applied Science and Technology) and so on. 
 
Is there a similar shift, and if so, Mr. Minister, how many 
dollars are you looking at shifting from operation and 
maintenance to capital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Certainly, Mr. Deputy Chair, there 
has been no major change in the allocation on the university 
side with the change in how the capital is being financed. 
 
And if you look at, for example, how the capital is allocated to 
universities there’s always a proportion of that that is aligned to 
maintenance and restoration type activities, which could also 
include minor equipment. 
 
So there has, that structure within the university side, has really 
not changed. And we don’t anticipate there being any change in 
the near future with regard to the allocation as well. 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2255 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we dealt 
with capital funding in the K to 12 system and in 
post-secondary, specifically with the universities. I wonder, as 
far as the capital funding of new projects on the various SIAST 
campuses, is that funded . . . will they be funded through your 
new Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation? How is 
that whole area handled as far as capital projects at SIAST? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and to 
the member opposite for his excellent question. 
 
With regard to our SIAST campuses, the larger projects would 
be funded through the EIFC (Education Infrastructure 
Financing Corporation), and we do provide dollars on a cash 
basis for some of the smaller restoration type projects. 
 
So really the answer is that it’s twofold: some dollars on a cash 
basis and some . . . and the majority, in terms of the big 
projects, with . . . through a tri-part agreement with the EIFC. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I wonder if you could provide for 
me any major capital plans on any of the SIAST campuses. Is 
there any plans for new facilities? I understand within the last 
year or so there was a major . . . a new building put up in 
Saskatoon. And I’m wondering what the plans are for this 
upcoming budget year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have 
had an opportunity to review the business plans and facility 
plans for our SIAST campuses. And I can indicate to the 
member opposite that there are no new major capital expansion 
projects identified by SIAST for the upcoming year. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I understand that there was 
some discussion, I believe a year or two ago, with the . . . 
looking at perhaps a building project at the Woodland Campus 
in Prince Albert. If I understand it, the process or the rationale 
behind it is there is this new initiative by your government to 
increase the number of jobs in forestry and a whole new 
emphasis on forestry. And along with, that there was a thought 
. . . there was some thought that there was a need for some 
research facilities at the Woodland Campus in Prince Albert. 
And I’m wondering where that project is, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
thank you to the member opposite. It’s my understanding that 
the proposal for that forestry research centre had come from the 
Department of Industry and Resources. There was initially 
some discussion about whether that should be attached to the 
Woodland Campus or whether it should be located downtown. 
And I don’t know where that’s at. It’s not something that 
SIAST or our department has been looking at. 
 
So I would suggest that they would ask the Minister of Industry 
and Resources when he comes up in estimates, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand that when 
some of the facilities were being built at . . . on the Woodland 
Campus, that there was some provision made for expansion. 
And I understand that one of the projects was this forestry 
centre building. And in fact that some . . . one of the facilities 
on the Woodland Campus actually has heating capacity to heat 

a proposed building. 
 
And I’m wondering if that in fact is correct, and how large a 
facility and what extra capacity do you have in . . . at the 
Woodland Campus for that type of thing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Certainly I’m not aware of the particulars with regard to the 
forestry research centre. So what I can do is acquire that 
information and provide that to him. And also I would 
encourage him to ask those questions of the Minister of 
Industry and Resources when he comes up in estimates. 
 
I can mention though that we are part of a multi-training 
program that is separate from the capital side on research and 
we do look at providing across-department training dollars for 
forestry initiatives. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So if I understood you 
correctly then your department has no funds allocated for a 
forestry research centre building at the Woodland Campus, Mr. 
Minister. Is that correct? 
 
(12:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — That’s correct, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
That’s not on our particular radar screen at this point in time 
and we have not allocated any dollars for capital with regard to 
a forestry research centre. That would be within another 
department. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, if such a research facility was to be 
built in Prince Albert, is there a capacity on the Woodland 
space for that building to be built? Also are there other research 
facilities at Woodland that would complement such a facility? 
In your opinion, Mr. Minister, if such a centre was to be built, 
would it make more sense to have it built . . . or would it make 
good sense to have it built at the SIAST campus rather than in 
another location? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I think the answer, Mr. Deputy 
Chair, the most appropriate one is that you would look at 
having a feasibility study and a planning study, and look at 
what are the best linkages and liaisons that would occur, 
whether this is best suited close to Woodland Campus or is it 
best suited for another location or is it best suited to be perhaps 
located beside P.A. (Prince Albert) Carlton? 
 
Well we don’t know. So I think whatever the results of the 
feasibility study that would indicate the best location is, you 
know, the proper way to go on this one. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, has your department or, in the past, 
the Post-Secondary Education department, ever conducted such 
a feasibility study with regards to a forestry research centre at 
the Woodland Campus? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — The answer is, no, we haven’t 
conducted such a study. It’s not within our particular 
jurisdiction at this point in time. 
 



2256 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I’d like to turn my 
questions now to the university funding mechanism, those extra 
dollars. I believe last time we discussed this issue in estimates 
you still had not made a determination as to the divvying up of 
those additional dollars. Have you at this point in time made 
that decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we’re very close 
to having a final resolution with regard to our university 
funding mechanism. We’re probably within two weeks. 
 
Currently, at this point in time, the dollars available to both 
universities from last year’s base has been provided, but we 
have not yet allocated the new dollars that have been available 
because we are still in negotiation between the two universities. 
But we’re very close to having, I would think, a resolution to a 
problem that the member opposite would know has been 
ongoing for some time and has been the subject of many 
recommendations dating back probably seven or eight years, 
including the MacKay report and DesRosiers. 
 
So I think it’s very good news that we are getting as, probably, 
as close as ever to actually having a resolution with regard to 
our university funding mechanism. So I think that’s good news 
for the House and for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, so what you’re saying is that, as I 
understand it, this special envelope of money was a three-year 
funding proposal and we’re in our last year of this particular 
funding mechanism and you are very close to negotiating a 
permanent arrangement between the two universities? Is that 
what you’re saying? And you will have this in place within the 
next two weeks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair. We are in 
the final phase of the three-year phase-in with regard to the 
DesRosiers formula. There was additional dollars provided by 
the provincial government to address a long-standing inequity. 
That global amount of dollars has been provided in increments 
over the course of three years. This is the final year of phase-in. 
Those dollars have been set aside for the DesRosiers 
implementation. 
 
And the member opposite is correct in that we are getting very 
close to having a final resolution for a more permanent solution 
in how we will be funding our universities in the future, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Deputy Chair, to the minister: Mr. Minister, I want to go back 
again to Woodland Campus in Prince Albert. There’s some 
areas of concern that the community has about the facility there. 
 
Certainly last year the facility lost its truck driving course to 
Moose Jaw. It was quite a loss to that facility. A lot of jobs . . . 
some job transfers took place, and certainly the emptying of a 
building in the Prince Albert area. We now have an empty 
building that SPMC is now looking after. It’s an unfortunate 
loss. And certainly to the Prince Albert area, there was some job 
creation around that. 
 
But more than that, Mr. Minister, also involved with that was 
the advantages for young people in the Prince Albert and region 

to be able to go to a local truck driving school. Because we 
certainly know, Mr. Minister, in this area of employment in the 
province, there’s a bound . . . lots of employment opportunities. 
 
But further to that, Mr. Minister, we also understand now that at 
the Woodland Campus in Prince Albert is that there are two 
further program cuts this year. One is in the ceramics area. 
Again enrolment was low. There was only seven students 
involved in it this spring. 
 
But certainly we understand, of course, that if you move that 
program to another facility, those students are not going to 
follow. This is one of those programs that is more of a local 
initiative, and certainly it’s not something that people are going 
to move any distance to be able to participate in this class. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I wonder if you might be willing to make a 
few comments as to the reasoning that went on behind the 
restructuring for that specific class because certainly it’s of 
concern to the people of Prince Albert, and certainly those 
people who were looking forward to that ceramics class in 
future, Mr. Speaker . . . or Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. When 
we look at our SIAST campuses and the reputation as being 
pre-eminent deliverers of technology and trades activities in the 
province of Saskatchewan, we also recognize that every year 
our SIAST campuses have business plans, they have operating 
plans. 
 
This provincial government has increased the dollars to our 
SIAST campuses by over 4 per cent this year. 
 
What we have found that they have flexibility within their 
training and course curriculum environment to provide courses 
as the demand dictates. The demand for the ceramics course in 
P.A. with declining enrolments was such that it was really not 
feasible to, perhaps, maintain that course when they were seeing 
an increased demand in other areas. 
 
So what they have done is they have added a new course to the 
Woodland Campus, SIAST, and it’s resources law enforcement 
diploma. There’s an new Internet communications certificate. 
They will also be adding a GIS/GPS (Geographic Information 
System/Global Positioning System) remote sensing and data 
imaging certificate. 
 
And of course we’re looking at the expanded nursing programs, 
40 new training positions in Prince Albert as part of our nursing 
education training. 
 
So these are decisions that are made autonomously by the 
SIAST board. They look at where the enrolments are, they look 
at the demand for courses, and they make adjustments on an 
ongoing basis. And we agree with that flexibility. 
 
With regard to the movement, the move of the truck driving to 
Saskatoon, and I think part of it to Moose Jaw, this was in 
relation to what the demands of the industry were; that there 
was consultation. The industry felt that it was beneficial to have 
these training courses closer to where the major hub of industry 
was. And it is my understanding that’s the reason why the 
SIAST board made that decision. 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2257 

 

So they are autonomous boards. They have flexibility to make 
decisions based on course demand and training demand, and 
that they make these adjustments on an annual basis so that 
there will be courses removed and courses added on an ongoing 
basis. And they are autonomous to make those decisions 
depending on the labour market in the province of 
Saskatchewan. Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, certainly we need to allow administration opportunity 
for flexibility. But in the example that I used, this ceramics 
class, I very clearly stated that those opportunities would be lost 
to those students. They’re certainly not going to travel any great 
distance for that type of course. It’s something that is a very 
short course. And so then what’s going to happen, Mr. Minister, 
is that there will be a position lost in the system for this 
educator. And that, Mr. Minister, is unfortunate. 
 
And certainly you mention that the truck driving school has 
moved to Moose Jaw. You thought it would be better to 
decentralize, in consultation with the industry, although in the 
Prince Albert region, Mr. Minister, I want to make you clearly 
aware that a very large portion of the trucking industry in this 
province is based out of Prince Albert. And so then we still feel 
quite strongly that that program — probably by the SIAST 
officials — will need to be looked at in the very near future. 
 
Because certainly there was another program lost last year, Mr. 
Minister, and that was the heavy duty mechanics course. That’s 
been moved to Kelsey in Saskatoon. And that’s another, again, 
unfortunate loss in Prince Albert. But there has been another 
loss that I’ll get to that we also need to speak about. 
 
But you did mention some programs that are starting up. But I 
wish to inform the minister that myself and the member from 
Prince Albert Northcote had the opportunity to attend the 
awards ceremony at Woodland Campus last Friday. And I wish 
to advise the minister that the courses that he mentioned are 
already up and running, and students are doing very well at it 
there. And so I thought I’d just inform the minister of what’s 
happening in his department already. 
 
There is a course, though, that we are very concerned about in 
Prince Albert. In the desire to centralize, Mr. Minister, is that 
the course for business administration diploma, the diploma 
course now has to be done in Moose Jaw. But the certificate 
program could be, up until this spring, Mr. Minister, could be 
attained in Prince Albert. And now that’s being closed out and 
the entire program is being moved to Moose Jaw. There is a 
significant job loss that’s going to be happening in Prince 
Albert. I believe there’s about five staff that were associated 
with that, to my understanding, Mr. Minister. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if you’d be able to comment 
on whether your department has appropriately looked at the 
ramifications of reducing students’ abilities to access education 
on a more local basis rather than having to do it on a provincial 
basis, Mr. Minister? 
 
(12:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Certainly when we look at the provision of course curriculum, 

that we are moving towards greater enhancement of Internet 
classes and technology enhanced learning. Through our TEL 
(technology enhanced learning) project, we are planning on 
having over 150 courses available. This, of course, will be 
available through the Internet in multiple locations and, really 
in essence, across Saskatchewan. 
 
I also wish to mention to the member opposite that one of the 
. . . very close to the top of the priority list for the future for the 
SIAST campuses is Woodland consolidation where we will be 
seeing some expansion of not only core services and classes, 
but consolidation in other areas as well. 
 
And when we see that the SIAST campuses are managed 
provincially by one board, that they look at the provincial 
perspective in labour needs and technology needs, and decisions 
are made so that one campus might lose one course and one 
campus might gain one course 
 
But when we look at the improvements to Woodland Campus, 
the additional dollars that have come in, and this fall the start of 
40 new nursing positions, that certainly I feel that Woodland 
Campus is providing an excellent opportunity to provide 
training in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, when I mentioned some of the classes, the 
new classes, of course, I was referring to that these were new 
classes offered at Woodland this year. And I wish to 
congratulate the graduates of those new programs and wish 
them every success for a successful career in the future. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, 
and to your officials, the big concern that K to 12 education is 
looking at today is I guess a different one than we had on 
budget day — although it was in the back of everybody’s mind 
— that day we were talking about the amount of dollars that 
was going to go into education and the fact that it was actually a 
cutback and that the taxpayers were actually going to be cost 
. . . it was going to cost them more money. 
 
But today the big concern that many school divisions have and 
teachers and parents is the teacher negotiations and the contract 
that is being in dispute right now or being talked about at the 
moment. 
 
I understand that it has been decided to go to a conciliation, and 
there is a frustration on the part of both the SSTA 
(Saskatchewan School Trustees Association) and the STF 
(Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) that the government 
really has not put forward any kind of a mandate. Both the 
SSTA and the STF have presented proposals and they’re 
waiting for the government. Can you tell us where you are in 
this process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
and thank you to the member opposite because she really does 
ask a very timely issue because it is my understanding that the 
negotiating teams are meeting at this very moment. 
 
With regard to the conciliation process, negotiations are 
ongoing. There is a meeting that is happening right now. We 



2258 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

also recognize that conciliation has been applied for, and it is 
my understanding that the Teachers’ Federation has indicated 
their member of the conciliation panel. The government trustee 
group has not yet indicated its member for the conciliation 
panel. 
 
Then together they will jointly choose a Chair of that 
conciliation panel, and at that point they will be looking at the 
various positions of the parties at the table, and they will 
providing recommendations you know probably more as we get 
into the middle or maybe later in the summer in terms of their 
recommendations where they see a settlement might exist. 
 
This of course becomes a public document. It also is a 
requirement for the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation under 
the Act that when they choose the route under the Act of going 
the conciliation job action as opposed to the binding arbitration 
side, because two paths are allowed for under the Act with 
regard to collective bargaining, that once that conciliation has 
occurred — and it can be called for at any time once 
negotiations have begun — that it then puts them in a position 
where they then could move to the next step in terms of going 
to their membership for a mandate with regard to potential job 
action. 
 
So I’m hopeful that negotiations will be successful, that they are 
ongoing, conciliation will occur in a parallel fashion as 
negotiations continue. And I would expect that as we get closer 
to the middle, end of summer, that we will be closer to having 
the issue of collective bargaining resolved at that time, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Mr. Minister, I understand that the Chair has not been appointed 
and that the SSTA have not appointed their member yet. But 
when you talk about being hopeful, well I think the parents and 
the SSTA and the STF are wondering when we . . . We’re 
looking at summer holidays coming up; we’re nearing the end 
of June; most of the month of July there’s . . . there won’t be 
any talks taking place because of the holidays and at the end of 
August the contract is finished. 
 
We’ve got September, parents are wondering are we going to 
have job action starting right away in September? There’s still a 
very big frustration that the government, your department, has 
not come forward with any type of a mandate saying this is 
what we can actually start with in the bargaining process. 
 
Everybody knows that the government at least has to say, this is 
our stand on it. Have you made that stand? Is there anything in 
your . . . anything going on right now that you can give both 
groups of people any kind of hope that you are actually working 
on some kind of a settlement rather than just saying, I’m 
hopeful it’s going to end before school starts in the fall? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Obviously it’s not for me to comment on what is being 
negotiated at the table at this very moment. And certainly when 
we look at the history of negotiations with teachers over the 
past 30 years, I can indicate that there has been a successful 
negotiation of every contract for the past 30 years and that the 
bi-level bargaining process and the way we approach collective 
bargaining with teachers in the province of Saskatchewan has 

been quite successful and is a model that is looked at by many 
other jurisdictions as being a model that is quite functional and 
that other jurisdictions would like to emulate. 
 
When we look at what is actually happening at the table, 
positions are being discussed. Certainly when you look at the 
range of items that might be discussed at a collective bargaining 
table, they are large. There have been I think now five or six 
separate meetings. And I think the most important thing to 
recognize for the people of Saskatchewan is that the contract 
with teachers does not expire till the end of August and that 
when we look at the track record in terms of when negotiation 
has started and how that negotiation has progressed, even at this 
point in time we are way ahead in terms of where we’re at with 
negotiations than at any previous contract that I can recall in the 
past, you know, 10 or 15 years. 
 
So in essence, the process is further along now than it ever has 
been before. And all I can say is that . . . let the parties 
negotiate. And we’re all hopeful that a fair settlement for 
teachers and ratepayers can be achieved at the bargaining table. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Of course the 
process has been working and we are all very hopeful that it is 
going to work. And you’ll understand that we haven’t made a 
political issue out of this because when we’re talking about 
education and the future of our children, it’s not politics. It’s the 
future of our province. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, it is still a great concern when we see that, in 
the past, teachers have said they have been . . . they’ve 
tightened their belts for a number of years. We know that . . . 
what teachers’ wages are doing compared to other provinces. 
We know the lack of teachers in various areas. 
 
And we know that, on the other hand, the property tax owners 
in this province are saying I cannot bear one more cent on my 
taxes. It’s something that this government is going to have to, 
going to have to eat. And at the same time, we understand the 
pressures of government. 
 
So people are saying the government is looking at extra funding 
for agriculture, they’re looking at a lot of the other issues and 
budgetary restraints that are coming. But education is still a 
priority. In fact in your Throne Speech I believe it was the third 
pillar of building this province, was education. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think that what we need to know is that, 
other times, you’re saying we’re further along in the process on 
June 15 now compared to the end of the bargaining time than 
we were at other times. But I also believe that, at other times, 
the government at least had put forward some ideas. There was 
something concrete for the SSTA or the STF to say this is what 
the government is saying. 
 
What are you saying at this time when it comes to money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
Certainly when we look at our track record for education and 
the additional dollars we provided, not only in the K to 12 side 
but on the post-secondary side, it has been substantive the last 
few years. 
 



June 21, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2259 

 

When we talk about even for . . . with regard to recruitment and 
retention of issues, that we’ve had a tremendous impact with the 
additional dollars provided in last year’s budget, over $1 
million to deal with recruitment and retention in rural and 
remote areas of Saskatchewan and northern Saskatchewan. And 
I can indicate to the member opposite that there has been some 
significant success with regard to recruiting and retaining 
teachers in northern Saskatchewan because of that initiative. 
 
And that initiative has resulted that in this just-concluding 
school year that, at the beginning of the school year, the 
Northern Lights School Division, for example, had all of its 
teaching positions filled, which is the first time in some 10 or 
15 years that they were able to achieve that. They’ve done 
remarkable work in making sure that they are recruiting 
teachers to northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we recognize that more needs to be done. We recognize 
that wages and working conditions are crucial to recruiting and 
retaining teachers in the province of Saskatchewan — and 
we’re sensitive to these issues. We also recognize that collective 
bargaining is happening at this point in time. 
 
And I can assure the member opposite that this government 
wants to see a fair settlement for teachers, that teachers are 
supported in the province of Saskatchewan and that we want to 
see a fair settlement for our teachers, recognizing the 
circumstances. But we also recognize that there are fiscal 
constraints that also need to be taken into account. 
 
So I say let the collective bargaining continue and we will 
monitor that process as it evolves, and we’ll let them negotiate 
at the table, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. Mr. Minister, a 
couple questions. And you and I chatted a bit about this, the 
Southeast Regional College in the southeast corner of the 
province, and the number of dramatic changes that are taking 
place within the college. 
 
And certainly one community in particular and I know I have 
three other colleagues that will probably be raising some of the 
same concerns, although they’re not as dramatically affected. 
The community of Whitewood has, and the Southeast College, 
has spent a fair bit of money in the last few years, really 
building a facility for the college to function in. 
 
They have the special care aide program that has worked very 
well over the past number of years, and a number of university 
courses have been taken by the college in Whitewood. And, Mr. 
Minister, I guess a couple questions is, how are these colleges 
funded as far as direction? Where does the direction come 
from? 
 
Does the department have any involvement or any suggestions 
regarding the programming? And is the department kept up to 
speed when major changes are being made within the college, 
and in particular in Whitewood’s situation? I think they’re 
going from something like 3.4 down to .6 positions within that 
facility itself. 
 
I know there are other communities that are arguing well 
they’re lacking some of the space they need for the programs 

that they are offering. And I think that’s some of the arguments 
the college is bringing forward. 
 
But I’m wondering if you can bring me up to speed on where 
we’re at and what the community of Whitewood can look 
forward to in regards to some of the major restructuring taking 
place? 
 
(12:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
and thank you to the member opposite. I have had some 
discussions with the member opposite with regard to this issue 
and I just would like to inform the House that regional colleges 
are autonomous boards. They are made up of community 
representatives. With regard to the Southeast Regional College 
it, as all regional colleges, do provide a business plan on an 
annual basis to the department, which is approved. 
 
There were . . . there may have been some glitches in this last 
go-round with regard to their business plan not including some 
of the aspects with regard to reorganization. So we’ve asked the 
union representatives and the board and members of the 
community to get together to talk about some of these issues. 
 
Certainly it is within the purview of a regional college to look 
within its region in terms of how it provides courses and course 
content to meet the needs of industry and training opportunities 
within their region. It may mean that there might be a decrease 
in a particular training opportunity in Whitewood. And it is my 
understanding that there would also be a corresponding increase 
in Moosomin in terms of some of those training opportunities. 
 
But I have asked, I have received correspondence from the 
council and mayor of Whitewood. I have received some 
concerns from some of the representatives of the employees in 
the regional college area and that they are currently discussing 
these issues, and I’m hopeful that we can come to a resolution 
with regard to the reorganization in the very near future. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, a further 
question and that is how are regional colleges funded? Where 
do they get their funding? And in regards to the boards, how are 
the boards appointed? Is this the Department of Education looks 
through a number of names that are submitted and puts in place 
a board? I wonder if you could just give a response to those 
questions, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
With regard to the question from the member opposite, I think 
first off I it’s important to recognize that there was a significant 
boost in the funding from the Department of Learning to 
regional colleges this year — a little over 14 per cent in the 
global dollars available which was a significant bump to the 
funding of regional colleges. 
 
So the short answer to his first question is that regional colleges 
receive their funding from the Department of Learning and 
there was a 14 per cent increase this year. 
 
With regard to his further points, Mr. Speaker, the boards of 
regional colleges are appointed by order in council, but they 
need to represent the geography of their region and they need to 



2260 Saskatchewan Hansard June 21, 2002 

 

have certain qualifications. In other words they should be 
qualified in understanding financial issues, they should be 
qualified in understanding educational needs of their 
communities, and so forth. 
 
So they are appointments made by the government based on a 
set of criteria that would complement a good board structure, 
and they then make decisions for that regional college in their 
community. 
 
So funding comes from the Department of Learning, a 14 per 
cent increase this year, boards are appointed, and boards are 
responsive to their communities. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Deputy Chair. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, a further question. And maybe 
the minister could have this in writing by Monday as it’d take 
up a fair bit of time on the floor. But could you give me an idea 
of the 14 per cent increase and what that means to each one of 
the regional colleges? Like with the Southeast, what they would 
have received as a result of the increase this year, and the other 
regional colleges in the province? If I could have something in 
writing for Monday, that would be appreciated and that would 
be fine. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well I can give him that information 
right now with regard to the grant for the Southeast College. It 
was 1.77 million last year and it’s 1.896 million this year. The 
total for all colleges was a little over 13 million last year, and 
it’s 14.7 million this year. 
 
So those are the global numbers, but if he has any more specific 
questions with regard to programming he just has to ask and I’ll 
provide that information to him. So thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Chairman, I’d like to ask — or 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry — I’d like to ask leave of the House to 
move a motion respecting sitting hours. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Hours of Sitting 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member from Saskatchewan Rivers: 
 

That notwithstanding rule 3(1), on Thursday, June 27, 
2002, the times for the daily meeting and adjournment shall 
be 10 a.m. to 1 p.m., and when the Assembly adjourns at 1 
p.m., it shall stand adjourned until Tuesday, July 2 at 1:30 
p.m. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would 
like to move that this House do now adjourn and wish all the 

members a good weekend. 
 
The Speaker: — And I too would like to wish everyone a very 
pleasant weekend. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 12:55. 
 


