















































Hansard: July 09, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2683 
 July 9, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan very upset with the government’s 
decision to transfer the surplus from the Fish and Wildlife 
Development Fund to the General Revenue Fund. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
refund the $1.6 million intended for the Saskatchewan Fish 
and Wildlife Development Fund and discontinue its present 
policy of using this money for other government purposes. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by citizens of Regina, Corning, Naicam, 
Langham, and Regina Beach, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition from citizens of Saskatchewan who 
are concerned about the component of the Saskatchewan EMS 
(emergency medical services) development project that calls for 
provincially run and centrally operated ambulance services. 
And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report and 
affirm its intent to work to improve community based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
community of Cudworth. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to present on behalf of citizens concerned with 
overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Langenburg and Marchwell in Saskatchewan, and Russell, 
Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 

with people opposed to possible reduction in services, Davidson 
and Craik health centres: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum of 24 acute care, emergency, doctoral 
services available as well as lab, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to 
users from the Craik and Davidson area and beyond. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston, Davidson, 
Bladworth, Elbow, and Holdfast. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of residents who are concerned 
about health care in the Davidson area. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at minimum with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctorial services available as well as laboratory, 
physiotherapy, public health, home care, and long-term 
care services available to users from the Craik and 
Davidson area and beyond. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Kenaston, Bladworth, 
and Davidson. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege today to 
rise on behalf of still more residents of the Southwest who are 
concerned enough about the hospital situation in Swift Current 
to sign a petition. And the prayer of their petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to commit its 65 per cent share of funding for a 
new regional hospital for the city of Swift Current. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the great city of 
Swift Current as well as the communities of Waldeck and Gull 
Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about reasonably priced telephone 
service hookup. The prayer reads: 



2684 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookup to these 
cabins and provide reliable cellular telephone coverage. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Leask, Saskatoon, Edmonton, 
Paynton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of constituents who are 
very concerned about the detrimental changes to this year’s 
crop insurance program. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Raymore, Wynyard, and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with the fishing on Lake of 
the Prairies. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are all from 
the centre of Langenburg. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province that are concerned about the 
high-price hookup costs for telephone service. And the prayer 
reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookups to these 
cabins and provide a reliable cellular telephone coverage. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by people from Leask, 
Saskatoon, and Martensville. 
 

I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 

Deputy Clerk: — According to order a petition presented July 
8, 2002 regarding claims being denied by the Workers’ 
Compensation Board and Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
has been reviewed and pursuant to rule 12(7) is found to be 
irregular and therefore cannot be read and received. 
 
According to order the following petitions have been reviewed 
and pursuant to the same rule are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 11, 18, 22, 157, 168, and no. 174. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to point 
out two gentlemen that are sitting in your gallery. I’d like to 
introduce Franklin Asapass. Franklin is the director of the 
senate council of FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan Indian 
Nations). Franklin and I had a very productive meeting this 
morning. And with Franklin is his friend Don Johannesson, who 
is a businessman from Saskatoon. 
 
I would ask all members of the Legislative Assembly to give 
these two gentlemen a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You may 
have noted that today again I think we have a second wave of 
visitors from Week in Wascana. And I’ll just mention again that 
this program gives a huge opportunity for young people to 
experience some of our finest landmarks and facilities: the 
Science Centre, the legislature, the Royal Saskatchewan 
Museum. And to think about whether they might be interested 
in working in any of these places when they get older as well as 
having fun like they’re doing today. 
 
So thank you for coming to visit and I hope you have a good 
Week in Wascana. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you and 
to you to the rest of the Assembly, I’d like to introduce two 
constituents of mine in the west gallery, Edward Hoffman and 
Trevor Klein. They are from Tyvan and Francis respectively. 
 
They were in town and came by my office and had the 
opportunity to discuss the ethanol and the future of ethanol 
production in our province, because they are very interested in 
the province doing well. And so it was great to hear and see 
their ideas and hope you look forward to the rest of the 
proceedings here in the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In your 
gallery this afternoon, I have Mr. Scott Fellner, accompanied by 
my chief of staff, Marv Schultz. And Scott will be working in 
my office over the summer. He is a Master of Arts student in 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2685 

 

sociology at the University of Regina. And he’s working on his 
thesis in addition to working in our office as a summer student. 
 
And I just want to talk about some of the research he’s doing. 
He’s researching the impact of national and transnational music 
entertainment corporations on the artistic practices and 
production of local Saskatchewan musicians/songwriters. And I 
also understand that he’s a very accomplished musician — bass 
player — and was in the Flatland Festival on the weekend. 
 
And I’d ask all members of the Assembly to welcome them 
here today . . . 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you today, seated in your gallery three 
gentleman. Denis Cyrenne, who is an accountant, an investment 
portfolio manager in Regina with McNamee Financial group. 
This is Denis’s first visit to the legislature, so welcome Denis. 
 
Ken Miller who is a farmer and a rancher from Avonlea. And 
Ken is associated with the Canadian Belgian Blue Association 
and just is back last week from being at the Calgary Stampede 
where he placed third with his Belgian Blue. 
 
And accompanying them is Lorne Ridgeway who is a frequent 
visitor to the legislature and is also a farmer at Avonlea. So I’d 
like to welcome them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’d 
like to introduce to you and to the Assembly a fine young 
student that will be working in my office for the next couple of 
months. “Working with tomorrow’s leaders today” is the motto 
we have in SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management) and we’re certainly going to continue doing that. 
 
Sheldon Dean is a university student at the University of 
Regina. He is currently in his third year of the administration 
program and is working to receive a degree in accounting and 
marketing. Sheldon has been married for one year and has a 
three-year-old son. Once Sheldon has completed the admin 
program he will continue to work towards a certificate in 
certified management accounting. 
 
And with Sheldon today is another friend of mine working in 
the staff, is Dale Robison. I’d ask Sheldon to stand and ask all 
the Assembly members to please welcome Sheldon here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in your gallery in the front row I’d like to introduce 
somebody who’s very well known to all members of the 
Assembly. And that’s Jessica Waiser, who’s been working with 
me as a student in the internship program over the last three 
months, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I know that we’ve all benefited a great deal from the four 
interns that have been working with both our caucuses over the 
session. I want to say that Jessica’s done just an excellent job in 

the work that she’s done for the hon. member for Saskatoon 
Nutana and myself. She’s been a regular attender at question 
period. 
 
But this afternoon I’d like all members to join me in expressing 
both a very warm welcome to the question period and this 
afternoon’s session, and also our appreciation to her for the 
work she’s done. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

2002 Canadian Special Olympics Summer Games 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. After five long yet exciting years of planning, 
planning, and more planning the city of Prince Albert is all set 
to host the 2002 Canadian Special Olympic Summer Games 
from July 8 to July 14. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Prince Albert is no stranger to Special Olympics. 
The city hosted the Saskatchewan Special O Summer Games in 
’97, an experience which no doubt put them in very good stead 
for hosting the national edition of the games this month. 
 
Special Olympics is a worldwide program providing sports 
training and competition for people with mental disability. The 
athlete’s oath states: “Let me win, but if I cannot win, let me be 
brave in the attempt.” An oath, Mr. Speaker, that we all can take 
something from. 
 
Come July 8, over 1,000 athletes will converge on the city of 
Prince Albert to take part in the games. The host committee 
expects some 5,000 people from coaches, support staff, families 
and fans to come out and show support for the athletes. 
 
(13:45) 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, there are the volunteers. The mission 
statement from the games for Prince Albert this month is 
“We’re here for the athletes.” Games Chairman Phil Fredette is 
confident that this will be evident in the course of the games 
this week. Mr. Fredette says, and I quote: 
 

You will come to see a community the size of Prince Albert 
that has the people and the resources to host a national 
event of this size and make these games the best ever. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to point out that Glen Scrimshaw, a 
Saskatchewan artist, has made a special contribution to Special 
Olympics with a $200,000 gift-in-kind in the form of a new 
painting entitled Shining Bright. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to extend congratulations to the city of 
Prince Albert, all of the athletes, the volunteers, and the 
stakeholders for what will be a very exciting special Canadian 
summer event. On with the games. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



2686 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

New Museum Opens at Blaine Lake 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
congratulate Billy, Vivian, Jenna and Weslie Nemish on the 
grand opening of their museum, the General Store Memories, 
on this past July 1. It was a pleasure for me to officiate the 
ribbon-cutting ceremony that attracted 400 visitors from three 
provinces and one US (United States) state. 
 
Hubert Smith of Marcelin held blacksmithing demonstrations 
and Albertown church group provided lunch for the day. A 
variety of items were also supplied by three vendors for 
viewing and purchase. 
 
Billy began collecting antiques three years ago and eventually 
the whole family was involved. The Nemishes decided they 
would like to preserve the community’s and the province’s 
history by opening up a two-storey museum on the family farm 
northwest of Blaine Lake. Their goal is to collect enough local 
heritage items to offer local school tours through the museum. 
 
Visitors to the General Store of Memories will be rewarded 
with an array of articles that will spark memories for those old 
enough to have seen or used them, and educate younger visitors 
as to what their parents and grandparents grew up with. They 
will also be able to take part in frequent weekend flea markets. 
 
I encourage anyone that is travelling in the Blaine Lake area to 
stop in at the General Store of Memories and take a trip back in 
time. 
 
Again, congratulations to the Nemishes for their efforts in 
preserving the past and educating the future. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Seniors Fitness Association 55 Plus Games 
 

Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with great 
pleasure that I rise in the House today to talk about some 
excellent role models we have in this province. 
 
This week almost 800 Saskatchewan residents will participate 
in a variety of sport, cultural and recreation activities at the 
SSFA (Saskatchewan Senior Fitness Association) Summer 
Games in North Battleford. 
 
And what is so unique about this group of Saskatchewan 
citizens, you might ask? They’re all over 55, Mr. Speaker, and 
their athletic ability and skill would put most of us to shame. 
 
The SSFA, Saskatchewan Senior Fitness Association, has put 
on the games every two years since the inaugural games were 
held in Melville in 1988. This year seniors from eight zones 
across the province will descend on North Battleford from July 
9 to 11, to compete in 18 different events. 
 
The games should not be categorized just as sporting events, 
Mr. Speaker, as they span a wide range of physical and mental 
challenges from slow-pitch softball to contract bridge, from 
darts to lawn bowling, and from snooker to track and field. 

These events bring together amateur competitors who 
participate for the sheer joy of competition, for the opportunity 
to visit another part of the province, and for the camaraderie and 
social interaction that are an integral and essential part of the 
games. 
 
The SSFA 55-plus games ultimately promote wellness. That is 
the spiritual, mental, and physical well-being among 
Saskatchewan residents 55 years of age and older. Through 
both active and passive activities the games mission is to 
influence personal behaviour and social supports that encourage 
healthy, active living for adults in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d like to invite all members of the House to join me in wishing 
all participants the best of luck in North Battleford, and in 
thanking each and every one of them for their energy and 
enthusiasm for physical fitness. They are an excellent role 
model and motivating factor for the rest of us. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

90th Birthday Festivities for the Village of Strongfield 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to stand in the 
House to talk about the celebration and 90th birthday of the 
village of Strongfield this past Saturday. I had the honour of 
being invited to take part in the festivities which included a 
parade, a family supper, and a wonderful fireworks display. 
 
This community event was attended by over 700 people 
including local, out-of-province, and even some people from 
outside of Canada. This attendance speaks volumes for the 
spirit of this small rural community and its strong history — 
community building over nine decades. 
 
I must congratulate the mayor, George Bristow, through his 
remarkable efforts and those of the many volunteers throughout 
the community which hosted this event and which made this 
event very well run, and came off without a hitch. 
 
The parade contained over 50 entries and was so long that it 
spilled outside of the village limits. Later on that evening the 
crowd was treated to a display of fireworks which would rival 
anything that you would see in the larger centres such as Regina 
and Saskatoon. 
 
This is organized by Dale Norrish who put together the 
awesome display of colour and light which dazzled children and 
adults alike. Hat’s off to Mr. Norrish for his great work in 
getting this colourful display in the evening sky. Overall the 
event was very successful with the weather co-operating to its 
fullest extent. 
 
I know I speak for everyone in attendance that day when I say 
that this event was enjoyed by all. 
 
I would like all members of the House to join me congratulating 
the village of Strongfield on their 90th, and wish them a happy 
birthday and many more to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2687 

 

Legislative Cafeteria Staff 
 

Ms. Lorjé: — Mr. Speaker, we all know Trent Brears, manager 
of the Cafeteria Board and captain of the Saskatchewan culinary 
team. We’ve been in awe of his fantastic ice and chocolate 
sculptures. We complimented him when he brought home two 
silver and one bronze medal from the Cooking Olympics in 
Germany a couple of years ago. And we all know that we can 
expect friendly and efficient service and great food whenever 
we drop into the legislative cafeteria. 
 
But did you know, Mr. Speaker, that Teodoro Linantud, who 
has been learning on the job over the past couple of years and is 
just halfway through his first professional cooking course 
successfully competed against other apprentices to represent 
Saskatchewan in the national apprentice cook-off in Vancouver 
last month. 
 
Teo was crowned best in Saskatchewan and went on to take 
seventh place against competitors from all across Canada. Small 
wonder, with his quiet culinary creativity and intensely focused 
work ethic. 
 
I’m sure all members of this Assembly join me in saying, well 
done, Teo, and best wishes for future competitions. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, I want to share with you one other 
little known fact about staff in the legislative cafeteria. We all 
know Joyce, the cheerful, quiet, and efficient woman who 
dishes up our meals and takes our money. Joyce is taking a few 
days off right now. Last week she moved, she got married, and 
she’s off on a honeymoon this week. 
 
Fellow MLAs (Members of the Legislative Assembly) please 
join me in congratulating Joyce and her new husband and 
wishing them all the best in their life together, and in 
congratulating Teodoro Linantud and Trent Brears. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Summer Sizzler 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Humboldt Summer Sizzler, Humboldt’s brand new summer 
event, will take place from July 12 to 14 on the Humboldt 
Uniplex grounds. 
 
The event gets underway Friday evening, July 12, with 
Humboldt’s annual parade. Following the parade, everyone is 
invited to participate in the Summer Sizzler’s Summerfest beer 
tent beginning at 8:30 p.m. Entertainment will include 
Humboldt’s own Beer Tent Gang and the Little German Band. 
 
Saturday is a busy day with the cultural circle which will 
showcase many aspects of culture in the Humboldt area 
including local exhibits, a local talent show, quilt displays, fine 
arts entertainment, and other entertainment. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, on Saturday there will be the sheep and 
goat shows, the local amateur horse show, and the Wild on 
Wheels automotive swap. There will also be a grandstand show 
featuring a heavy horse show along with gymnastic 
competitions followed by a cabaret. Sunday will start off with a 

pancake breakfast followed by more exciting activities all day 
long. 
 
I would like to take this opportunity to invite everyone to come 
out to Humboldt to enjoy the Humboldt Summer Sizzler. It’s 
sure to be an enjoyable time for all. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wanuskewin Heritage Park Celebrates 10th Anniversary 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is indeed 
a pleasure for me to rise and inform this House of a great 
moment being marked in my constituency this week. 
 
On Thursday, Wanuskewin Heritage Park celebrates its 10th 
anniversary. The official opening date of the park was June 27, 
1992 and Wanuskewin has decided to celebrate on July 11 
when NHK Japan Broadcasting Corporation will be 
broadcasting a live program from Wanuskewin to over 35 
million viewers in Japan. 
 
Ten years ago, Queen Elizabeth II opened Wanuskewin 
Heritage Park to visitors from around the world to learn more 
about the place where First Nations met newcomers in a spirit 
of sharing and hospitality. 
 
Wanuskewin is recognized worldwide as a major archaeological 
site of Northern Plains Indian culture. Hundreds of thousands of 
visitors, including Prince Charles who visited last year during 
his provincial tour, have visited and marvelled at the sights. 
 
The park’s mandate is to create awareness, sensitivity, and 
knowledge of Aboriginal culture to both First Nations and non 
First Nations people. 
 
I would invite all members to join with me in congratulating 
Wanuskewin on its 10th anniversary. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Drought Assistance For Agriculture 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. The second year of extreme drought is gripping 
large areas of northwest and central Saskatchewan. The NDP 
(New Democratic Party) government has admitted that much to 
be true but yet at the same time has offered no help and no 
answers to the Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
In fact the minister is quoted in today’s Leader-Post saying, 
“there’s little that the province can do.” All he could offer is 
more excuses but they are still waiting for the federal 
government to tell us how the federal farm package will be 
distributed. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s simply not good enough. Farm 
families are expecting more from the NDP government than 
excuses. They want some answers. 
 
Will the minister explain exactly what drought relief program 



2688 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

the NDP is preparing to deliver in Saskatchewan for farm 
families this summer? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I listened carefully to the 
members yesterday and again the member today, leading off 
with the question about what is this government doing for 
farmers in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, we have a plan for 
Saskatchewan farmers. They have no plan for Saskatchewan 
farmers — no plan, Mr. Speaker, for Saskatchewan farmers. In 
this province today, Mr. Speaker, we built . . . we’re building a 
crop insurance program for farmers; submitted a plan, Mr. 
Speaker, in October of last year, and said that we needed for 
Saskatchewan farmers an enhanced crop insurance program, 
Mr. Speaker, we needed a new crop sector program, and we 
needed a marginal gross margin income program for producers, 
Mr. Speaker. We submitted that in February or October of last 
year. 
 
Today, Mr. Speaker, I still wait for one scrap of letter from that 
member opposite saying to me what in fact the Saskatchewan 
Party is going to do . . . (inaudible) . . . Saskatchewan Party. Not 
one, not one word about the plan from the Saskatchewan Party 
for Saskatchewan producers, Mr. Speaker — not one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again it’s rather 
sad that the minister’s answer shows that they have no plan, no 
program, no idea of how they’re going to assist the 
Saskatchewan farm families at a time of a drought. 
 
And the minister keeps asking the Saskatchewan Party what we 
would do, what are our solutions. Well the Saskatchewan Party 
did offer solutions, Mr. Speaker. For example, we proposed that 
the provincial government commit $10 million for drilling 
wells, for digging dugouts, and for pumping equipment to . . . 
for water supply. We proposed the program would help farmers 
now when there is a drought right now. 
 
But did the NDP listen to this suggestion? No. And they’re still 
not listening to the Saskatchewan farm families who have asked 
for help time and time again. They’ve asked for direction, 
they’ve asked for leadership from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP today commit to funding a water 
program such as the one that we have proposed for the livestock 
producers of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I just want to quote from a 
radio interview that the member had in Yorkton, with the 
Yorkton GX radio, Mr. Speaker, where the announcer there 
asked the member from Watrous, what is it that you would do if 
you were going to advance a plan for Saskatchewan 
agriculture? She said: 
 

I think if you’re unhappy with the plan that you’ve got 
(quote), you’ve got to make . . . (changes to the plan, Mr. 

Speaker). And yes I do. I think we should . . . (go) East 
with a proposal and then adjust it from there (Mr. Speaker). 

 
So what they’re going to do, they’re going to take their plan and 
they’re going to take it to eastern Canada, and they’re going to 
adjust their agricultural plan, Mr. Speaker, in eastern Canada. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, in Saskatchewan our producers and this 
government have not even seen what their plan is, Mr. Speaker. 
So what they have, Mr. Speaker, is obviously an invisible plan 
that they’re going to take to eastern Canada and they’re going to 
try to adjust it. 
 
Advise us, Madam Member, what it is that you’re . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. I would ask the member if he wishes, 
I’ll give him five seconds to repeat his statement through the 
Chair, because he is not on record. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I would ask the 
member from Watrous to tell us what is her plan. What is she 
taking to Eastern Canada, Mr. Speaker, to propose for 
agriculture for this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like the minister to tell 
the producers of this province how successful he was going out 
east without any plan, with no plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — He came back with absolutely nothing for 
the farm families of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government keep on shirking their own 
provincial responsibility for helping the farm families of this 
province. They keep on blaming the federal government for 
cuts to crop insurance when the minister himself has slashed 
millions of dollars out of our own provincial budget. 
 
The minister claims that he can’t come up with $10 million for 
the drought assistance program to help the livestock producers 
of the province. Well if there’s a will, there’s a way, Mr. 
Speaker. The NDP has $10 million for pie in the sky in 
Australia. They’ve got $40 million for cable TV. They’ve got 
$60 million for a land titles system that doesn’t even work. And 
yet, they can’t find $10 million for farm families in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a question of priorities. 
When is the minister and the NDP government going to get 
their priorities straight and put Saskatchewan farm families 
ahead of Australia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . and to the House, Mr. Speaker, that in 
this budget we added additional money for crop insurance. We 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2689 

 

added this year programs, Mr. Speaker, for the . . . to enhance 
the transition program. We have the grazing land program . . . 
(inaudible) . . . haying. And we have the water pumping 
program, Mr. Speaker. We have a host of programs that we’ve 
developed for farmers this year. 
 
But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the members opposite what 
we have here, Mr. Speaker, is a collection of Saskatchewan 
Party members who represent, Mr. Speaker, disenchanted 
Liberals. They represent the old Canadian Alliance and the old 
. . . (inaudible) . . . and the old Tory . . . reconstructed Tories, 
Mr. Speaker. You have a smorgasbord of men and women, Mr. 
Speaker, who haven’t had an original idea in their head since 
they began this session, Mr. Speaker, two years ago, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the Saskatchewan Party represents the largest portion of the 
popular vote in the last election and growing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, I have a constituent in 
Stoughton named James Turner. Perhaps you have one in your 
constituency. 
 
Mr. Turner and his wife Earla were re-registering their 
mortgage on their home in Stoughton so they contacted 
Information Services Corporation to get a copy of their property 
title. They were quite surprised to learn that a maintenance 
order judgment had been placed against their property. 
 
So they contacted ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). ISC told them the maintenance order had been 
issued against someone named James Turner somewhere in 
Saskatchewan. But since the new $80 million computer system 
can’t distinguish between two people of the same name, the 
maintenance order was applied against the James Turners in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now Stoughton’s James Turner has to prove that he’s a 
different James Turner than the one with the maintenance order 
against him and go through the legal process to have the 
judgment removed. 
 
To the Minister of Justice: why can’t the NDP’s $80 million 
LAND (Land Titles Automated Network Development project) 
registry tell the difference between two people with the same 
name? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this might come as 
a big surprise to the member, but no computer system and no 
human system can tell the difference between two people with 
the same name unless there’s something else attached to it. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this is not an issue which adversely reflects on 
ISC. It just happens to be the way that systems work when 

matters are attached to persons’ names, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
sure the member’s . . . the person the member spoke to got this 
matter clarified very quickly at ISC. And it is something that 
unfortunately, Mr. Speaker, when two people are called the 
same name, a computer and a person can’t tell them apart. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, it would seem to me that 
an $80 computer system . . . $80 million computer system paid 
for by the taxpayers should be able to tell the difference 
between two people with the same name from their middle 
initials and from their land descriptions, Mr. Speaker. 
 
James and Earla Turner have now spent weeks trying to clear 
up this matter, to say nothing, Mr. Speaker, of the emotional 
stress that they have been put under by this. And they continue 
to do their jobs, Mr. Speaker. They’ve had to hire a lawyer to 
get this maintenance order removed. They have to pay the legal 
fees for this government’s mistake. 
 
Why can’t the $80 million computer tell the difference between 
two people with the same name? Why should James and Earla 
Turner have to pay the legal fees out of their pocket for this 
government’s mistake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well it’s good that not everybody has 
the same name, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know where we would be 
if that were the case. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, let me say that I’ll look into the legal costs 
incurred by the person who contacted the member and see what 
we can do. 
 
But I would remind the member that no system can distinguish 
between two names which are exactly the same. And it just so 
happens that in this particular interest that he’s talking about, 
that interest attaches, the maintenance enforcement order 
attaches to a person’s name and the computer can’t tell if 
there’s more people with that name, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But let me assure the member that I’ll look into it and see what 
we can do about compensating his client or his . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
computers can store a lot of information but I gather the one at 
ISC can’t. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, once James and Earla 
Turner finally received the title for their new property, they 
discovered that Earla’s name had been spelled wrong. So again 
their lawyer had to contact ISC to get this corrected. Again, it’s 
going to cost them money. When the Turners’ lawyer, Mr. 
Speaker, contacted ISC he was told it was going to take two 
weeks to two months to correct this situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is absolutely unacceptable and serves only to 



2690 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

disrupt what should be normal business of a land transaction in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is it too much to ask that the $80 million new 
automated land titles system does not cost Saskatchewan people 
extra legal fees, significant delays, and emotional stress to 
conduct a simple land transaction. Mr. Minister, will you fix it 
or will you get a . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member care to put his question on 
record through the Chair. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Mr. Speaker, will the minister get a quill 
and parchment that works? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, not only does the Sask 
Party draw upon its . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Please, not everyone at once. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, not only does the Sask 
Party draw upon 19th century philosophy for its policies, Mr. 
Speaker, but now it’s suggesting that we go back to 19th 
century practices for dealing with land transactions, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s one thing to be in the Dark Ages, Mr. Speaker, 
but they’re so far back in the Dark Ages they can’t even see 
their way out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is that this is a system that 
works. It has flaws; we fix them when they come along, Mr. 
Speaker. As the member will know, as the member will know, 
Mr. Speaker, Microsoft has called this system a world leader, 
Mr. Speaker. That’s what it is and, Mr. Speaker, that’s what it 
will be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Economic Development minister. Last night during debate 
on the NDP’s mismanagement of ethanol expansion in 
Saskatchewan, the minister admitted its negotiations with Broe 
industries on the construction of four new ethanol plants were 
falling apart because the NDP first said it would deal 
exclusively with Broe industries and then changed its mind. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP should never have considered direct 
ownership of ethanol plants or any exclusive ethanol deal with 
Broe industries or any other company because it scares away 
other private sector companies from investing in the ethanol 
industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the minister finally admit that the NDP has botched the 
expansion of the ethanol industry in Saskatchewan and, in the 
process, created a major setback for ethanol projects at Belle 
Plaine, Shaunavon, Tisdale, or Melville? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say I find it 
strangely interesting that members from that side stood up and 
attacked Broe’s proposal to build four ethanol plants in this 
province day after day after day. And after they were done their 
attack on his proposal to build four ethanol plants, they attacked 
his ability to run them, to manage them, to put them together. 
So that’s one; that’s number two. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to say to that member and I want to 
say to his colleagues, you’ve been on both sides of the issue 
with respect to public investment. You’ve been on both sides. 
They have been, Mr. Speaker, on both sides of the issue. 
 
And people of Saskatchewan clearly understand what’s going 
on here, Mr. Speaker. This is not a plan for people of that side 
to grow Saskatchewan. It’s a plan to snow Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — They have been, they have been, 
they have been on . . . they have been on both sides of every 
major issue in this session. On the ethanol issue they’ve been on 
both sides. On health care they’re on the side of private and 
they’re on the side of public, Mr. Speaker. On crime they’re on 
the side of a hard-nosed . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, our message on ethanol has been 
clear and consistent right from the start. Mr. Speaker, the NDP 
hired their old political buddies at Points West communications 
for $200,000 plus to make an exclusive deal with Broe 
industries. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. But massive pressure 
from the public and the Saskatchewan Party forced the NDP to 
reconsider. We told the NDP that direct government ownership 
was the wrong way to go in expanding the ethanol industry. We 
told the NDP that government should not be picking winners 
and losers, dictating the size and location of ethanol plants, or 
entering into any exclusive deal with Broe or anybody else to 
build ethanol plants. 
 
But the NDP wasn’t listening. And now the expansion of the 
ethanol industry in Saskatchewan is in chaos. 
 
Mr. Speaker, given the apparent breakdown in negotiations with 
Broe industries, what is the status of the ethanol projects at 
Belle Plaine, Tisdale, Shaunavon, and Melville? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I’m going to begin by 
telling the member opposite that I’m led to understand that 
negotiations with Broe industries are continuing, progress is 
being made, and announcements may be made shortly. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2691 

 

I want to say, Mr. Speaker, and I’m going to quote from 
Hansard because it’s really important that members opposite, if 
they can’t clarify . . . if the leader . . . if the members can’t 
clarify a position, maybe the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party 
can. 
 
On June 5 the member from Swift Current gets up and says, we 
just fundamentally disagree. We fundamentally disagree that 
venture capital, the equity, the risk capital should come from 
the taxpayer, Mr. Speaker. That’s what he says. That’s on June 
5. 
 
And then on June 12, the member from Cypress Hills gets up 
and says: 
 

It’s an organization that provides money when every other 
opportunity has been exhausted, when every other lender 
has been checked out, when every other source of funding 
has been considered, applied to . . . or refused. 
 

Mr. Speaker, he refers to it: 
 

A lender of last resort ordinarily does not get involved 
unless the equity is already in place. 

 
But he says, if we would accept the lender of last resort 
position, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time is up. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, with answers like that, no 
wonder the NDP’s management or mismanagement of the 
ethanol industry has been so screwed up. Every day, every day 
we get a different story. 
 
Last Friday, last Friday the minister told the legislature there 
could be no government ownership of ethanol plants. But on 
Saturday, the next day, the minister told the Leader-Post the 
government had to be a 40 per cent owner of ethanol plants. 
 
First the NDP led Broe industries to believe they would sign an 
exclusive agreement and then they changed their mind. Is it any 
wonder that ethanol expansion in Saskatchewan has come to a 
grinding halt? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP finally admit its plan to own ethanol 
plants and dictate winners and losers is failing miserably? And 
will the government finally do the right thing — get out of the 
way and let private sector investors and local communities drive 
ethanol expansion in Saskatchewan? 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, what I am saying to 
the people of Saskatchewan and what I’m saying to the Leader 
of the Saskatchewan Party who sits right across here today, Mr. 
Speaker, would he have the courage for once to stand up and 
enunciate their policy as it relates to ethanol? Is the member 
from Cypress Hills right or is the member from Swift Current 
right, Mr. Speaker? 
 

Mr. Speaker, I also want to know if he would stand up and 
articulate, the member from Rosthern, which one of his 
positions is the right one — get tough on crime or soft on crime. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they haven’t taken one position, not one position 
in this session. This is no Grow Saskatchewan option over here; 
this is snow Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. They are ashamed of 
who they came from and who they are. They’re ashamed of 
where they would lead this government and that’s why, Mr. 
Speaker, people of Saskatchewan don’t trust them and that 
leader of that Saskatchewan Party will never be the premier of 
this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investment in Hanson Lake Sand Corporation 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There is one cold, hard 
fact that belies the yarn that we just heard from the minister and 
that cold, hard fact is that this Saskatchewan Party is beating 
that party in the polls hands down, Mr. Speaker. Hands down. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that party, that NDP Party, Mr. 
Speaker, is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, that NDP Party, Mr. Speaker, is 
folding faster than Superman on laundry day, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what’s happening in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of Crown 
Investments Corporation. On October 6, 2000, SOCO 
(Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation), now under the 
control of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), announced it was investing $1 million in the 
Hanson Lake Sand Corporation, Mr. Speaker, a company that 
owns large pure silica sand deposits in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the minister inform the Assembly the status of that million 
dollar taxpayer investment in that particular company? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I’m appreciative that that 
member got up to ask a question. I was a bit worried before the 
end of session I might not get a question. 
 
And may I say, while we’re on the subject of polls, that member 
can recite statistics about polls from the opposition benches for 
as many days and years as he wants to Mr. Speaker. We’d be 
thrilled with that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say in response to the question, SOCO has 
reviewed this file in detail, Mr. Speaker. We’re working with 
the company to try and find resolution as best we can so that we 
can maintain jobs in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, in the press release from Daren 



2692 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Industries, a wholly owned subsidiary of the Hanson Lake Sand 
Corporation, dated May 1, 2002, it says, and I quote: 
 

By order of the Court of Queen’s Bench of Alberta, Daren 
Industries Ltd. and Hanson Lake Sand Corp. have been 
placed into receivership. Ernst & Young Inc. has been 
appointed receiver-manager. The receivership is the result 
of an indebtedness to the Plaintiff . . . 
 

Mr. Speaker, it would appear that this company that they have 
invested 1 million taxpayers’ dollars in is in receivership. 
 
Will the minister confirm for the Assembly that the 
government, the NDP government, have lost up to 1 million 
taxpayer dollars on this venture, a short two years after it was 
announced. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the 
member will know that the role of SOCO is to invest into areas, 
Mr. Speaker, that oftentimes are higher risk. It is clearly the 
agenda, or the mandate I should say, of SOCO to create jobs in 
our province, Mr. Speaker, it’s to create opportunities for 
businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with respect to the particular investment that he is 
speaking of, there is a mineral there, Mr. Speaker, that is 
unique, I should say, and creates many, many opportunities. It’s 
unique to our province and there is some tremendous potential 
there. 
 
What we’re trying to do, Mr. Speaker, is to ensure that we 
maintain jobs in northern Saskatchewan, provide many more 
economic opportunities for people in northern Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — The minister didn’t answer the question. The 
question’s simple. This government invested 1 million taxpayer 
dollars in this company in October of 2000, and on May of 
2002, the company announces that they’re in receivership. This 
minister should stand in this Assembly and account to the 
taxpayers where their $1 million is, Mr. Speaker. Those are the 
questions that we’re asking. 
 
Now so far it looks like he’s . . . the government’s only lost 1 
million taxpayer dollars. You will recall, Mr. Speaker, that 
when the minister, on behalf of taxpayers, lost 28 million in the 
potato business, he called it a success. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the taxpayers, the Saskatchewan 
Party would like to know just how successful has this 
investment been. How much taxpayers’ dollars have been lost 
on this particular decision? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Before I answer the question, Mr. 
Speaker, I’d like to know whether he would characterize the 
Country Music Hall of Fame as a success, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, let me say that we should 
be incredibly proud. I look back at the month of May where 
there was job increase numbers here, Mr. Speaker — 11,000, 
May over May. I looked just recently at June — job number 
increase of over 12,000, June over June, Mr. Speaker. 
Incredibly good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, let me say to that member: 
he . . . just a few minutes ago, he and his colleagues say, Mr. 
Speaker, that we should not invest in investments like in 
Australia. They say, don’t do there. Now we invest here in 
Saskatchewan, create jobs in Saskatchewan — they say, don’t 
do that, Mr. Speaker. What would they have our government 
do? 
 
I think the job numbers show that we are doing the right thing 
here in Saskatchewan, for the people of Saskatchewan. And 
that’s what we will continue to do into the future, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. Order. Order. Order. 
Why is the member from Melville on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — To see if things will quieten down. No. 
With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And thank you, 
my colleagues. We have some special guests here from the 
United Kingdom. But first of all, I’d like to introduce to you Dr. 
Nick Perry and his wife Darla; Katelyn and Kendra Perry who 
are from Regina and seated in the east gallery. 
 
I’d also like to introduce Mr. Perry’s father, Capt. M. Perry, 
OBE, (Officer of the Order of the British Empire) who’s from 
Wales in the United Kingdom. Along with them is Dr. Perry’s 
sister Judith; nephew and niece, Robert and Libby McCririck 
from Scotland. As well, Ben Perry, the godson, and Colin 
Sanders who are travelling around the world before 
commencing university in the United Kingdom. 
 
And I might say that not only is Dr. Nick Perry a very fine 
gentleman, he’s also a very good podiatrist. 
 
So please help me welcome them to the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
on his feet. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Leave to introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I would like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2693 

 

this Assembly a guest who is seated in the west gallery, Walter 
Logan. Walter is a retired United Church minister. He was at St. 
John’s for a number of years. He was in my congregation at St. 
James. I see him as a mentor and guide. 
 
He’s been involved with the Regina anti-poverty ministry, has a 
deep commitment to social justice, and has worked hard and 
long for the good of the community. And I would like all 
members to join me in welcoming Walter to this Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood on his feet? 
 
Mr. Hart: — With leave to introduce guests, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, seated in 
your gallery is a constituent of mine Mr. Lou Coderre. 
 
Lou has been a long-time observer of the political process and 
his family roots go back in the Liberal Party. He’s — Lou — a 
teacher in Wynyard and is currently on leave taking studies at 
the University of Regina. And I’d ask all members to join with 
him in welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — And why is the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena on her feet? 
 
Ms. Draude: — Introduce a guest. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. To you and through 
you, I’d like to introduce a very special person in my life, my 
youngest daughter Jeannette Draude is here. She just came 
home from Bermuda and she’s looking for work in 
Saskatchewan. So I’d like all members to welcome her to the 
Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF REPORT 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members, I would 
like to advise that today I have received from the Provincial 
Ombudsman, the Saskatchewan Ombudsman annual report for 
the year 2001. And I hereby table this report. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
government, I stand today to convert written questions 441 
through 444. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses . . . Pardon me. Questions 441 to 
444 converted to orders for return (debatable). 

MOTIONS 
 

Second Reading of Bill No. 203 
 

Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. By leave of 
this Assembly I move: 
 

That this Assembly move to second reading of Bill No. 
203, The Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Awareness Day Act. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ PUBLIC BILLS AND ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 203 — The Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
Awareness Day Act 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
very proud to stand today to give second reading to a Bill that 
will proclaim September 9 as Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
Awareness Day in Saskatchewan in perpetuity. 
 
At this time I would like to thank all my colleagues for 
supporting this Bill. More importantly I’d like to thank them for 
remembering the real reason each of us chose to be part of this 
profession, a profession where daily decisions affect the lives 
and the futures of every person in this great province. 
 
We must remember, Mr. Speaker, that together, the 57 
honoured members in this Assembly have been entrusted with a 
great responsibility by the people of this province. The people 
of the province have hopes and dreams and goals, and it is our 
duty to help them realize and achieve them. Our decisions have 
a direct impact on making this province a better place to live, 
not just for those of us here today, but for our children and the 
children of tomorrow. 
 
There have been some very serious debates in this Assembly 
over the past 76 days as we’ve passed many Bills and discussed 
the most beneficial way to utilize precious tax dollars. Let me 
be the very first, Mr. Speaker, to acknowledge that we are very 
often in disagreement on most issues. 
 
But today, Mr. Speaker, things are different. Today we stand 
united in our sincere hope that what we are doing will have an 
impact on generations to come. They are . . . The children are 
the future of this province and they must be the priority of all 
governments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today we are taking a small step towards the 
important goal of protecting completely innocent children from 
a condition that is completely — 100 per cent —preventable. It 
is a condition that when present, can literally stop a child from 
living a life that he or she is entitled to, and from making a 
meaningful contribution to society. Quite simply this condition 
prevents an individual from reaching his or her unknown 
potential. 
 
(14:30) 



2694 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

This condition impairs judgment and causes behavioural 
problems, not just for a short time or for a few years, but for a 
lifetime. This condition, Mr. Speaker, can impact all of us 
directly and indirectly. The condition is fetal alcohol syndrome 
(FAS) or fetal alcohol effects (FAE). 
 
Fetal alcohol syndrome is 100 per cent preventable — no 
alcohol during pregnancy, no FAS. There is no cure for the 
condition and there is no simple diagnosis. There is no magic 
wand that can be waved that will alleviate the symptoms once 
the damage has been done. Yet in this 21st century, in this 
world of information overload, FAS and FAE have become a 
very real and very troubling aspect of our society. 
 
FAS and FAE causes an impairment to the brain not unlike that 
which happens to someone who’s suffered brain injury from a 
car accident. Someone afflicted with FAS or FAE does not have 
the capability of determining right from wrong. They do not 
understand the consequences of their actions. They cannot 
process information in the same way that you and I do. They 
cannot logically reason, if I do this then this is going to happen. 
 
Babies born with FAS have little ability to connect emotionally 
with others. They are locked in a world where they are not 
capable of forming strong emotional bonds. They are incapable 
of understanding how their behaviour affects others. Theirs is a 
cold and lonely world. They are detached from themselves and 
from others. As a society today we don’t have the capability of 
connecting to them and they are alone forever. 
 
The only answer is prevention. And prevention can only happen 
through education. Every young person must know and they 
must understand that drinking alcohol during pregnancy can 
result in a child being born with FAS or FAE. All young people 
must know that there is no evidence to suggest how little or 
how much alcohol will affect the unborn child. They must know 
that there’s no information available to say when or if drinking 
during a certain stage of pregnancy is less harmful than during 
another stage. 
 
They must know that the incidence of FAS or FAE is as high as 
1 in every 200 children born, depending on which study is used. 
We do know that at least one child is born every day in Canada 
with FAS or FAE. We’ll never know what that child could 
really have achieved had they been given the same opportunity 
as other children. 
 
And regrettably that child may also cost society anywhere from 
1.5 to $3 million over his or her lifetime through education, 
justice, health, and social services programs. It’s a sad fact of 
life, Mr. Speaker, that over 60 per cent of those incarcerated in 
our prisons are victims of FAS or FAE. Yet those individual 
costs can be from 80,000 to $120,000 a year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, proclaiming an awareness day for FAS is just one 
step in the education process of our citizens and it’s a first step. 
So much more has to be done. We need education and 
information in the school system from the early years through 
the high school years. And since so many of our young people 
are electronically and technologically advanced, corporations 
and media should be encouraged to play in a responsive role in 
this area as well. 
 

We need co-operation between government departments — 
specifically Justice, health care, and Social Services — to 
ensure those individuals most at risk are given the information 
they need to make decisions that will affect their unborn 
children. We must work with the Aboriginal leaders to ensure 
their government undertakes the same type of intensive 
educational information campaign. The public and hospitality 
industry must become involved. We need their input and their 
ideas on how to better educate our young people. 
 
While we know that FAS is preventable, we must also be 
realistic and recognize that alcohol is part of our society. In that 
regard we must pursue prevention activities on every front to 
safeguard children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill we are discussing may seem fairly 
insignificant compared to some of the more complex legislation 
that’s been presented in this Assembly this session. But there is 
nothing more important than doing everything in our power to 
help prevent FAS or FAE from . . . for our . . . from our 
children. 
 
There is nothing more important to the future of our province 
than healthy individuals who are emotionally, physically, and 
psychologically equipped to take on the opportunities of 
tomorrow. We need the combined strength and talents of all of 
our children to build this province. There is simply no excuse 
for a society with the standard of living we enjoy in 
Saskatchewan where we see a troubling increase in a handicap 
condition that is preventable. 
 
Some things are just plain not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. 
Eradicating a preventable condition affecting a child is a 
laudable goal. Passing this Bill today is part of that goal. 
 
I move that Bill No. 203, an Act to . . . a fetal alcohol syndrome 
awareness day, now be read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to speak on 
the very serious topic of fetal alcohol syndrome. Today our 
government is passing legislation that will demonstrate our 
commitment to preventing and treating fetal alcohol syndrome. 
 
I had the privilege of being responsible for the FAS issues while 
I was the Associate Minister of Health. We worked closely with 
communities, individuals, organizations, and other provinces 
and territories to raise awareness of FAS and FAE and to find 
joint solutions to these issues. 
 
The Fetal Alcohol Syndrome Awareness Day Act establishes 
September 9 as Fetal Alcohol Awareness Day. This day is 
symbolic — the ninth day of the ninth month — and is already 
internationally recognized as a time to remember those 
struggling with the disabling condition of FAS or FAE. 
 
The legislation we are passing today confirms Saskatchewan’s 
commitment to support and encourage local awareness and 
prevention efforts. Mr. Speaker, we know the risks associated 
with drinking alcohol during pregnancy. FAS is recognized in 
North America as one of the leading causes of preventable birth 
defects and developmental delay in children. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2695 

 

The good news is that it is 100 per cent preventable. I am proud 
to say, Mr. Speaker, that our government is working on a 
number of fronts to develop and provide services to prevent 
FAS as well as to support those who are affected. 
 
Our province delivers a wide range of mental health services 
and alcohol and drug services, Mr. Speaker. All of these 
services are available to help address the needs of those affected 
by FAS or to help prevent this lifelong disability. For example, 
when pregnant women come forward seeking addiction 
treatment they are given top priority for care. 
 
As well our government, through the Department of Health, is 
helping to fund Dr. Patricia Blakley’s program at the University 
of Saskatchewan. Through this funding Dr. Blakley works with 
a multidisciplinary team to assess and diagnose FAS. She is 
also studying ways to reduce exposure to the genetic and 
environmental causes of FAS, and helping to educate and train 
other health professionals in FAS assessment. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to tell you about a pilot 
program in La Ronge that provides home visits and supports for 
chemically dependent women and their families. The program 
targets women who are pregnant or who have had a child with 
FAS and who are at risk of future FAS births. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government recognizes that fetal alcohol 
syndrome is a complex issue that cannot be addressed by the 
health system working in isolation. We are far more likely to 
find workable solutions faster if we work together with partners 
and pool our resources, particularly in areas of expertise. 
 
To that end our government works very closely with groups 
such as the Saskatchewan Institute on Prevention of Handicaps 
on a variety of initiatives. I’m pleased today to welcome two 
representatives from the institute, present up in your gallery. 
Lois Crossman is the FAS program coordinator, and Holly 
Graham is the FAS educator. I’d like to acknowledge the 
important work that these two women do to help raise 
awareness of FAS prevention and treatment. 
 
With them today in the gallery is Leslie Grob from the 
community care branch with Sask Health. I’d like to welcome 
them all and ask all members to welcome them to the Assembly 
to witness the passing of this important legislation. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Our common goal is reducing the number of 
FAS births. We want to help individuals and families avoid 
having to cope with a lifetime of disability. Mr. Speaker, one of 
the innovative ways we are doing that is with our Kids First 
program. The goal of this program is to reach out to families 
facing many challenges to ensure that children get the best 
possible start in life. 
 
Through prenatal outreach the program identifies pregnant 
women who need support, education, and counselling to stay 
healthy and chemical free through . . . during their pregnancies. 
Community partners help us identify and work closely with 
these vulnerable women. 
 
Our government is also a member of the Prairie Northern 

Pacific FAS Partnership, an alliance between the four Western 
provinces and the three northern territories. 
 
Together we share resources and our partners are address . . . 
with our partners and address . . . addressing prevention 
initiatives, as well as care and support for individuals affected 
by FAS. As you can see, Mr. Speaker, our government takes 
this issue very seriously. The legislation we are passing today is 
one more way we are showing our commitment to preventing 
FAS. 
 
The bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is that our government 
recognizes that efforts to promote healthy lifestyles and to stop 
preventable disabilities will provide long-term benefits for 
individuals and the health system as a whole. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The division bells rang from 14:40 until 14:50. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 53 
 
Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Van Mulligen Prebble Belanger 
Crofford Axworthy Nilson 
Junor Hamilton Harper 
Forbes Jones Higgins 
Trew Wartman Thomson 
Yates McCall Hermanson 
Kwiatkowski Heppner Julé 
Krawetz Draude Gantefoer 
Bjornerud Wakefield Stewart 
Elhard Eagles McMorris 
D’Autremont Bakken Wall 
Brkich Weekes Harpauer 
Hart Allchurch Peters 
Huyghebaert Hillson  
 

Nays — nil 
 
The Bill read a second time and, by leave of the Assembly, 
referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 203 — The Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
Awareness Day Act 

 
Clauses 1 to 3 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Preamble agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

THIRD READINGS 



2696 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Bill No. 203 — The Fetal Alcohol Syndrome 
Awareness Day Act 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I move this Bill now be read the 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a third time and passed under its 
title. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I request leave to go to 
government business. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Executive Council 

Vote 10 
 
Subvote (EX01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me today is 
Mr. Dan Perrins, seated to my left to the deputy minister to the 
Premier. Behind Dan, Bonita Cairns, who is the director of 
administration and information services in Executive Council. 
And directly behind myself is Mr. Jim Nichol who is the acting 
director of senior management services and executive assistant 
to the deputy minister. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, and thank you 
to the Premier for introducing his staff. Of course we’ve met his 
deputy minister, Mr. Perrins and it’s good to see the other 
officials here. 
 
This is an opportunity where we get to take an overview or look 
at the larger picture of how our province is fairing and how the 
government, under the leadership of the Premier, is handling the 
challenges and the opportunities that the province faces. 
 
And I know, Mr. Speaker, that the opposition is supposed to, by 
its nature in the parliamentary system, oppose. But this 
opposition also observes things very carefully and we’ve been 
observing what has been happening in the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we’ve had a lot of help in making those 
observations. 
 
And despite the bravado from the Premier, and his ministers, 
and his government, the situation in Saskatchewan is not the 
positive picture that the Premier would try to paint. And so we 
have to, then, judge the government on its ability to see whether 
or not there are actually problems and whether they want to 
paint them over with words that really don’t mean a whole lot 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I have a whole slug of clippings here, and 
I’m not going to obviously read them all. But just to help the 
Premier do a reality check I am going to read a number of the 
headlines, because I think he needs to recognize that there are 
some serious problems in Saskatchewan and that an awful lot of 
people, in fact the majority of people in this province, recognize 
there are problems. 
 

The fact that a province has problems does not mean that the 
province is bad. The province of Saskatchewan is a great 
province. It’s a wonderful province, and for that reason, we 
need to recognize problems where they exist and deal with 
them. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, I would point out to the Premier that The 
Melville Advance notes that, This government has an economic 
policy — ongoing disaster. 
 
Randy Burton in his column in Saskatoon says, “Bright future 
optical illusion: call an election.” That’s a message directly to 
the Premier. Hugh Arscott wrote an editorial in Saskatoon, 
“Joint action the only way to oust NDP.” 
 
There’s an opinion in the Fort Qu’Appelle Times that says, 
“Government repeats its disastrous economic policy.” 
 
And then there’s a Les MacPherson article in The StarPhoenix 
says, “NDP has perfect track record in job uncreation.” There’s 
another Les MacPherson column that says, “Calvert’s election 
call can’t come soon enough.” 
 
The editor of the Waterford press says, talking about the NDP 
government says, “The same old show.” He says it’s . . . “he’s 
tired of watching reruns; it’s time for a new show.” That’s 
Lucien Chouinard who’s the editor of the Waterford press. He 
also talks about NDP economic policy and calls it voodoo 
economics in his opinion column. 
 
The P.A. (Prince Albert) Herald says, “The government also 
needs attitude change.” That is the headline. 
 
The Saskatoon StarPhoenix says, “SaskTel’s cable TV foray 
beyond belief.” 
 
The Globe and Mail says, “Saskatchewan’s love of Crown 
corporations ill-advised.” 
 
The Saskatoon StarPhoenix says, “Calvert stands on 
quicksand.” Another StarPhoenix article — and these are all in 
. . . just in the past few months — Les MacPherson says, “Spud 
flop shows disdain for free enterprise half baked.” 
 
Again the P.A. Herald says, “Review of government jobs not 
out of line.” 
 
The Saskatoon StarPhoenix editorial says: 
 

That the provincial budget has failed in the context of the 
full resources at its disposal — the government is taking a 
deserved drubbing for coming up short on election plan to 
bolster provincial police ranks by 200. 

 
The StarPhoenix says, “Job losses sign of government failure.” 
That’s a two-page, that’s a two-page editorial. That was a large 
one. 
 
The Yorkton This Week says, “NDP policies create poor 
business climate.” 
 
Another article in The StarPhoenix, “NDP government 
decisions border on madness.” The list continues and another 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2697 

 

story says, from The StarPhoenix, “End budget games.” And 
that’s talking about the provincial NDP government’s budget, 
the fudge-it budget. 
 
There is . . . I wish I could take time to read all these articles but 
there’s just too much to read, we won’t have time. Another 
article says, “Government must shed brewery shares,” talking 
about the government making incursions into private sector 
areas. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that’s . . . there’s another one here, says, 
“Creative accounting unsustainable in long term.” That’s a 
column by Randy Burton in the Saskatoon StarPhoenix. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the list is phenomenally long. And one more, 
“NDP addicted to devil’s television,” And I believe that’s in 
regard to the additional video lottery terminals that the 
government approved. 
 
So the tone of the editorial comment and the reaction of the . . . 
certainly the printed press, as shown here, is one that’s very, 
very negative towards this government. 
 
The Premier, we believe, needs to rise up in the House, either 
today or tomorrow, some point in the near future, and actually 
square his shoulders a bit and make an admission that this 
government has made a considerable number of mistakes. 
These mistakes are showing, and if he’s going to create 
credibility for his government, he’s going to have to recognize 
that all of these editorialists are not wrong. That all of these 
people that have pointed out problems in the way this 
government has acted or failed to act are in fact pretty accurate 
reflections of the way Saskatchewan people feel. 
 
Mr. Chairman, it is no accident that the Saskatchewan Party, a 
party at the time that was less than two years old, won the 
popular vote in the last election. It was a matter of the way the 
numbers shook out that the NDP was able to forge a coalition 
government by joining forces with three Liberal members. And 
they’ve been able to hang on to a shred of power. But that 
doesn’t undo the fact that because they haven’t changed their 
policies, the problems in this province that caused them to lose 
the popular vote in 1999 remain with us. 
 
So I think it’s appropriate for the first question to the Premier to 
simply be: will the Premier get this whole process off on the 
right foot? Is he prepared to admit that his government has 
made a number of mistakes in a number of areas? 
 
If he does that, then in fact we can continue this discussion in 
constructive terms and talk about how to fix the problem. If he 
stands up and defends his government, Mr. Speaker, then we 
still have a long education process to go through to try to show 
to the Premier very clearly that in fact his policies — the 
policies of the NDP government — are failing, they’re failing 
miserably. And in fact, the only solution that Saskatchewan 
people will have, will be to turf the NDP government at the next 
election. And people will continue to call for that to happen as 
soon as possible. 
 
So will the Premier stand up and admit that his government has 
made a lot of mistakes and needs to change his direction if the 
province is to move forward in the future? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
began his remarks this afternoon in the estimates process by 
indicating that it is the role of the opposition to criticize. Fair 
enough. 
 
He also indicated that it’s been the role of his opposition, the 
opposition that he leads in this legislature, to observe, was the 
word he used. And now he wanted then to share some of his 
observations. 
 
What I note, Mr. Chair, in his opening comment, the Leader of 
the Opposition was very shy about describing that other 
fundamental, crucial responsibility of any kind of an opposition 
which is to propose alternatives. 
 
Now he says they’ll criticize and he’ll say they observe, but he 
didn’t much say about proposing . . . You see, Mr. Speaker, 
they can try, but they will not shout me down. Not today. Not 
tomorrow. Not in the next session. And not in the next 
government, Mr. Speaker. They will not shout me down. 
 
Now the fact of the matter is, a responsible opposition in this 
legislature and outside of this legislature should be proposing 
not just criticisms and not just observations — although I’m 
going to have a word to say about their observations in a 
moment — but not just criticism and observations. They should 
be proposing alternatives. And there is a depth of silence when 
it comes to alternatives here. 
 
Now we’ve had an interesting session, as you know, Mr. Chair, 
and as all members knows, a session that in many ways has 
been driven by media comment. In fact, I have not observed a 
session of this legislature during my time here that has been so 
driven by media comment and an opposition that has found on a 
daily basis its questioning and its point of view not from its own 
research, not from talking to the people of Saskatchewan, but 
by picking up the morning papers or by listening to the morning 
news broadcasts to give them their agenda for the day. And not 
in my experience, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chamber . . . Mr. Chair, 
in this Chamber have I watched an opposition so reliant on 
media for their . . . for their questioning and their ideas. 
 
And then, if it wasn’t . . . if my point wasn’t just proven in the 
House today, what does the Leader of the Opposition do? He 
doesn’t get up with any substantial criticism. He gets up with 
observations made not by himself but by editorialists and 
columnists in this province. Driven by the media — not a hint 
of an alternative plan, no, just observations made by the media. 
 
Now isn’t this interesting, Mr. Speaker, because we could spend 
. . . we could spend, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, we could . . . 
we could spend all of today, all of tomorrow, and who knows 
how long comparing headlines. If the Leader of the Opposition 
wants to talk about headlines, I’ll share some headlines, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
But yes, I want you to know that most of the headlines brought 
to this debate today by the Leader of the Opposition were 
headlines from one or two or three columnists or editorialists. 
Now I’m going to share headlines that are fact-of-the-matter 
headlines reporting the reality of Saskatchewan. 



2698 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Let’s just take a look at very recent headlines, Mr. Chair. “Jobs 
keep coming.” 
 

For the second month in a row, more people here working 
in Saskatchewan. 
 

Headline fact: “TD upgrades Saskatchewan forecast.” 
 

(TD upgrades Saskatchewan forecast). Just this week TD 
economics has upgraded the forecast for Saskatchewan’s 
economy to 2.3 per cent this year (and get this, Mr. Chair), 
to 4.2 per cent next year. 
 

“Outlook gets a boost.” That’s from . . . these past few days 
headlines, Mr. Chair. Now this is an editorial piece, Mr. Chair, 
no doubt about that. But the headline reads — it’s written by 
Dwight Percy: “Job opportunities abound in Saskatchewan.” 
 
Now when, Mr. Chair, did you hear the Leader of the 
Opposition quoting these headlines: “National job statistics, 
good news for Saskatchewan.” 
 
Now here’s another columnist piece. This is from the National 
Post, the national newspaper where the writer says: 
“Saskatchewan: not the biggest, just the best.” 
 
From the Leader-Post, June 12: “We’re awash in good news.” 
 
From the Regina Leader-Post, June 8: “Regina leading the 
way.” 
 
Mr. Chair, from the Saskatoon StarPhoenix: “Manufacturing 
picks up, rebound in Saskatchewan.” 
 
From June 27 Leader-Post: “Returned Reginan is glad that 
she’s back.” 
 
You get my point, Mr. Chair, that if you take a look at the 
headlines describing the reality of Saskatchewan today, you’re 
finding a province on the move, jobs improving, manufacturing 
up, predictions for our economy up, credit ratings up. 
 
But it’s not just these economic headlines that are of interest 
I’m sure to all of us. I have files here of headlines in almost 
every aspect of the life of Saskatchewan which would tell us . . . 
which would tell us that this province is a better province today 
than when this session opened four months ago. 
 
This, Mr. Chair, has been a very good session for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Why do I say that, Mr. Chair? It may not 
have been a good session for the Leader of the Opposition or 
the opposition members, but it’s been a very good session for 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition wants to talk about headlines. 
Here’s a headline that we are all very happy to see: “Fewer 
families living on welfare” in this province, Mr. Speaker. 

Here’s a headline that we should all be very happy to see: 
“More funds for child care” in this province. 
 
Another very happy headline, this from the Weyburn Review: 
“Welfare numbers down.” Here’s from the Prairie Messenger, 
Mr. Chair: “Saskatchewan has fewer poor children.” Mr. 
Speaker, from the Leader-Post: “Child poverty rate up 
everywhere but in Saskatchewan.” 
 
So, Mr. Chair, if the Leader of the Opposition wants to compare 
headlines, we’ll compare headlines for as many hours as he 
wants. He asks this question. At the end of his presentation he 
asks the following question: have we made mistakes? Would 
we admit that we’ve made mistakes? 
 
Mr. Chair, of course we admit we’ve made mistakes. Of course 
we admit we have made mistakes. The only people, the only 
perfect people, I guess they all occupy the benches over there. 
The only perfect people who never make mistakes are people 
who never do anything, venture anything, or plan or say 
anything. Of course we’ve made mistakes. 
 
Mr. Chair, you know in the course of this session we advanced 
a policy around long-term care fee increases. After listening to 
the people of Saskatchewan, we understood that was the wrong 
policy, and we changed. Of course we’ve made mistakes. We 
hear the people of Saskatchewan and we’re willing to admit 
those mistakes, and change. 
 
Now I have a question then for the Leader of the Opposition. I 
go back to my first point. It is the role of an official opposition, 
it is the role of any credible opposition both in this legislature 
and outside of the legislature, to propose alternatives — 
propose alternatives with some detail, with some specificity. 
 
We’ve heard this, as the House Leader called it today, the snow 
Saskatchewan plan. We’ve heard it now for months. But all we 
know about this plan, all we know about this plan is 
unsustainable tax cuts, sell off the Crowns, and decimate the 
public service. That’s what we know about the plan. 
 
So in the course of these discussions and debates, Mr. Chair, I 
think it’s only fair I’ll answer for this government and our 
activities, our plan, our successes and our failures. I expect 
today the Leader of the Opposition will be answering some 
questions that I know the people of Saskatchewan have about 
his policy. That’s the role of a responsible opposition and I 
expect that we’ll see that role played out today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, the Premier has failed the first 
test. He admitted to one mistake, Mr. Speaker, one of the most 
glaring errors in the history of the province, the unfair taxing of 
our senior citizens and disabled people who need long-term, 
and that was the only failure he admitted to. That wasn’t even 
one of the ones I referred to in the long list of issues. 
 
The Premier went on to try to reverse the roles, and I 
understand that he may be in fact preparing to be the leader of 
the opposition, and that’s fine. And he may want me to answer 
the questions, and I’m prepared to do that after the next election 
if the people of Saskatchewan elect a Saskatchewan Party 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2699 

 

government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — But I will say this, Mr. Chairman. The 
Premier is rather nervy to be blaming the media for the 
editorials they write that are actually factual accounts of the 
way people feel about our province. 
 
And I would point out to the Premier that in fact the 
Saskatchewan Party official opposition has made a great deal of 
specific . . . taken a great deal of specific measures and 
articulated them very well. 
 
We have called for accounting to be done in the form of 
summary financial statements. Most provinces in Canada do 
that. The Saskatchewan Party, as a government of this province, 
would do that. The Premier and the NDP refuse to provide 
accurate, clean summary financial statements. So score the 
Saskatchewan Party one, the NDP zero. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when the Fyke Commission was doing its study 
on health care, the Saskatchewan Party made a submission to 
the Fyke Commission. We didn’t hear anything from the NDP. 
They were secretly, behind everyone’s back, trying to work on 
a parallel platform on health care, their own plan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the member for Melfort-Tisdale articulated a 
very clear vision for health care, included a health science 
centre in the city of Saskatoon associated with the University of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, roundly supported by the health 
care community, by the city of Saskatoon. And he went on to 
call for many other initiatives in the health care field that this 
government has still not yet acknowledged has been made, even 
though we tabled that document in this very House. 
 
The Premier hasn’t read it because he doesn’t know that we 
have made specific suggestions as to how to deliver better 
health care in Saskatchewan. So the Premier either has to plead 
that . . . ignorance on this factor, on this issue, or he simply is 
not communicating accurately to the people of Saskatchewan 
when he says that the Saskatchewan Party isn’t very specific 
and doesn’t present detailed ideas as to how this province needs 
to be governed. That’s just two. 
 
We have articulated a policy on Crown corporations. We started 
the process of articulating policy on ethanol. We supported the 
Bill that the government introduced simply because they copied 
ideas that we had presented six months earlier. Mr. Speaker, I 
don’t know where the Premier was for the last year. We have 
articulated policy on highways. 
 
Just a few minutes ago we passed a private member’s Bill, the 
first one since I’ve been elected in the province of 
Saskatchewan, not initiated by an NDP member, but initiated by 
my colleague, the member for Kelvington-Wadena, to establish 
a day to recognize the seriousness of fetal alcohol syndrome. 
And, Mr. Speaker, perhaps that seems like a small thing but 
that’s about the only thing the NDP would let go through this 
session of the legislature, initiated by the opposition. They 
didn’t want to lose face by opposing it. 
 
But we have many, many initiatives that if the Government 

House Leader would have the courage to allow us to introduce 
the legislation, it would be good for the province of 
Saskatchewan. We could do as good and better job than they 
are doing with the myriads of officials that they have to put 
their legislation together. 
 
Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, when it comes down to specific 
things — and the Premier knows this extremely well and I’m 
surprised he didn’t raise this — when we debated the whole 
idea, the whole idea of having a meeting of Western premiers 
and leaders of the opposition, where did that idea come from? It 
didn’t come from the NDP government. It came from the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
And it actually happened. In spite of the Premier refusing to 
answer questions in the House about it, refusing to agree, Mr. 
Chair, to such a meeting, that obviously the Saskatchewan Party 
hit on such a good idea that he finally caved in and in fact, that 
was about the most successful thing that happened in regards to 
the whole agriculture crisis and the US farm Bill. After the 
Premier took the portfolio back again, we’ve had nothing but 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the crowning pieces of achievement by the 
Saskatchewan Party is the work done by the member for 
Humboldt in getting better legislation to protect young people, 
children from the sex trade. Mr. Speaker, the NDP had 10 years 
to do it but couldn’t seem to get around to it. But under the 
leadership of the member from Humboldt, it actually happened 
— even from the opposition side of the House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now I will point out to the Premier, 
simply — I shouldn’t have to do this in estimates — he should 
. . . this is valuable time and he should be using that to explain 
the vision he has for the province of Saskatchewan. But there is 
a number of articles that says things like “Sask Party delivers 
plans to rebuild Saskatchewan.” Did the Premier hear that? I’ll 
repeat it in case he didn’t. “Saskatchewan Party delivers plans 
to rebuild Saskatchewan.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Here’s another article. “Saskatchewan 
Party meetings, a plan to grow a province.” Now plans are 
concrete things. Plans have to have an object and the object of 
these plans are to grow a province — something the Premier 
doesn’t seem to know very much about. 
 
Grow Saskatchewan meetings — all about sharing ideas. 
Residents inquire about opposition party’s plan, Mr. Speaker. 
And I might add for the Premier that after we held these Grow 
Saskatchewan meetings all over Saskatchewan . . . and he 
makes fun because there was a couple of meetings where we 
only had four or six people. Now it doesn’t matter that they 
were opinion leaders. That doesn’t matter. It doesn’t matter that 
they had nobody show up for a budget consultation meeting in 
La Ronge. 
 
The fact is that mayors . . . we had board members from health 
districts, boards of education, mayors, reeves, economic 
development people, the leaders of the province of 



2700 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Saskatchewan came to listen to the Saskatchewan Party plan 
and, Mr. Chairman, they were impressed, not only because we 
had a plan but because we also invited their input which they 
gave us, Mr. Chairman, and which made our plan better. 
 
Another article, “Saskatchewan Party makes presentation, 
planning economic growth for the province”. Now, Mr. Speaker 
. . . or, Mr. Chairman, it’s not our fault that that government 
stands in the road from us delivering our plan. That’s not our 
fault. That’s their fault and the Premier needs to understand 
that. 
 
So, Mr. Chairman, the Premier of Saskatchewan is being 
ingenuous at the least and could be far more serious when he 
stands up and says, show us your plan, you don’t have a plan. 
It’s simply not factual. And I would ask the Premier not to 
propose, not to propose ideas for the minds of the Saskatchewan 
people that are not based in fact which is what he has been 
doing and he’s done that on many occasions. He’s been 
fearmongering. 
 
You talk about somebody being negative and not recognizing 
the truth. The Premier falls into that category, Mr. Chairman. 
And we have all kinds of articles, all kinds of evidence that says 
that the Saskatchewan Party is in fact delivering a plan and the 
people of Saskatchewan are excited about it. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Nutana doesn’t know what the 
plan is. The plan is an economic plan to grow Saskatchewan by 
100,000 people in 10 years. Now just because under NDP 
government Saskatchewan’s population is going backwards — I 
think 14 or 15 quarters in a row that we’ve lost population — 
doesn’t mean that the province of Saskatchewan can’t grow. 
 
The members opposite . . . the member sits opposite, did not 
hear a single word that I said when I talked about specific ideas 
that we have to grow Saskatchewan and to make our province 
better. 
 
Now, Mr. Chairman, I want to talk about some specific failures 
of the Premier and his government. I would ask the Premier to 
explain to the people of Saskatchewan why he allowed his 
Agriculture minister to bring in changes to crop insurance that 
are not supported by the people of Saskatchewan? Why did the 
Premier allow his Minister of Agriculture to change the variable 
rates or to discontinue the variable rates? I hope the Premier’s 
listening. 
 
Why did the Premier allow his Agriculture minister to 
discontinue spot loss hail — a very popular part of crop 
insurance? Why did the Premier allow premiums in crop 
insurance to increase? 
 
Why did the Premier allow his Minister of Agriculture to claim 
that the reason why crop insurance was being underfunded was 
because the federal government hadn’t put in their share? When 
in fact the truth is, the truth is that the federal government 
loaned $20 million the year before which the province agreed to 
pay back but reneged upon. Why will the Premier not 
communicate the truth to farmers about why premiums, crop 
insurance premiums, increased? 
 
Mr. Chair, how does the Premier defend his rain lottery? You 

know when we’ve made . . . We actually had some fun here in 
the legislature about what we called the loopy lottery prior to 
seeding. Well unfortunately it’s no laughing matter anymore 
because there are a number of producers in a large portion of 
Saskatchewan that have been shortchanged rain. They had no 
access to this loopy lottery. You talk about creating an irritant. 
You talk about an unfair initiative. You talk about something 
that makes this government the laughing stock of producers — 
it’s that loopy lottery, that rain lottery, that they allowed to slip 
past their watch. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, why did the Premier allow his Agriculture 
minister to so severely weaken the crop insurance program 
which was so badly needed this year? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the 
Opposition took a long time to get to his question and so I guess 
I’ll take a little time to get to the answer. The Leader of the 
Opposition stood up and made this outrageous statement — an 
outrageous statement in the British parliamentary system — 
where he said the only time we’re going to hear about their 
policies is after they’re elected to government. That’s what he 
said. They’ll only be prepared to answer questions about their 
policies after they form the next government. Well the fact of 
the matter is they never will form the next government with that 
kind of attitude. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — He claims they’ve had specific plans 
released during the course of this session. Well interestingly, 
the Romanow Commission — likely the most significant 
commission to look at health care in Canada in the last half 
decade — was here in Regina, invited, gave special invitation 
both to governments and to oppositions to present. Not a peep 
at the Romanow Commission from the Sask Party. Why was 
that, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair? 
 
Why were they not there to present to the Romanow 
Commission if they have ideas on health? Because, Mr. Chair, I 
know the problem and the problem is just this: they’re afraid a 
little to speak of their true position on health care. 
 
So since we’re asking questions back and forth today, let me 
pose this question to the Leader of the Opposition today and 
perhaps he’ll want to answer it because his Health critic is not. 
Is the Saskatchewan Party in favour of private, for-profit 
hospitals in Saskatchewan’s or Canada’s health care system? 
That’s the question, Mr. Chair. What is the position on . . . of 
the Saskatchewan Party on private, for-profit hospitals? 
 
Mr. Chair, he talks about ethanol. He talks about ethanol. Well 
we know from question period today how divided they are 
when it comes to a policy around ethanol, where the member of 
Swift Current said there should never be, under any 
circumstance, public investment in the ethanol industry. Under 
no circumstance should there be any equity investment from the 
province of Saskatchewan in ethanol. 
 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2701 

 

Now the member of Wood River takes a somewhat different 
point of view. It’s rather convoluted. I’m not sure what the 
position is exactly. So I think, by way of clarity, the Leader of 
the Opposition can stand up today when we have the 
opportunity in this forum to be very, very clear about their 
party’s position on the investment of public equity in ethanol. 
Should it never happen? Should it happen under some 
circumstances? Or should it in fact happen under every 
circumstance? What is the position? 
 
Now he asks about . . . he tell . . . amazingly, he said they have 
a position on highways. Well if they have a position on 
highways, in the question periods of this session . . . how many 
days have we had now, 77 . . . 77 days. And in question period, 
not one question to the Minister of Highways and 
Transportation. Not one question. 
 
Mr. Chair, we’ve taken to calling the Minister of . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. I’d ask 
members on both sides of the House to keep it down. It’s very 
difficult for the Chair to hear the Premier. 
 
Order. Members on both sides of the House, it’s very difficult 
for the Chair to hear the Premier. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was just going 
to observe before I come to the more specific questions around 
crop insurance, I was just going to observe, we’ve taken, on this 
side of the House, to describing our Minister of Highways and 
Transportation as our Maytag man — our Maytag man. He 
never gets called upon here, which is a testament, Mr. Chair — 
it is a testament to the work that we’ve done on the roadways 
and highways of Saskatchewan. 
 
Last year, Mr. Chair, you know, we committed we’re going to 
fix the roads. We put a plan in place. We’re completing now the 
second year of a three-year plan. We’re fixing the roads, we’re 
building the highways because we have a plan and we’re 
accomplishing our plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Chair, that is another reason 
why, at the end of this session, the people of Saskatchewan 
know this has been a good session for the people of 
Saskatchewan. That’s for sure. 
 
Oh, I should just, I should just, because the Leader of the 
Opposition, I guess, wants to quote, to quote headlines every 
time he stands up. Well I’ll quote just a few more. 
 
This is about the tour that he referred to when he took their 
snow plan out to the, out to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Well here’s a few headlines I’ve collected. “Sask Party preaches 
to a few on the tour.” Maybe I can read some of this. 
 

Although the Saskatchewan Party may have aspirations of 
winning the next provincial election, they were only able to 
attract a handful of people to a special meeting in Meadow 
Lake last week. 
 

Another headline. This is from Indian Head. This is from Indian 
Head. The member’s here. This is from Indian Head. It says 
here, “Dismal turnout for the presentation.” And here you are. 
 

At one point Friday morning there were more politicians 
than visitors. 

 
Well here’s the headline . . . here, Mr. Chair, is the headline 
from The Wilkie Press reporting on the snow Saskatchewan 
tour. The headline here says, “Grow Saskatchewan or gut 
Saskatchewan.” 
 
Another headline: “The grow Saskatchewan meeting stunted by 
indecision.” 
 
Mr. Chair, we can go on, we can go on for hours quoting 
headlines. Let me, let me now try and address more specifically 
the more specific questions around crop insurance. 
 
I think the Leader of the Opposition would recognize and know 
that per capita the taxpayers of Saskatchewan invest more . . . 
Mr. Speaker, if the members opposite would like the answer, 
I’ll be pleased to give them the answer. 
 
The members opposite will know and I think would even admit 
that, per capita, Saskatchewan taxpayers put more support into 
agricultural programming than any other taxpayers in Canada, 
on an average of 4:1 to other provinces. And we are twice the 
amount of the closest province. This government and the people 
of Saskatchewan through their tax dollars are supporting the 
farm families of Saskatchewan in a way that no other, no other 
taxpayers, no other province is doing. 
 
This year, as I think even the Leader of the Opposition would 
recognize, the federal Government of Canada cut support for 
crop insurance — cut support for crop insurance. Now if he 
denies that, then he is truly a friend of the national government. 
They cut support for crop insurance in Canada. 
 
Let us also understand that when we went into this budget 
circumstance this spring, we went into one of the toughest 
budget circumstances that this government has faced since the 
early 1990s. And that was well recognized. 
 
In that circumstance of perhaps the toughest budget that we’ve 
faced in a decade, in a circumstance where the national 
government is withdrawing support from crop insurance, what 
did we do, Mr. Chair? We added new resources to crop 
insurance, $14 million in new money for crop insurance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, 
that in this year . . . Well let’s just compare year over year. With 
the changes this year, with the new resources last year, 34,307 
farmers signed up for Saskatchewan crop insurance coverage; 
this year, 34,754 more farm families; 24 per cent of insured 
crops have increased coverage, most of them going to 80 per 
cent; and 74 per cent maintained the same coverage as last year. 
 
Mr. Speaker the enrolments in crop . . . Mr. Chair, the 
enrolments in crop insurance have increased, we’ve increased 
our funding. Now have we done everything, can we do 



2702 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

everything? The answer is no. 
 
Mr. Chair, the resources are not unlimited. We have to choose, 
we have to make priority decisions. The luxury of sitting in as 
opposition is you can do anything, you can promise anything, 
you can spend anything — totally unaccountable. 
 
In government, that’s not the way it is, Mr. Chair. We have to 
priorize. We have to look at the resources that are available to 
us. We have to look at the entire economy. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I would submit that given the budget 
circumstance we have, given the cut from the federal 
government, that we were able to place in crop insurance 14 
million new dollars is a record we’ll be very proud of. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, the Premier’s logic defies 
reason. Saskatchewan pays more per capita for agriculture 
because agriculture is such a large part of our economy. Does 
he expect us to pay a large portion per capita on an auto 
industry when we don’t have one? Of course not. 
 
I mean does the Premier think he’s pulling the wool over the 
eyes of the people by making these straw arguments that don’t 
stand up to scrutiny? Mr. Speaker, he didn’t answer the 
question about variable rates; he didn’t answer the question 
about spot loss hail; he really didn’t answer the question about 
higher premiums; and he didn’t answer the question about the 
rain lottery. He’s belittling the Office of Premier by refusing to 
answer the questions. 
 
Now I want the Premier to clarify, is the Premier saying that the 
federal government is lying when they say that they loaned the 
Government of Saskatchewan $20 million they expected to be 
paid back; when the 20 million wasn’t paid back, they reduced 
that as their portion of funding for farm safety nets in the 
current year? Is the Premier saying the federal government is 
lying when they said that the province failed to pay back a $20 
million loan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, here are the facts; judge them 
as you will. This year the federal government reduced their 
share of crop insurance from 96 million to 80 million — $16 
million down. The province of Saskatchewan took its share 
from 93 million to 108 million — 14 million up. The federal 
government cut funds; we added funds. It’s as simple as that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. So I ask the 
Premier, if the federal government put less in here this year, 
was that because the province didn’t pay back the $20 million 
additional that they promised to pay back from the year before? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well it’s happy that we have an 
apologist for the federal government sitting in the Leader of the 
Opposition’s bench. You’re not going to find an apologist for 

the federal government sitting in the Premier’s chair of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, if I make a 
financial commitment, I may not like to have to pay back my 
bills, but I have to. If I buy something and a payment comes 
due, I have to make it. 
 
Is the Premier saying that the Saskatchewan . . . province of 
Saskatchewan under his leadership doesn’t have to pay back its 
debts? Is that what the Premier’s saying? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, point number one, I don’t 
know where the Leader of the Opposition gets the notion that 
the federal government somehow loans money to the provinces. 
I don’t know where that comes from. 
 
Point number two, I might expect this . . . I might expect this 
line of argument from Mr. Karwacki, Leader of the Liberal 
Party. I might expect it from the Leader of the Liberal Party or 
from the member of North Battleford, the Liberal member. I do 
not expect it from the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party, come 
past Reformer, come Alliance, now come Saskatchewan Party. I 
do not accept this apology from the federal government from 
the Leader of the Opposition in Saskatchewan. 
 
And point number three, if that leader and the party he now 
leads wants to talk about paying off debt, I’ll tell him the debt 
that the people of Saskatchewan are paying off is the debt that 
his party ran up in this province to the tune of $15 billion when 
they were last in government. That’s the debt we’re paying off, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, call it a loan, call it an advance. 
Is the Premier saying that the federal government has lied when 
they claim that the province of Saskatchewan did not meet its 
obligations of repaying the $20 million? Is the Premier saying 
that the federal government is lying? 
 
I’m not apologizing for the federal government. I’m trying to 
get to the truth. Will the Premier co-operate and tell this House? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Here’s the truth, Mr. Chair. This year the 
federal government reduced it’s share of crop insurance funding 
from $96 million to $80 million. That’s the fact. In this year 
we’ve increased funding for crop insurance from 93 million to 
108 million, Mr. Chair. That’s the fact. 
 
And the fact of the matter is the Saskatchewan farmer, the 
Saskatchewan producer, the Saskatchewan taxpayer doesn’t 
need an apologist for the federal Liberals sitting in this 
legislature in the chair of the Leader of the Opposition. We 
don’t need that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2703 

 

Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, a Premier worth his salary 
would have answered that question. This Premier refused to 
divulge the truth, Mr. Chairman, and that is unacceptable to the 
people of Saskatchewan. If he refuses, he refuses, and he will 
pay for that lack of information at the polls. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Chair, I can’t make the 
Premier answer the questions. He has to voluntarily do that. But 
I can certainly ask the questions, and then he is accountable for 
the fact that he refuses to answer the questions for the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Let’s move on to the agriculture policy framework agreement. 
Now, Mr. Chair, I was involved in some of the meetings that 
led up to the request to have the federal government put forward 
$1.3 billion to offset the hurt caused us by the US farm Bill. 
 
During those discussions I heard our Minister of Agriculture 
speaking with the Alberta Minister of Agriculture and the 
Manitoba Minister of Agriculture, and they spoke in glowing 
terms, and I can describe it in no other way — glowing terms 
— about this new agriculture policy framework agreement. 
Now in the legislature, following the presentation of that new 
policy framework, the Premier says he doesn’t even know what 
the details of that agreement are yet. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture who sits right beside him says he 
doesn’t know what the details of this agreement are. Why was 
his Agriculture minister going around in these meetings 
praising the federal government’s new policy, agriculture policy 
framework agreement, when he can’t even tell us what’s in the 
agreement? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think that the Leader of the 
Opposition and the party opposite must be the only people in 
Canada who do not understand the position of this government 
in this province and the people of Saskatchewan around these 
matters. We have said for months, for years, that we need to 
develop in Canada a long-term, sustainable agricultural 
program. 
 
Mr. Chair, we have been a part . . . If I may say, this Minister of 
Agriculture has been leading the discussion for Canadian 
producers, leading the discussion across Canada. Everyone in 
Saskatchewan, everyone in Canada knows that we’ve been the 
province, we’ve been the government, we’ve been the 
leadership that have called upon the national government to 
come to the aid of Canadian producers in the matter of trade 
injury. Everyone knows that. It’s recognized in the national 
papers as late as just two days ago. 
 
Now the federal government has described its response. Is it the 
responsibility of this Minister of Agriculture or this Premier to 
answer the questions of detail that should be addressed to the 
federal government, questions of detail that we have, that the 
Leader of the Opposition has, that his colleagues in Ottawa, I 
assume have — if they ever asked a question on agriculture any 

more — that provinces all across the nation are asking? Does he 
suggest that we should have the secret workings of the Minister 
of Agriculture, the mind of the Minister of Agriculture in 
Ottawa, Mr. Vanclief? 
 
We are supportive of the principles of developing an 
agricultural policy framework in this country, with long-term 
funding, with significant funding, with adequate funding. But, 
Mr. Chair, we are not signing up, we are not signing up until we 
have much more detail and until we have a national government 
that will recognize the hurt that’s being inflicted on Canadian 
producers by international subsidies. 
 
Now if the Leader of the Opposition is going to re-enter the 
debate around agriculture, then I do invite him today. I let him 
. . . invite him today because his Agriculture critic says she 
doesn’t have a plan. Then let us hear from the Leader of the 
Opposition today. Let us hear from the Saskatchewan Party 
some very specific, some very specific detail and plan that they 
would have put in a national farm security program. Let’s hear 
some detail from the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
I can’t answer on behalf of the federal government. Hopefully, 
he can answer on behalf of himself and his own party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, why did 
you allow your Agriculture minister to fly around for the last 
number of months and years to all these meetings to plan the 
new framework agreement if the federal government weren’t 
telling you any of the details of the plan? Why were you 
wasting taxpayers’ money? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now I see, Mr. Chair. Now it’s a waste 
of taxpayers’ money for the Government of Saskatchewan to do 
battle on behalf of Saskatchewan farm families. 
 
Now we shouldn’t have the Minister of Agriculture fighting at 
the national level, doing battle with his colleagues on behalf of 
Saskatchewan producers — no, no, no — he should stay home. 
 
Well that of course, Mr. Chair, is never going to be the position 
of this Premier or this government and I’m surprised the Leader 
of the Opposition would even suggest it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair. So is the Premier admitting 
that his Agriculture minister was going to Ottawa and to 
Whitehorse or Dawson City, or wherever it was, to do battle 
with the federal government? He wasn’t taking ideas and 
bringing back input from the other governments that he was 
involved with? Was all this travel a waste of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I invited the minister . . . the 
Leader of the Opposition to submit some of his detailed 
planning. It’s interesting that . . . 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Order, order, order. Order. Order, order. 
 



2704 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — The member of Thunder Creek just 
asked — he can get up and ask questions from his feet some 
time I hope — but he asked from the seat, have we ever 
considered having input to national agricultural policy? Well 
here we are. Just take note, member from Thunder Creek. 
 
I have here documents entitled, Presentation to the House of 
Commons Standing Committee on Agriculture, presented by 
Clay Serby, Deputy Premier, Minister of Agriculture and Food, 
Minister Responsible for Rural Revitalization, February 19, 
2002. A substantive — I’m quoting thank you — a substantive 
policy document. 
 
I have here An Option for Future Agricultural Safety Net 
Programming Within the Agricultural Policy Framework 
presented by the Hon. Clay Serby, Deputy Premier, Minister of 
Agriculture and Food, Minister Responsible for Rural 
Revitalization, Province of Saskatchewan, January 2002. A 
substantial policy document presented to the federal 
government. 
 
I have here, Mr. Chair, a Presentation to the House of 
Commons Standing Committee on Agriculture and Agri-Food 
by the Hon. Clay Serby, Deputy Premier, Minister of 
Agriculture and Food, Province of Saskatchewan, June 2001. 
Another substantial policy document presented to the national 
government. 
 
I have here, Mr. Chair, a . . . I have a report here, Mr. Chair, 
called a report to the premiers, A Fair Deal for Canadian 
Farmers October 2001, submitted by myself on behalf of all the 
premiers of Canada to the national government, to the Prime 
Minister of Canada. 
 
That’s four substantive policy documents presented to the 
national government in less than a year. 
 
Now where, I ask, is the substantive policy document presented 
on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party to anybody? They don’t 
present to the national government. They don’t present to our 
government. They don’t present to the people of Saskatchewan 
on agricultural policy. 
 
Where, Mr. Leader of the Opposition, is your substantive policy 
presented on behalf of Canadian or Saskatchewan farmers? 
You’re great at shouting from your seat, but you sure don’t 
have an idea on your feet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Premier, 
I thank you for showing us that document. There was one 
paragraph about that long which said the minister’s name on 
one page and then there was another little grey area on the next 
page. Our critic, the member for Watrous, has read the 
document. There’s nothing in it. It’s empty of substance. 
There’s no detail. It’s worthless. 
 
It’s a waste of paper, Mr. Premier. Just like your agriculture 
policy has been a waste of paper and a waste of breath. It just 
. . . That’s the reason why every Agriculture minister that’s 
been appointed by yourself and previous . . . your predecessor, 
Mr. Romanow, has been turfed by the people of Saskatchewan. 

You’re devoid of ideas. You’re a washout when it comes to 
agriculture policy. 
 
Now when I was at these meetings with Shirley McLellan and 
Rosann Wowchuk, the two prairie counterparts to the Minister 
of Agriculture, they were talking about the details of the 
agriculture policy framework. And your Minister of Agriculture 
was sitting there going yes, yes, yes, it’s wonderful; oh it’s a 
great plan, we can hardly wait; let’s get it implemented sooner; 
let’s not wait too long to get this agriculture policy framework 
passed; we’ve got to get Mr. Vanclief to get this done 
immediately. 
 
And then we ask him questions about the agriculture policy 
framework and he humped his shoulders up and says, I don’t 
know anything about it; the federal government won’t tell me 
what’s in it. Why does Rosann Wowchuk and why does Shirley 
McLellan know what’s in the policy framework agreement, but 
the Government of Saskatchewan doesn’t have a clue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
goes into theatrics when he knows Canadian producers . . . 
Saskatchewan producers know that this Minister of Agriculture 
has had more input to substantive policy in this nation than I 
say any other minister in Canada. He meets on a regular basis, 
on a regular basis, with the farm leaders of Saskatchewan that 
inform this minister to the policy options that he presents to 
other ministers and the national government. 
 
Now the Leader of the Opposition seems very unwilling or 
unable perhaps to demonstrate any substantive agricultural 
policy that comes from the Saskatchewan Party. Now he says 
the papers that I display here are thin. I’ll tell you, Mr. Chair, 
they are thorough, they are in-depth, and they are, Mr. Chair, a 
whole lot more substantive than the invisible policy that I don’t 
see from here. 
 
I challenge . . . Mr. Chair, I challenge the Leader of the 
Opposition to stand up in his place right now, right now when I 
sit down, and table the policies of the Saskatchewan Party that 
they have submitted to the national government, that they have 
submitted . . . I see their ag policy in the last election; it doesn’t 
fill half a page. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition, we all know, 
spent some time in Ottawa where I believe he served as the 
Agriculture critic for the Reform Party. Is that the case? He 
served as the Agriculture critic for the Reform Party. Well he 
decided in 1998 that with that kind of a background he could 
just rush down to Ottawa and he’d get it straightened right out. 
That’s what he thought he could do. 
 
Well here’s the report of his visit to Ottawa in 1998 from the 
parliamentary newspaper, The Hill Times. Headline, 
“Saskatchewan Party Leader gets the cold shoulder.” 
 

Handshake for you. Saskatchewan Party leader and former 
Reform MP Elwin Hermanson was back on the Hill last 
week trying to drum up support for an aid package for 
Saskatchewan farmers. The former Reform Agriculture 
critic met with opposition critics, but could not swing a sit 
down with the Agriculture minister, Lyle Vanclief. 
 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2705 

 

(Quote) “I used to be friends with Lyle when he chaired the 
Agriculture committee in the last parliament,” said Mr. 
Hermanson, adding that this time he only got a handshake. 

 
Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition can belittle the 
contribution of this Minister of Agriculture and this government 
but it’s not belittled by the producers of Saskatchewan, it’s not 
belittled by the farmers of Canada because it has been 
substantive and it will be substantive as we move through this 
discussion and as we move through discussions in the months 
and years to come. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know, this 
government is so clued out. I’ve had meetings with Mr. 
Vanclief. I had a meeting with Mr. Vanclief for an hour, an 
hour and a half, since that story has been written. The NDP 
doesn’t know the half of what the official opposition have been 
doing and they don’t recognize how effective the official 
opposition has been on behalf of Saskatchewan. 
 
But we do have a Premier that hasn’t answered more than one 
question since we started about an hour ago. Mr. Chairman, he 
has not revealed any details as to the agriculture framework 
agreement. He has not been able to explain why his minister, 
who was bragging he knew about the agreement, but can’t 
answer a single question about what might be in that agreement 
and still doesn’t know what’s in the agreement . . . When is the 
province and when are the producers of Saskatchewan going to 
know what’s in the agriculture framework agreement? 
 
That question’s being asked to my colleagues and myself all 
across Saskatchewan —what’s in the agreement? Is it, you 
know, is it worth $2, $4 an acre? Is it involving NISA (Net 
Income Stabilization Account)? Is it crop insurance based? Is 
there some new program? What’s the bridge funding for? These 
are the questions that are being asked. 
 
They’re asking, why hasn’t the province signed on to the 
agreement? Yes we understand it’s because the federal 
government hasn’t committed to trade injury compensation. But 
for the . . . as far as the rest of it’s concerned, why hasn’t the 
province signed on to the rest of the agreement? Can’t they sign 
on? Are we not going to have crop insurance next year? Are we 
not going to have a NISA program next year? Has the minister 
from Yorkton left the industry high and dry? These are the 
questions that the people of Saskatchewan are answering and 
they expect that the Premier of Saskatchewan should know the 
answer to those questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’m surprised that the 
Leader of the Opposition doesn’t know this detail because this 
detail has been quite widely known. This is the information that 
we’ve been provided by the federal Minister of Agriculture. It’s 
been quite widely known. But I’ll repeat it for the Leader of the 
Opposition if he hasn’t heard it. 
 
Here’s the following information provided by the Minister of 
Agriculture Canada, Minister Vanclief. It’s a three-point plan 
that they’ve introduced. You know, him . . . he and the Prime 

Minister stood there and announced it in . . . on the farm in 
Ontario. Here’s the plan they announced — the APF 
(agricultural policy framework), a five-year commitment. Under 
the safety nets, $1.1 billion a year requiring the 60/40 cost split. 
On this, Mr. Chair, there is no doubt we are there on the cost 
split. This is for the long-term programming. No doubt about 
that. 
 
They’re talking about some other areas — food safety, 
environment, research, and renewal — where they’re 
committing $180 million per year, of which 120 million will be 
for federal-provincial initiatives requiring the 60/40, and 60 
million of that will be for federal initiatives with no provincial 
cost sharing. 
 
The second, the second plank of their plan is what they describe 
as federal bridging programming. Bridging. This is 100 to $120 
million a year with a five-year commitment. This is federal 
dollars only, except for water, and that they’re asking 
one-third/one-third/one-third, federal, provincial, and producer. 
 
That will be used for initiatives they describe as water 
development, equity capital, biomass support, pesticide minor 
use program, marketing support, environmental farm plans, and 
co-op development program. This is what they call their 
transition, the number of questions left outstanding. 
 
The third is this area they describe as bridge transition funding 
which, note, Mr. Chair, is only for a two-year commitment, and 
that’s a two-year commitment at $600 million a year which 
would amount to 1.2 billion in total. And here, Mr. Chair, is 
where we have the significant dispute with the federal 
government. 
 
One, they are refusing to describe this for what it should be, 
which is trade injury compensation, a trade injury payment. 
They don’t want to call it that. That’s what it should be called. 
 
Secondly, it should be for the extension . . . for the time 
extending to cover the American farm Bill. Until we see change 
at the WTO (World Trade Organization), that protection to 
Canadian producers needs to be there. Not two years — it’s 
more likely five or longer. 
 
And thirdly, and thirdly, it’s not by our calculation but by the 
calculation of the federal government itself and producer 
organizations in our own province that the trade injury at a 
minimum should be $1.3 billion a year. Not 1.2 billion over two 
years — 1.3 a year. So here is where the glaring inadequacy in 
meeting the trade injury occurs in the plan. 
 
Now there are many questions and detail that affect these other 
program areas. While we might find some definite agreement 
on principle, there are many, many areas of detail that are yet to 
be understood or described. 
 
This is the knowledge of the programs that has been provided to 
us and provides to provinces across the nation, with the Leader 
of the Opposition. We would appreciate more detail. 
 
The Minister of Agriculture is working with the farm leaders in 
this province. He’s continuing to work with his colleagues and 
with colleagues across the country to secure more 



2706 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

understanding of this deal, because the fact of the matter is you 
don’t sign up, you don’t sign up for a deal until you’ve seen the 
fine print, Mr. Chair. And we’re working to get that fine print. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, it is extremely frightening that 
the Premier of the province knows no more about this 
agriculture policy framework agreement than what he can read 
in a federal release, and we’re supposed to be paying for 40 per 
cent of some of it, or all of it, or two-thirds of it. He doesn’t 
know the details. His Agriculture minister doesn’t know the 
details of this plan. 
 
In fact, Terry Hildebrandt, the leader of APAS (Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan), knows more of the 
details about this framework agreement than the Premier of 
Saskatchewan and his Agriculture minister knows. That is 
disgusting and that is shameful and that is just unacceptable. 
 
Mr. Chair, we’re not going to get any more information from 
the Premier on this issue. He talked about where is the 
Saskatchewan Party policy on agricultural issues. Well I’ll point 
out a couple. 
 
We called two months ago for $10 million to be allocated from 
within a . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We called two months 
ago . . . If the member from P.A. Northcote would be quiet long 
enough for me to speak, I will state that the Saskatchewan Party 
two months ago stated that within existing budgeting, $10 
million should be allocated by the provincial government to 
deal with the drought crisis. This is just to deal with water. This 
is to deal with the watering of cattle, the hauling of livestock, 
pumping of water, those immediate needs. 
 
Mr. Chair, two months have come and gone. The drought has 
deepened in a large part of the province of Saskatchewan. This 
is just one issue. This is already much more than we’ve heard 
from the other side, Mr. Chairman. Why hasn’t the Premier and 
why hasn’t this government not responded to the needs of the 
people of Saskatchewan? 
 
Another thing that the Saskatchewan Party has asked is why did 
the Government of Saskatchewan, in this year when they have 
cut back funding in the Agriculture department — $50 million 
that the Minister of Agriculture has cut from the Agriculture 
budget — why did the NDP choose this year to end the 
agriculture property tax rebate that amounts to $25 million? 
Why did the Premier hit Saskatchewan producers with a lack of 
response to the drought and with an ending of the rebate on 
agriculture property tax? 
 
The Chair: — Hon. members, I’m having difficulty hearing the 
speakers so would you please come to order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, again I ask the Leader of the 
Opposition to provide for this House copies of the policy 
documents that they’ve put together, copies of those policy 
positions which they will have advanced to the national 
government, copies of the agricultural policy that accompanies 
their snow Saskatchewan meetings. We have heard in the 
course of this session a call from the opposition to spend $10 
million on wells and piping and dugout construction. Fair 

enough, but I wouldn’t believe that that . . . Surely that’s not the 
entire agricultural policy of the Saskatchewan Party? 
 
Well then . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . the leader says 
absolutely not. Well then let’s see the rest. And just on the issue 
of the program that is suggested around drought, this is of 
interest, Mr. Chair. Just a moment ago I was reading from the 
information regarding the federal proposal for agricultural 
funding across Canada. They are proposing some dollars for 
water, for dealing with these same issues that the Leader of the 
Opposition raises. 
 
They propose that it should be funded 
one-third/one-third/one-third; federal . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. The Chair does not want to 
inject himself into the debate. I’m trying to let the speakers 
participate in debate but I’m having difficulty hearing the 
speakers, so . . . Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The federal 
government is now proposing that future water programs should 
be funded one-third/one-third/one-third; federal, provincial, 
producer. That has traditionally been the case in Canada where 
much of the water work has been done through the PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) with federal 
funding. 
 
Now in this session the opposition gets up and said, well we 
shouldn’t even worry, we shouldn’t even go to Ottawa and look 
for money for drought or for waterworks. We should just cough 
up $10 million and do it ourselves and just let the federal 
government right off the hook. 
 
You remember last year, Mr. Chair, how again this Minister of 
Agriculture lobbied hard and got money from the federal 
government, put together a program, did some of the work 
around drought, around irrigation piping, around dugout 
construction, well drilling and so on. That’s what we’re at work 
today doing. What does not assist is when the Leader of the 
Opposition gets up and said, well the federal government 
should just forget their responsibility for water in this country; 
you just do it, you just find $10 million. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, that’s a fair enough position but I want him 
now to tell us a little more about their agricultural policy that 
goes beyond a promise that they have $10 million to do this 
drought work. 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order. Hon. members, I am having 
difficulty hearing the members that have the floor. And I do not 
want to inject myself into the debate, but I will. So please come 
to order and stay in order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. You know, the 
Premier is developing a reputation as being a very weak 
Premier. And by not answering the questions, he is enhancing 
that . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. Order, order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier did 
not respond as to what the province is going to do about the 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2707 

 

drought situation. He tried to claim that the Leader of the 
Opposition said things that the Leader of the Opposition 
absolutely didn’t say, to hide the fact that he has no position on 
this issue. And, Mr. Chair, he refused to respond to the question 
about the property tax rebate on agriculture land in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Will the Premier quit dodging the questions and tell the people 
of Saskatchewan what’s he doing about the drought? After all 
he is the Premier — it’s fair he can ask me, but this is on 
taxpayers’ time and he is the Premier — what is the Premier 
doing about the drought and what is the Premier going to do 
about discontinuing the property tax rebate on agriculture land? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, as the Premier, we understand 
— this government understands — the hurt that’s being felt by 
some areas of our province as a result of drought. What have we 
done, Mr. Chair? More than any other government in Canada is 
what we’ve done. And we are working with the municipalities; 
we’re working with the producers. We’re looking at options 
actively today in terms of meeting some of the drought related 
needs. 
 
What have we done, Mr. Chair, in a budget year when Ottawa, 
the national government cut our crop insurance program 
significantly — by $16 million — we were right there, added 
new money to crop insurance. That’s what we’ve done. 
 
We have the forage cover program that’s been widely 
subscribed across the province, which this group of men and 
women made all sorts of fun of when it was introduced, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
We have been fighting like no other government in Canada on 
the national level to support Saskatchewan and Canadian 
producers — like no other province. And we have taken an 
active role in developing national farm policy and we’re not 
afraid to lay our policies on the table. We’re not afraid to lay 
our policy proposals on the table, as opposed to the Leader of 
the Opposition who seems very afraid today to lay his policy on 
the table. 
 
Now he asks about the rebate . . . the rebate on the education tax 
on farm property. And the Leader of the Opposition will know 
that two years ago we introduced a two-year program to provide 
rebate relief for our farm families around the educational tax — 
he knows that — 25 million in each year if I recall, for a total of 
$50 million. 
 
Now the member from Saltcoats wants to know how much. He 
knows how much. That program is not in existence in this 
budget. 
 
And the fact of the matter is this . . . Let me go back and just 
rehearse again with the, with the opposition the circumstances 
that we’ve been through in this spring and budget year — one 
of the toughest budget circumstances to face the province of 
Saskatchewan in the last decade, if not the toughest budget 
circumstance till . . . since those folks left government and left 
the province near bankruptcy. 
 

At the risk of having to go through the entire list, does the 
opposition not understand that we came through a summer of 
drought last year? Do they not understand that we’ve come 
through one of the lowest commodity prices in years? Do they 
not understand like the rest of North America we were 
subjected to the downturns as occasioned by September 11? Do 
they not understand the challenge that we were under? 
 
Thank goodness, Mr. Chair, we did not take their advice last 
year when they were telling us, spend every dime in the rainy 
day fund. That’s what they were telling us — spend every dime. 
Let them loose with the treasury, they’ll spend every dime. and 
they’ll put the place straight into bankruptcy again. Mercifully, 
we did not take their advice last year. We had to face a difficult 
budget circumstance like none other since the early 1990s. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, the fact of the matter is you can’t do 
everything. We heard calls from rural Saskatchewan to fix the 
highways, rebuild the roadways of Saskatchewan. We’ve heard 
that call, we’ve heard it from this opposition; we’re doing it, 
we’re fixing the highways, we’re rebuilding the roads. 
 
We heard calls from municipal government for greater revenue 
sharing. We heard that call. Ten million new dollars in revenue 
sharing in this budget. 
 
We heard calls from education — from school boards, from 
trustees. We’ve heard calls from the opposition — more 
resources for education to take the relief off the property tax. In 
this budget, more money for education, Mr. Chair. 
 
More money for highways, more money for municipalities, 
more money for education, and, Mr. Chair, we listened to the 
people of rural Saskatchewan when they said, we do not want 
the closure of our small hospitals. We’ve listened. We’ve 
preserved the small hospitals in Saskatchewan. We’ve listened 
to the people. More money for health care. Mr. Chair, we can’t 
do everything. 
 
Again I say when you’re in opposition, you can do everything. 
You can promise all the money. You’ve got . . . you have no 
reason to be accountable. 
 
But the fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, in government you have 
to set priorities. We’ve set priorities. They are: education, 
health care, renewal of the highways, economic development, 
and continuing tax relief and fiscal stability and responsibility 
in that province. 
 
And the result of the budget, the result of the budget, Mr. Chair, 
as you well know and the Leader of the Opposition well knows, 
when reviewed by Moody’s of New York city, they gave us a 
credit upgrade. That’s the answer. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. We need to 
deal with facts rather than the fantasy world that the Premier is 
in. 
 
I’m looking at the Premier’s own budget delivered by his 



2708 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Finance minister. (AG08) on page 27, $50 million less for 
agriculture in the 2002-2003 year as compared to the previous 
year — 50 million less dollars to that industry. Now I could be 
. . . I will be more specific. Farm sector initiatives, reduction in 
spending by $25 million. That’s the heart of this issue. NISA 
spending is down. No, NISA spending is 2,000 . . . $2 million 
up. Adaptation initiatives is down, and the farm land property 
tax rebate is absolutely gone; it’s down to nil. So there’s 
another $25 million. 
 
The result is, whereas last year $175 million was spent, this 
year $125 million. That’s a $50 million cut to agriculture. And 
the Premier says it’s all a matter of priorities. So how does he 
face farm families and say, I’m paying four senior bureaucrats 
to stay home? How does the Premier tell farm families, I’m 
spending your tax dollars telling four senior bureaucrats to stay 
home because we messed up the reorganization of government 
and we don’t have a job for them. 
 
How can the Premier face farm families and say, we’re 
prepared to gamble $80 million in Australia, we’re prepared to 
gamble $80 million in Australia, but we’re going to cut $50 
million from the Agriculture budget. How can the Premier look 
farm families in the eye and tell them that? Well the truth is he 
can’t and he won’t. He won’t tell farm families the truth about 
what his priorities are. 
 
And that’s why he’s at about 10 per cent in the polls in rural 
Saskatchewan. And that’s why he won’t win a single seat in the 
next election in rural Saskatchewan. And that’s why the 
member from Meadow Lake is going to lose. And that’s why 
the member from Melville is going to lose. And that is why the 
Agriculture minister from Yorkton is going to lose in the next 
election . . . (inaudible) . . . 26 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The Premier has made his priorities very 
clear. And let me tell you, Mr. Chairman, the Premier’s 
priorities are not health care and education like he just said . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — The Premier has made his priorities very 
clear. The Premier’s priorities is not agriculture, that’s very 
clear. But it’s not health care, it’s not education. It’s for public 
servants that he’s paying to stay at home. It’s playing the 
Australian stock market. Can you imagine an NDP Premier 
gambling Saskatchewan taxpayers’ money on the Australian 
stock market? The stock has plunged to 17 cents a share. We’ve 
lost money on the deal. And he has the nerve to blame the 
agriculture situation on the opposition, on the weather, on the 
Liberals in Ottawa. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s not cutting it with farm families. 
 
I want to move on to just one more agricultural issue and this is 
not a specific government initiative. But I would like to know 
where the Premier stands on the issue of international subsidies. 
Just a very simple question. Does the Premier of Saskatchewan 
believe that producers in this province would be better off if: (a) 
the international trade war was accelerated; (b) the international 
trade war remains as it is; or (b) there was a reduction or a 

de-escalation of the international trade war? Which of those 
three options does the Premier think would be better for 
producers in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Oh, what I hear, Mr. Chair, is trying to 
build a little defence for something that the Leader of the 
Opposition used to say when he was in the House of Commons. 
That’s what’s going on here. He’s trying to build a little case to 
defence his position taken in the House of Commons that there 
should be no subsidies. We know what’s going on here — no 
surprise there. 
 
Well now here’s the fact, here’s the facts, Mr. Chair. We were 
one of two Canadian provinces who had people in Doha at the 
World Trade Organization. The then . . . the Attorney General, 
today’s Attorney General was in Doha — one of two provinces 
of Canada represented there — fighting the battle to reduce the 
international subsidies, fighting the Americans and fighting the 
Europeans. 
 
The fact of the matter is as a result of that and keeping high 
pressure on our federal government in Doha — and if I may say 
with the active co-operation of our federal government in Doha 
— we believe we saw progress there. We heard the nation of 
France for the first time say that they needed to move away 
from subsidies, which would give leadership to the Europeans, 
which we hoped then would give leadership to the Americans. 
We believe progress was being made and I believe it was due to 
the fact that the province of Saskatchewan and the province of 
Manitoba had people in Doha keeping the feet of the federal 
government to the fire and making progress. 
 
Then along came the new American farm Bill, President Bush’s 
new American farm Bill, which has not only met the European 
subsidies but proposes to expand the subsidies into crops now 
currently not being subsidized, including the pulse crops, which 
is a direct hit on the farmers and producers of Saskatchewan. 
 
We take the position, as do I believe the national government of 
Canada, that at the World Trade Organization we need to 
negotiate lower and lower subsidies on agricultural production. 
We take that position. 
 
But in the meantime we do not take the position held by the 
Leader of the Opposition that the national Government of 
Canada should immediately get out of subsidies. That was the 
position advanced, that the Canadian government should not 
subsidize. While our producers are up against the producers of 
the United States of America and the European Common 
Market, the national government of Canada has no alternative 
but to support our producers as they do in the United States of 
America and in Europe. 
 
Until such time as the WTO can bring down the level of 
international subsidy, the national government of Canada has 
but no alternative but to support Canadian producers. 
 
And let me close with this argument, Mr. Chair, this needs to be 
a 100 per cent federally funded support program — 100 per 
cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2709 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Nobody, Mr. Chair, in Ottawa — 
nobody in Ottawa when Bombardier was in difficulty over 
international trade arrangements — nobody in Ottawa asked 
Bombardier to cough up 40 per cent of the funding, or the 
province of Quebec, or for that matter the province of 
Saskatchewan where Bombardier is an active player in our 
economy. We were not asked in that case. 
 
Nobody asked the provincial government, nobody asked the 
municipal government, to cough up money when our national 
airline, Air Canada, was in trouble because of international 
dispute. In this case it is a federal responsibility — 100 per cent. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to make it 
very clear to the Premier that his position on international 
subsidies is exactly the same as the one I hold and the one I 
have held in my entire public life. And if the Premier continues 
to present a different case he has done a very bad thing, he 
needs to pray for forgiveness, and he needs to not do it again. 
 
Mr. Chair, I want to go on to the issue — the Premier has not 
done well on agriculture — I want to go on to education. Mr. 
Chair, in the budget that the Finance minister brought down in 
March he did something that has not been done I believe in the 
history of the province of Saskatchewan. He decided to fund the 
capital expenditure for education through a new Crown called 
the Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation. 
 
Mr. Chair, the former Finance minister of Saskatchewan, Janice 
MacKinnon, said that this was contrary to the rules that this 
government, the previous NDP government, had put in place. 
 
Mr. Chair, the Premier and his Finance minister are not 
supposed to introduce debt financing into a departmental 
expenditure unless they had made that commitment in an 
election. 
 
This is a changing . . . this is a changing of accounting. This is a 
changing of accounting that, according to Janice MacKinnon, is 
contrary to the rules of the game that have been put in place by 
the NDP government itself. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’m asking the Premier: how could he countenance 
the NDP going against its own rules and, mid term, introducing 
a new Crown called the Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation to try to hide deficit in regards to the capital 
funding of education out of the Education department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I think the Leader of the 
Opposition will know — other members certainly know in this 
House — that we’ve had for years in this province something 
called the Municipal Financing Corporation where, through the 
auspices of the province, third parties, in this case 
municipalities, have been able to borrow to do their work. 
 
The only question that really needs to be answered here, the 
only question that really needs to be answered is from the 
Leader of the Opposition. Are they in favour or are they not in 
favour of building the schools and the colleges for 
Saskatchewan’s young people to take these young people and to 
take our province into the future? That’s the question. 

If they oppose this, then they . . . if they oppose this budget and 
if they oppose this allocation in the budget, then what they’re 
doing is opposing the fixing of our schools and the building of 
our schools and the building of our colleges for the future of the 
province. 
 
If they oppose it, fair enough. But they can oppose this all they 
want, they can oppose this all they want, and you can take the 
critics from wherever they want to oppose this, and it’s not 
going to prevent this government for building for the young 
people and the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair. Mr. Premier, you again skirted 
the question. The former Finance minister of Saskatchewan said 
that what you have done is wrong. The former Finance minister, 
Janice MacKinnon, said that what you are doing is a changing 
of accounting practice to try to hide a deficit budget. 
 
I would think that the former Finance minister of 
Saskatchewan, Janice MacKinnon, would know what she’s 
talking about. 
 
Mr. Premier, will you answer the question? Why did you 
change the funding structure for education mid term by 
introducing this Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation 
to try to hide a large deficit in this year’s budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well I’ll tell you why exactly why we’ve 
done it . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. If other hon. members want to 
continue their debate, feel free to take it behind the bar. Order. 
Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, I’ll tell you exactly, exactly 
why we’re doing this. We are doing this to provide the tools for 
Saskatchewan’s young people — indeed, for Saskatchewan 
people of all ages — the tools necessary, the educational 
opportunities necessary to build a new Saskatchewan and take 
this province into the future. 
 
Again, I say, as I said during the beginning of these 
conversations this afternoon, Mr. Chair, as a result of this 
session there will be approximately $90 million available for 
educational capital in this province — $90 million as a result of 
this session because we are going to pass this budget against the 
opposition there. We’re going to pass the budget. 
 
As a result of this session, this province will be a better 
province; the people of Saskatchewan will be better equipped 
for the future, and much of it is to do because of education. 
 
Why are we doing this, he says. Because the fact of the matter 
is, the need is there. The fact of the matter is we could not do 
this without looking at a process of amortization. I expect that 
the Leader of the Opposition at one time or another has 
amortized something that he knew was important to his farming 
operation. Did he never amortize a piece of land or a piece of 
machinery? 
 
Mr. Chair, we are taking this option, this opportunity to provide 



2710 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

these tools for the young people and the adults of Saskatchewan 
as they engage in the educational experience they need for 
themselves, for their families, and for the future of our 
province. And that’s something, Mr. Chair, if there is one thing 
that I am absolutely proud of in this budget and in the work of 
this session, it is this investment in education, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, what the Premier is actually 
doing is trying to hide the debt those children are going to have 
to pay. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, what the Premier is again 
saying is that it’s more important to invest $80 million in 
Australia than it is to fund education the way it’s always been 
funded. 
 
Now the Premier can solve the problem by moving, as the 
Saskatchewan Party suggested, to summary financial statements 
so the people of Saskatchewan would recognize that he’s in fact 
the leader of a government that’s running a rather large deficit 
this year. He could choose to do that but he’s trying to hide the 
facts from Saskatchewan people and he’s trying to make future 
generations pay for it. 
 
I say that again, this is the sign of a very weak leader, a leader 
who is not upfront with the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Chair, if Janice MacKinnon says it’s wrong, then the 
Premier is disagreeing with a former Finance minister who has 
been on the inside, knows the status of the finances of the 
province of Saskatchewan, and knows that the Premier is 
breaking his government’s own rules by changing the way he 
funds education midstream. 
 
Really what he’s doing, it’s not so much talking about an 
amortization of the family home. What he’s talking about is 
more paying for the groceries on his credit card which he never 
gets cleared off. That’s really what the Premier is doing. 
 
I want to go on to the issue of teachers’ contracts. Teachers’ 
contracts are currently being negotiated. And his minister of 
Education has not come clean with the people of Saskatchewan 
that any increased costs to school boards will be totally covered 
by the provincial treasury. 
 
I’m asking the Premier today to state clearly, on behalf of 
taxpayers in the province of Saskatchewan, the additional costs 
of the funding of education after the teachers’ contract is agreed 
upon. Will it be funded entirely by the province of 
Saskatchewan or does he intend to pass on some of that cost to 
property taxpayers in the province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the process of negotiating a 
teachers’ contract has in Saskatchewan for — I’d have to check 
with the minister of Education but I believe that it’s well over 

30 years now — well in the neighbourhood of 30 years, has 
been a very successful process where the trustees, the 
government, and the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 
have sat down together, negotiated hard, and come up with 
collective agreements. There has not been a general provincial 
teachers’ strike, I believe, in that whole period of time. 
 
We are going to take this record of success, in terms of 
negotiating with the educators, the teachers of Saskatchewan, 
and we’re going to work with it. 
 
Now I know the Leader of the Opposition, Sask Party, they 
don’t much care for collective bargaining, they don’t care for 
contracts signed with public servants. We’ve learned that this 
week. That’s very clear. They want to emulate the British 
Columbia experience where contracts don’t matter. 
 
We place a high value on this process of negotiation with our 
educators, with our trustees, with the province’s partners. The 
Leader of the Opposition will know that in the process of 
negotiation it is just that, a process of negotiation, where the 
sides will present their arguments, where they will present their 
offers, their demands. 
 
We will do it in the confines of fiscal responsibility. I ask the 
Leader of the Opposition to review recent contracts and work 
with the trustees. 
 
And the fact of the matter is, in recent contracts we have met 
the financial obligations of those contracts as they are 
negotiated by the province. That’s been our record — a proud 
record, Mr. Chair, a proud record of good negotiations, of 
collective agreements, of working with trustees. 
 
And I invite again the Leader of the Opposition to look at recent 
budgets, look at recent expenditures in education. And we have 
met those with the trustees to settlements before. 
 
It is interesting though, Mr. Chair, that the Leader of the 
Opposition has introduced into the discussion of these 
estimates, discussions that were held with, I think, the minister 
of Education as recent as yesterday; and clearly, throughout this 
session . . . I’m told that in fact one of the members opposite, 
the member from Last Mountain, in fact was standing in this 
House just days ago indicating that he — and I assume he 
speaks on behalf of his caucus — that he was fully supportive 
of the educational financing that we’ve introduced in this 
budget. Now it’s peculiar therefore, today, that the Leader of 
the Opposition gets up and says he’s opposed to it. 
 
So one more time, we don’t know what the position is. Which 
side of the fence are we on? Are we supporting this process of 
funding educational capital so that we can ensure the future for 
our children, or are we opposed to it? Do we want to shut this 
down? Do we not want this capital to proceed in this budget 
year? Again, I ask the Leader of the Opposition to clarify on 
behalf of his party. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Premier, I don’t think you 
heard my question. My question was not, is there a problem 
with the teachers’ contract negotiations. I didn’t ask that. Now 
you spent, I don’t know, about five minutes answering some 
question that I hadn’t asked. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2711 

 

I anticipate that there will be a successful negotiation of the 
teachers’ contract. What I asked you, Mr. Premier, was once 
that contract is settled — and we expect there will be additional 
cost because, every time an agreement is completed, there is a 
raise involved and teachers’ salaries will go up — that cost has 
to be borne by somebody. Is it going to be borne out of the 
General Revenue Fund of your government, or are you going to 
pass some of that cost on to property taxpayers? That was the 
question I asked. Would you please answer the question? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, as the process of 
negotiations unfolds, we’re not going to insert ourselves with 
. . . into that process of negotiations. 
 
I am, as I said in my answer just moments ago, I remind the 
Leader of the Opposition of past practice. Look at our past 
budgets. Every year, they’ll call us into question. And the fact 
of the matter, we have met the obligations to teachers, to the 
trustees, when they have been negotiated by the province of 
Saskatchewan. And we’ll stand on that record. They might wish 
they had such a record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, or, Mr. Chair, I want to read 
a couple of articles. First of all a reader’s opinion in The 
StarPhoenix, Monday, July 8 — I believe that’s yesterday: 
“Melenchuk position disappoints boards.” This is a letter by 
Bernie Howe, board Chair, Saskatoon (West) School Division. 
And I quote: 
 

Learning Minister Jim Melenchuk has advised school 
boards that the government will not commit to funding the 
cost of the contract currently being negotiated with 
teachers. 
 
Melenchuk has said that, when a new collective agreement 
has been concluded, the government will assess the cost 
implications and consider whether additional funding can 
be made available to school divisions in the current fiscal 
year. 
 
This is disappointing to school boards and, frankly, just not 
good enough. 
 
While the government has the majority position at the 
bargaining table, boards need to know the cost impact for 
them when commenting on the proposals and whether they 
are prepared to support an agreement. 
 
Boards believe in a fair and reasonable salary increase for 
teachers, but are not able to fund the negotiated increased 
cost by themselves. They need the help of government. 

 
Now he goes on to talk about full-time equivalents and some of 
the impacts that will be felt if the Education minister doesn’t 
make this point clear. It is the responsible thing for the 
Government of Saskatchewan, either for his Education minister 
. . . and he’s already failed the test, so now the responsibility 
falls on the Premier. 
 

It is the responsibility of the Premier of Saskatchewan to tell 
school boards in this province, once a teacher salary negotiation 
is completed that if there are increased costs they will be borne 
fully out of the General Revenue Fund or they will be shared 
between the General Revenue Fund and property taxpayers. It is 
your responsibility, Mr. Premier, to state clearly what you 
intend to do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it is my responsibility in the 
midst of a collective bargaining process to allow that process to 
reach its conclusion, not in the middle of the process to indicate 
one or another. Now . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Would hon. members on both 
sides of the House please come to order and stay in order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, it was sort of quiet in here 
until the member from Rosthern and the member from Nutana 
joined the debate. 
 
Mr. Chair, I’ll repeat. We’re going to let the process of 
negotiation work its way through. We’re not going to insert in 
the middle of negotiation. I repeat again, in all of my experience 
in government in this province, the province has met the 
contractual obligations, provided the funding for the trustees. 
That has been the history. 
 
I’m told by the minister of Education that only once in the past 
30 years, only once in the past 30 years, on one occasion, did 
the province not meet the financial obligations as they had been 
negotiated through the collective bargaining process. I repeat 
again, we’ve had 30 years of good negotiations. I am not 
inserting in the middle of negotiations. 
 
And I point the Leader of the Opposition to the history of this 
government in the last decade that where we have always met 
the responsibilities that have arisen as a result of negotiated 
settlements with the teachers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Premier, 
let’s talk about your record. I also have an article here from the 
Kindersley Crossroads — recent one — May 27, 2002. 
“Kindersley town council letter protests education grant cut.” 
And it reads, and I quote: 
 

Delegates to a regional meeting last week heard an 
expression of gratitude for a Kindersley letter protesting 
funding cuts to education. The West Central Municipal 
Government Committee decided to await the minister’s 
response before recommending that other municipalities 
send similar letters. 
 
Debra Gronning, a member of the group’s education 
sub-committee, read the letter at the committee’s May 16 
meeting in Outlook. The letter, to Education Minister Jim 
Melenchuk, protests the education department’s cutting of 
its computational foundation operating grant to the 
Kindersley School Division, which Gronning chairs, by 
close to $425,000. 



2712 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Mr. Premier, I’m not quoting now, I’m speaking. A $425,000 
cut to the foundational grant for the Kindersley School District. 
That’s what your government is imposing upon the people of 
Saskatchewan. Now I’m going to go on to quote: 
 

Kindersley Ald. Cecil Campbell said that (the) town 
council, at its May 13 meeting, debated refusing to approve 
the school division’s annual budget and sending it back as a 
form of protest. 
 
They’d refused the formality at least once in the past “and 
got a big presentation that was a big waste of time,” Ald 
Mike Hankewich told the council meeting, noting, “They 
can put the gun to our head and say we have to pay this.” 
 
That, coupled with the delay in issuing tax notices which 
would result, caused (the) aldermen to decide on the letter 
instead, Campbell said, with the recommendation it also go 
to municipal delegates with the hope they send similar 
ones. He suggested waiting until Kindersley sees what sort 
of a response it receives. 
 
Ald. Bob McTaggart argued to send the division budget 
back. 
 
“The only way to draw attention to the problem is if 90 per 
cent of communities refuse to pass these budgets and force 
someone to come out, explain why we have to pass them, 
and slow the process down,” he said. “It’s not the school 
division’s fault. They don’t want to (raise mill rates). I 
think we’re supporting them by voting (the budget) down.” 
 
Other speakers in Outlook indicated that a senior education 
bureaucrat either didn’t know the facts on a couple of 
matters, including the length of time some students must 
spend on buses, or has deliberately misled municipal 
representatives in meetings. Wilkie Mayor Walter Lorenz 
said that after many meetings with provincial officials on 
some topics, “You get to a point with the bureaucracy that 
you have to go to the minister — or even the premier.” 
 
Gronning said that with about 80 per cent of school 
division costs used to pay teachers salaries, divisions with 
reduced foundation grants, which choose to cut services 
rather than increase the mill rate, may lay off teachers or 
close smaller schools. She . . . noted teacher salaries will 
increase this year, as teachers are presently in contract 
negotiations. 

 
Well, Mr. Chairman, the Premier is dead wrong. There is an 
increased cost because of his government’s failure to fund 
education that is currently being picked up by property 
taxpayers, and that will increase unless he makes a commitment 
to pick up future costs. 
 
Mr. Chair, I want to ask the Premier: Mr. Premier, many school 
divisions in Saskatchewan are already paying 100 per cent of 
the cost of education. How do you propose — if those costs 
increase following teachers’ salary negotiations — how do you 
propose that they would get even 1 cent of support from your 
provincial government since they’re already funding 100 per 
cent of the cost of education in their division? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, well now this is surprising 
because one can only conclude from the questioning by the 
Leader of the Opposition that he would now propose that the 
government change the foundation operating grant system. Is 
that what he is suggesting? That we should now change what 
has evolved and — through many years of practice and 
experience — proved to be a very effective funding formula for 
education, is he now proposing that that should be changed? 
 
That is exactly what’s behind his final question here. Otherwise, 
there’s no answer to his question. He knows that the grant will 
change because of enrolments. He knows that the grant is based 
on a fair, equitable, local resource base. 
 
(16:45) 
 
Is he proposing . . . Well the deputy leader over there, he should 
know something about this. He was a school trustee. Is he now 
recommending to his leader that we change the foundation 
operating grant? Because that’s what I’m hearing in the leader’s 
question. Well the . . . Let me just say this. We are not about — 
we are not about to change the foundation operating grant. 
We’re not about to do that. 
 
Now he wants to know again about funding to education. Well I 
remind him, in this budget year, against the opposition of this 
party, we are increasing, we are increasing funding to K to 12 
— K to 12 — by 7.2 per cent; to Learning by 7.2 per cent; 7.2 
per cent — well, well above the rate of inflation. This concludes 
three budget years since 1999 where we have now increased the 
funding to Education, now Learning, in this province by 20 per 
cent — 20 per cent since 1999. 
 
Now I ask again the Leader of the Opposition: he doesn’t want 
to talk about his future plans. Well let’s talk about the plan that 
he took to the people of Saskatchewan in the last election. Now 
what did the Leader of the Opposition — he can’t deny it — 
what did he say to the people of Saskatchewan in the last 
election? They would freeze, at the rate of inflation — freeze at 
the rate of inflation — funding to health and education. Freeze 
at the rate of inflation. 
 
Well I don’t know what the inflation rate has been since the last 
election, but let’s be generous, a total of 6 per cent — a total of 
6 per cent. That’s being generous. So where, I ask the Leader of 
the Opposition, would the school trustees be today if they’d 
have bought his plan which said freeze at the rate of inflation? 
They’d now be 14 per cent short in funding — 14 per cent 
short. That’s where they’d be if they bought the Saskatchewan 
Party plan. Well mercifully, they didn’t. 
 
And mercifully, we’ve had a Minister of Finance and Minister 
of Learning that has put together a financial package for the 
trustees of this province, for education in this province that has 
added 20 per cent new funding since 1999. The money is there, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’ve been good in the past in negotiating contracts and 
standing behind our contracts. We’ll stand on our record. We’ll 
stand on our record of funding increases to education. We’ll 
stand on the foundation operating grant principles. And we’ll 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2713 

 

stand with these negotiators who are working today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would remind the 
Premier that under an NDP government in the 1990s, they cut 
$350 million from education. They cut;, they didn’t even keep 
up with inflation. They actually cut $350 million from 
education and they threw that burden either on to property 
taxpayers or we saw a cutting of services in education. Those 
are the facts, Mr. Chairman, and the Premier chooses to be very 
selective in the way he deals with this issue. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Premier’s plan and his minister’s plan for 
education, is to see education decimated in this province with a 
decrease in enrolment of 35,000 people, 35,000 students by the 
end of this decade. 
 
That means the laying off of teachers under an NDP 
government; that means the closure of schools under an NDP 
government; and that means the depreciation of education under 
an NDP government. Mr. Speaker, the Premier and the NDP 
have failed education in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — To the Premier, I now would like to move 
on to the area of health care. Health care has always sort of been 
that feather in the hat of the NDP. They claim to be the 
champions of health care. 
 
But under an NDP government, we have a nursing crisis. We 
have the longest waiting lists in Canada. And we had a 
government that had so lost its way, it planned to increase 
long-term care fees by as much as 90 per cent, Mr. Speaker, and 
in a great deal of embarrassment after the province rose in 
uproar, they had to backtrack from that position. And they’re 
still paying a large political price for that act of aggression 
against seniors and people with disabilities. 
 
Mr. Chair, I want to ask the Premier: given recent reports that 
there is a nursing shortage in the province of Saskatchewan 
with the average age of nurses as significant, the fact that the 
number of seats set aside or designated for nursing is woefully 
inadequate under the NDP, how can he assure the people of 
Saskatchewan that they are going to have adequate health care 
under his government if we continue to see the number of 
nurses reduced and the opportunity for replacements to dissolve 
away? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
raised what is a very, very significant issue — a very, very 
significant issue for this province, the Department of Health, 
this government, for the communities of Saskatchewan. But not 
only for us, for health care across Canada. There isn’t a 
province in Canada who isn’t having to deal with — as the 
leader points out — the upcoming retirement of nurses, the 
shortage of nurses across Canada. This is by no means a 
province that’s unique to our province. That doesn’t make it any 
less important or doesn’t make us any less determined to make 
solution. 
 
Now I am also very proud of the fact, Mr. Chair, that we were 

able to negotiate a contract, a settlement, with the nurses of 
Saskatchewan — a contract and a settlement which the nurses 
of Saskatchewan have very, very clearly said is crucial and will 
be important in both retaining and attracting nurses to practise 
in Saskatchewan. Very proud of the fact that we were able to 
negotiate a settlement without a dispute, as we’ve seen in other 
jurisdictions. 
 
And it’s questionable that we’d have been able to do that again 
if we’d have taken the Saskatchewan Party policy and plan of 
freezing funding to health at the rate of inflation. I’m sure we’ll 
compare those numbers before the debate is over, but if we’d 
have used their plan to freeze the funding to health at the rate of 
inflation, I’m not sure that there’d have been any potential to 
get negotiated settlement with our nurses, never mind 
negotiated settlements with other extremely valuable health care 
providers in our province, whether they’re represented by 
Canadian Union of Public Employees or Service Employees 
International Union. Settlement with our doctors, physicians’ 
agreements — these are all very important to the stability of the 
system. 
 
Now in addition to recognizing the problem, recognizing that 
it’s not a problem only of Saskatchewan, recognizing the fact 
that we’ve come to negotiated settlement with a contract that 
the nurses themselves say will improve the opportunities for 
retention, we’ve introduced a plan — the Minister of Health has 
fully described it in this House — to improve the workplace for 
our nurses, to improve the training spaces in our province, to 
work in the development of nurse practitioners and the role of 
nursing; new bursary programs — $500,000 for a nursery . . . a 
nursing bursary program, increase in the number of nursing 
education seats across the province. Another $500,000 
committed to bursaries for previously licensed nurses to get the 
education they need to get back to work. We’ve implemented 
the principal nursing adviser position. We’ve established a 
provincial nursing council. Mr. Chair, I could go on and on. I 
know the minister has at length in the course of his estimates 
and the discussion around nursing in this House. 
 
The Leader of the Opposition raises a very significant issue. We 
are deeply committed to dealing with this issue in the context of 
Canada, but first of all in the context of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier 
acknowledges that other provinces are having similar problems 
and other provinces are dealing with that problem. We want to 
know what are you doing about the problem here. 
 
The fact is that if the current trends under your government 
continue, we will lose 140 nurses a year over the next 10 years. 
We have to replace, I believe, it’s about 4,000 nurses in the near 
future and we are short the seats of training. That means if we 
don’t increase the number of seats for training nurses in 
Saskatchewan, we’re going to have to buy them — for lack of a 
better term — from other provinces or other countries. 
 
We’re going to have to have some plan in place to compensate 
for the huge loss in nursing staff that we expect to occur over 
the next few years. It’s not good enough for the Premier to say 
yes, this is a big problem. That’s exactly the response the NDP 



2714 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

proposed for the agriculture problems we faced. This is a big 
problem. 
 
But by failing to deal with it when other provinces did deal with 
it, we became more exposed and we became more vulnerable. 
Now there’s an agriculture problem in Alberta and there’s an 
agriculture problem in Ontario, but they’re dealing with it and 
their productivity levels are higher and their incomes are higher 
in other provinces because their provincial governments dealt 
with the challenges facing agriculture. 
 
They’re miles ahead of Saskatchewan. They have better safety 
net programs in other provinces. They have more diversification 
in other provinces because the province, because other 
provinces recognized that they had a responsibility. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan we’re going down the exact same path 
when it comes to health care. We’re saying we have a problem, 
other provinces have a problem, but we don’t propose . . . And 
when I say we I’m talking about the NDP government over 
there; I don’t want to be a part of it. I shouldn’t say we. You are 
taking Saskatchewan down a road of potential health care 
disaster. Not only are we going to be short nurses. If current 
trends continue, we won’t have enough doctors to provide 
adequate doctoring care in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So what does the Premier say to the citizens of Saskatchewan 
who are worried about the fact that the province is losing nurses 
and doctors and other health care professionals, and they almost 
stand alone in not putting forward a plan to reverse this 
problem? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Well, Mr. Chair, I’ll be very interested 
the next time the Leader of the Opposition’s on his face . . . on 
his feet — sorry, on his feet — to explain exactly to this House 
and to the people of Saskatchewan which province of Canada is 
doing so well. Which provinces? He claims there are provinces 
doing so much better. And I’d like him just to stand up in the 
next answer and tell us just exactly which provinces. Which are 
they? 
 
Now he wants to know what we’re doing about this. Well then 
I’ll tell him what we’re doing about it. And I’m sure the 
minister . . . I’m sure the member from Rosthern will be very 
. . . Mr. Chair, the member from Rosthern is very agitated from 
his seat. I don’t know why he gets so agitated. 
 
Mr. Chair, since 1999 we have established a $500,000 nursing 
bursary program for students in LPN (licensed practical nurse), 
RPN (registered psychiatric nurse), and RN (registered nurse) 
program. We’ve increased the number of nursing education 
seats right across the province. We’ve provided $500,000 for 
bursaries to help previously licensed nurses get their education 
they need to return to work. 
 
Who did that? Who did that? Did the Sask Party do that? No, 
no. 
 
Since 1999 we have implemented the principal nursing adviser 
position. Since 1999 we have established a Provincial Nursing 
Council. And in 2001 — get this — in 2001 we provided 
$700,000 for projects related to quality workplaces, 
casualization, and preceptoring of students. 

Mr. Chair, since 1999, working directly to the retention and 
recruitment of health care providers, we have established a 
Health Human Resources Council. Who did that? The Minister 
of Health, the Department of Health, the Government of 
Saskatchewan, the coalition Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Chair, over these years we have worked with the SRNA 
(Saskatchewan Registered Nurses’ Association) and the 
Nursing Education Program of Saskatchewan to develop 
expanded education options for the nursing program. We have 
continued our contract with Lifestream Development Services 
to participate in recruiting activities on our behalf. We are 
recruiting across the country, across the world. 
 
We have supported the efforts of our health districts — and 
these are not to be overlooked — we have supported the efforts 
of our health districts for their own campaign to recruit nurses 
into service in Saskatchewan. 
 
We have advertised nationally and internationally for nurses. 
We recently launched a new advertising campaign, both 
in-province and across Canada, where we are promoting 
Saskatchewan as a place to live and work and exercise the 
career in health care, the caring career of nursing. 
 
(17:00) 
 
It’s difficult when you’ve got such a negative group of folks 
across the way to attract people, but there we are. We’ve signed 
an MOU (memorandum of understanding) with the SIFC 
(Saskatchewan Indian Federated College), with the University 
of Saskatchewan, with SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology), with the Northern 
Inter-Tribal Health Authority, with post-secondary . . . with 
Learning, to offer northern health services . . . sciences access 
program in Prince Albert. The Health department itself 
provided $200,000 for the development of this program. 
 
We’ve signed an MOU with the very same list of partners to 
development a northern nursing program in Prince Albert to 
begin this fall, 2002, where we’re training nurses for northern 
Saskatchewan where some of the most difficult retention and 
recruitment issues have been faced. 
 
We’ve provided $37,000 in 2001 to fund the northern access 
program for nursing here in Regina. And we announced — get 
this, Mr. Chair — $3 million additional, $3 million additional 
funding for the retaining, recruiting, and training of health care 
providers. 
 
Mr. Chair, we have a plan. We have a plan to address the 
shortages. We have a plan to recruit and retain. The Leader of 
the Opposition says that he has a plan. I ask him to add to this 
plan. What would he have us do? What would he have us do? 
Would he have us take his party policy position and freeze the 
funding to health care at the rate of inflation, or has he now 
rejected that policy? Would he please answer that question? 
Would he have us freeze the level of funding at the rate of 
inflation, as he said in the last election, or has he reversed that 
position? What specific programs can he offer the people of 
Saskatchewan to recruit and retain public health nurses, nurses 
in the hospitals, nurses in the home care? 
 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2715 

 

Mr. Chair, and I asked him earlier today, and maybe it is now 
the hour where he will finally volunteer, does he share the view 
of his member from Weyburn? Does he share the view of the 
member from Weyburn who says that from her point of view — 
I can quote the quote — from her point of view we should 
welcome private hospitals, private clinics, into the health care 
system of Saskatchewan? Does he share the view that for-profit, 
private hospitals have a role to play in the future of 
Saskatchewan health care? Is that his plan to address health care 
in this province? 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s obvious from 
the Premier’s questions that he has a strong desire to become 
the leader of the opposition, and we’ll do our very best to make 
that dream come true for the Premier. 
 
I’ve already told the Premier, but he wasn’t listening, that the 
Saskatchewan Party has a plan to build a health science centre 
at the U of S (University of Saskatchewan) that would train 
additional health care workers. He didn’t seem to hear. He 
never seems to hear what the Saskatchewan Party says. 
 
I want to tell the Premier about an incident that happened a few 
months ago. We talked about our plan to grow Saskatchewan 
and a fourth year nursing grad contacted me and said, you have 
a plan to grow Saskatchewan; I want to hear about that plan 
because I want to tell you what we’re planning — and she was 
talking about her nursing graduation class — I want to tell you 
what we’re planning to do under the NDP government. She said 
there are about 100 . . . It was less than 100, but it was between 
50 and 100 students in that particular class and that was half of 
the total that were involved in that segment of the education. 
She said three . . . at least three-quarters of us, upon graduation 
within a year, will leave the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
She said, she said when the nursing recruiters come to the U of 
S, she said the nurses in Saskatchewan who are part of this 
recruiting team, they tell us the way it is. They tell us the 
conditions are not very good in Saskatchewan. 
 
They just came out of negotiations, of course as you know, Mr. 
Premier, a couple of years ago, where an NDP government not 
only imposed back-to-work legislation on the nurses, but 
actually imposed a contract through legislation. You talk about 
abusing the collective bargaining process. There is no bigger 
example of abuse than that NDP government over there. 
 
Mr. Premier, you offended the nurses to the point where they’re 
not even encouraging nursing graduates to seriously consider 
pursuing a profession in the province of Saskatchewan. 
Meantime, recruiters were coming to the U of S from Alberta 
and from other parts of Canada and the United States and they 
were telling nursing grads, come to our province and we’ll pay 
you a signing bonus; come to our hospital and we will . . . we 
will pay your moving expenses; and come to our jurisdiction 
and we have a better contract than you will find in the province 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
And obviously, Mr. Premier, many, many nurses were weighing 
the options between health-care-unfriendly Saskatchewan and 
other jurisdictions that were making better offers. And 
three-quarters of these nursing grads — and we don’t have 
enough to begin with to meet the need — but three-quarters of 

these nursing grads were making plans to leave the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I know existing nurses who have left. There’s a nurse from I 
believe it was the community of Outlook that’s currently 
practising her profession in Minnesota or Wisconsin, and she is 
encouraging other nurses to leave Saskatchewan and go to that 
American state because she said we’re treated better here than 
we are in our home province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Premier, the result of this lack of attention to health care 
and this failure to meet the demands and needs of health care 
are causing us to have some of the longest waiting lists in 
Canada. And this is causing people to hurt — people that I 
know, that have talked to me, that cannot get the health care 
they need and have no prospects of getting the care they need 
for months and months, and sometimes even years. 
 
Mr. Premier, what are you saying to the people of 
Saskatchewan who see health care deteriorating around them 
because you’re not training enough nurses, you’re not providing 
a climate that they want to practise in, and health care waiting 
lists are getting so long that they’re beyond reason? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, according to the Leader of the 
Opposition the entire health care policy of the Saskatchewan 
Party is to build the new health sciences building in Saskatoon. 
That’s the entire health care policy, unbelievably, of the 
Saskatchewan Party. 
 
I wonder, Mr. Chair, if he has done any consultation with the 
University of Saskatchewan or the College of Medicine around 
this health sciences building that he proposes. If that’s the only 
policy that the Saskatchewan Party has with health, then I 
wonder if he’s even consulted with the medical school and the 
University of Saskatchewan . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . You 
have. Well that’s interesting, because . . . He claims that he has. 
Well we’ll have to . . . we’ll have to test that. 
 
Mr. Chair, I have here the very, very recent Maclean’s 
magazine that . . . front cover, the question is asked, where we 
get the best health care in Canada. Where do we get the best 
health care in Canada? In the group of communities that have 
medical schools, where do you get the best health care in 
Canada? Well I admit, number one: Edmonton, Alberta. 
Number two: Saskatoon, Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Now I know, you know, they’ll almost 
say or do anything to try and gain a little political advantage. 
How did we get to a circumstance where health care in Canada 
is better in Saskatoon than in London, Ontario, Calgary, 
Alberta, Toronto, Hamilton, Quebec City, Ottawa, Winnipeg, 
Vancouver, Montreal, Sherbrooke, Halifax, Kingston, and St. 
John’s? How did we get to this circumstance? 
 
Well we got to this circumstance perhaps beginning as early as 
1944, where the government of this province made a 
commitment to publicly funded, publicly administered health 
care in this province. Now it took, Mr. Chair, 20-some years — 
it took 20-some years for the government of that time to realize 
the dream of publicly funded medicare in this province. 



2716 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

This year, Mr. Chair, we celebrate the 40th anniversary of the 
founding of medicare in this province. 
 
What we have is a group of men and women sitting across from 
us today who promote the doctrines of privatized health care. 
There is no doubt about that. I can quote their own members 
who promote the doctrines of privatized health care. 
 
They say they would improve health care. They say they would 
take us from the number two position in Canada. Fair enough, 
tell us how. And it’s not by building just one educational 
institution. 
 
I’ll tell you what they’re about. They’re about the privatization 
of health care, there is no doubt about that. They’re about the 
introduction of private hospitals into our system. No doubt 
they’re about the introduction of user fees into this system. 
 
Mr. Chair, how other can they explain their own position? They 
say that you can improve health care by keeping the public 
funding to health care frozen at the rate of inflation. They say 
they can do that. They say that you can come to contractual 
arrangements with your nurses, with your doctors, with your 
health care providers by freezing the public funding at the rate 
of inflation. They say they can do that. 
 
They say they can build hospitals all over Saskatchewan. They 
say they can do that by freezing the funding at the rate of 
inflation. It’s ridiculous, Mr. Chair, it’s ridiculous. 
 
We know that health care costs in Canada are a challenge to 
every government. We know the rate of inflation in health care 
is much higher than the rate of inflation in the general economy. 
How can they claim that they can improve health care by 
freezing the funding to health care at the rate of inflation? 
 
There’s only one way — there is only one way — you ask the 
client of health care, you ask the patient, to pay. That’s how you 
do it. That’s how you do it. And you take services out of the 
public sector and transfer them directly into the private sector. 
 
If they deny it then explain how you intend, Mr. Leader of the 
Opposition, how you would have intended had ever been 
elected, to fund health care at the rate of inflation and retain 
nurses, and grow the supply of health care providers, and build 
a health sciences building, and build and maintain hospitals? 
How would you have done it? 
 
You don’t have an answer, because if you’d have had an answer 
you’d have appeared at the Romanow Commission and shared 
your answer with the rest of Canadians. No you do not have an 
answer that you’re very proud of unless that answer is, as some 
of your members are willing to volunteer, it’s the matter of 
privatization of health care and, Mr. Chair, they cannot deny it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well for a time 
under the NDP government, if it wasn’t for the increased share 
of federal funding for health care, they would have been below 
the rate of inflation. 
 
The Premier again is not being level. He is not talking the 

straight goods with the people of Saskatchewan. He is talking 
about a level of delivery that we would have brought forth 
that’s higher than what he delivered himself, for heaven’s sake. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — And the thing, Mr. Chair, is that the 
people of Saskatchewan are starting to realize that the Premier’s 
words just don’t add up to what’s actually happening in this 
province, and that’s why he’s trailing in the polls and that’s 
why he’s going to be swept out of office in the next election. 
 
Mr. Chairman, the Premier just acknowledged . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. Hon. members, would you 
please come to order. Order. Would you please come to order, 
hon. members. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. The Premier 
quoted from some information that said some health care 
provider outside Saskatchewan has the best care in Canada, I 
think in a province that doesn’t have an NDP government. And 
he’s showing it to me. It’s from Maclean’s. So that means that 
governments other than NDP governments are able to provide 
the best health care in Canada. I hope he realizes that. 
 
Now I talked to a former doctor, a leading doctor who was 
formerly associated with the College of Medicine at the U of S. 
And he talked about the outstanding health care performance 
that was delivered in the city of Saskatoon. He happens to be 
. . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order. I’m having difficulty hearing the 
Hon. Leader of the Opposition from members that are speaking 
overtop of him. So would hon. members please come to order 
and stay in order. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. There is a doctor, a 
retired doctor, who was involved with the College of Medicine 
who resides in the member for Saskatoon Nutana’s riding. And 
he shared with me that he hopes that we soon replace the NDP 
government because he said the folks that are holding the 
College of Medicine together are doing it in spite of this 
government, not because of it. 
 
He acknowledged the fine work that they had done and he had 
had a hand in shaping the College of Medicine and making it 
what it is. But he said the struggles that the college has faced in 
recent years because of lack of attention and lack of funding 
from the NDP government is appalling, and he said it won’t 
hold together much longer unless we have a change of 
government. 
 
So what that means, Mr. Chair, is that if our current Premier 
stays in office we could actually lose the College of Medicine in 
Saskatoon. 
 
I want to move on to another area because time is slipping 
away. I want to talk a little bit about the issue of gaming and the 
issue of the new SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority) agreement that was signed just recently. The 
Government of Saskatchewan just recently signed a new 
gaming agreement for our province with SIGA for 25 years. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2717 

 

Twenty-five-year agreements just aren’t signed any more. Why 
did the Premier allow this agreement to be signed for such a 
long period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, before we just walk easily 
away from the health care debate, the Leader of the Opposition 
says that the College of Medicine has endured a lack of funding 
over the last several years. Again he will not answer the 
question. 
 
He simply refuses to stand up even for his own party. Well the 
member from Estevan says it’s up to . . . to answer the 
questions. That’s exactly what I’m doing. I’ll answer the 
questions about the behaviour of government. But don’t you 
think, Mr. Chair, don’t you think the people of Saskatchewan 
deserve an opposition who’s willing to stand behind even their 
own policies made public. 
 
He went out . . . They went out in the last election campaign — 
I remember it well — he was on television saying that the 
answer to health care is to freeze the funding at the rate of 
inflation. What is, what is . . . the Popsicle party some people 
say. They’re going to freeze it at the rate of inflation. 
 
He then comes into this House knowing the kind of increases 
that we’ve put into the funding of health over these past years 
— eight point some per cent in this year alone if I’m not 
mistaken, eight point some per cent in this year alone. For 
health care, for health care, 8.2 or so this year alone. 
 
An Hon. Member: — 6.8. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — 6.8 this year — sorry — 6.8 this year. 
Now the Leader of the Opposition would have frozen it. Well 
what’s the rate of inflation this year? One? One? Two to be 
generous. Two to be generous. 
 
So if we’d have ever made the tragic mistake of electing that 
group of men and women to govern, this year’s increase to the 
Department of Health would have been at best 2 per cent. And 
then they have the gall to stand in here and say, but you’re not 
funding health enough. 
 
I don’t understand the logic, Mr. Chair. I don’t believe the 
people of Saskatchewan understand the logic. Unless, as I 
assume, the way you find new money for health care is to take 
it directly from the patient, directly from the client, in a 
pay-for-use operation. 
 
Well, there’s the member from Weyburn back. Well that’s very 
good because she’s the very one that stands up in the public and 
says, I think we should have privatized health care in 
Saskatchewan. And if she’s anxious, I’ll bring out her quotes. 
It’s very good to have her contributing from her seat. Perhaps 
she’d like to stand on her feet and contribute to this debate. 
 
Now you know, you know, Mr. Chair, the members opposite 
have many, many questions. I wish they had the courage to get 
on their feet and ask them. The member from Indian Head, I’d 
like to know his position on private hospitals. We already know 
the position of the member from Weyburn. I think we know the 
position of the member from Wood River. It’d be interesting to 
see what the position of the member from Indian Head is on 

private hospitals. Does he have the view that the private . . . that 
the hospital in Indian Head should be owned by a private 
corporation? Is that his view? 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. Order. I 
recognize . . . Order. Would the member . . . Order. Would the 
member for Rosthern please come to order. Order. I recognize 
the Premier. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Chair, the Leader of the Opposition 
asked some questions about the gaming agreement signed with 
the FSIN. I think his question at the end was: why would we 
sign a 25-year agreement? We would sign a 25-year agreement 
because of the respect that we have for the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, for the job that we know that 
they’re going to do over the life of this contract. 
 
You’ll know, Mr. Chair, that there are many contractual 
obligations that we enter into as individuals that will extend 20 
and 25 years. There are a significant number of contractual 
obligations the government will enter into for 20 and 25 years. 
There are agreements that we will enter into with peoples that 
will extend far beyond 25 years. 
 
We believe in the partnership that has been achieved with the 
federation, with the people of Saskatchewan, for this industry in 
this province. I count this again as one of the substantive 
accomplishments of this session. And as a result of it, I believe 
the people of Saskatchewan can be confident, can be confident 
in a well-managed gaming casino industry operated in 
partnership with the FSIN. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Well, Mr. Premier, 
just getting back to the issue of policy and standing for what 
you believe, in the last election in . . . in the last general election 
in which you didn’t run — I believe you were a person behind 
the scenes helping engineer the NDP campaign — the 
Saskatchewan Party ran on a platform and on policy positions 
and won the popular vote. The NDP ran on a smear campaign 
and lost and had to form a coalition with the Liberals to form 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Meanwhile, when it comes to health care, 
the Premier stands in his seat and makes all kinds of unfounded 
accusations against the Saskatchewan Party while he, as the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, tries to gouge seniors of their life 
savings and all of their earnings through 90 per cent increase in 
long-term care fees. 
 
That is one of the most despicable actions I’ve ever seen on the 
part of a premier of Saskatchewan. Had it not been for the 
opposition and for the uprising of the Saskatchewan people, he 
would have got away with it, Mr. Chairman. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Chairman, the Premier who helped 
engineer a smear campaign in an election, the Premier who tried 
to take away seniors’ entire life savings, has no business 



2718 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

whatsoever lecturing the opposition on health care policy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, that Premier should be 
ashamed of himself. That Premier needs to get up and answer 
for his government. He needs to answer for his record. He needs 
to act like a premier, not like the Leader of the Opposition. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, the Premier said — 
and let’s get back to the issue of gaming — the Premier said 
that a 25-year agreement is a good thing. He says he just thinks 
that everything is going to work out fine. 
 
That is another indication of a weak leader. A weak leader 
would sign a 25-year agreement rather than putting forward an 
agreement of a reasonable length of time that demands that 
things be done right so that they can be successfully renewed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chairman, the Premier also agreed to this 
25-year agreement while his Justice department was not 
prepared to bring forth a police investigation that reported on 
some of the problems that SIGA and his government had had 
under the previous agreement. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, we have anticipated that that would be 
released in the proper time — that would have been released 
before the signing of the new agreement. It’s actually not fair to 
SIGA and to FSIN to not release the results of that agreement, 
or that investigation, before the new agreement was signed. 
 
It looks like cover-up. It looks like lack of accountability on the 
part of his government. Perhaps he’s again protecting some of 
his colleagues on his side, as he has in the past, from proper 
scrutiny. It leaves more questions unanswered that shouldn’t 
have to be unanswered. 
 
So I ask the Premier: why would he show such poor judgment, 
sign a 25-year agreement — agreement that’s far too long — 
before the police investigation is made public and proper 
actions can be taken because of wrongdoing on the part of his 
government just as much as on the part of SIGA? Why has he 
been so irresponsible? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Chair, the Leader of 
the Opposition, when he attended the Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations, in that forum he stood up and he 
praised the FSIN and SIGA for addressing the governance 
challenges of their authority. He praised them. 
 
Then he has his MLAs stand up in this House questioning them 
on a daily basis. Now the member from Wood River asks 
exactly the right question: what is wrong with that? When 
you’ve got the leader of the party saying one thing in the 
context of the FSIN and the rest of the party in the legislature 
saying something quite different, I don’t think it’s very hard to 
answer the question, what’s wrong with that. 
 
I’ll tell you, it’s the height of hypocrisy, that’s what it is. 

You’ve got the leader trying to pretend that they’re supportive 
of the First Nations people, and supportive of the First Nations 
people involvement in gaming when we know doggone well 
they don’t support them. That they come into this House, and 
through innuendo and question would challenge the First 
Nations people of gaming. And they know it. They know what 
they’re doing. And that’s what’s wrong. That’s what’s wrong 
with it. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Chair, they’ve been caught. They’ve 
been caught because here it is, here’s the kind of headlines: 
“Sask Party flip-flops on the casino talks.” It’s one position here 
and one position over here. He says . . . he says that he accepts 
they’ve made improvements in governance. He praises them. 
But then he says to me right now we should not sign a 25-year 
agreement. We should not do that because, he implies, there’s 
something wrong. 
 
Mr. Chair, we respect our Aboriginal brothers and sisters and 
neighbours in this province, and we will work with them as we 
have in the past, and we will work with them in the present, and 
we will work them in the future, whether it’s in gaming, 
whether it’s in education, whether it’s in health care or 
self-governance. 
 
And it may very well be, it may very well be that the First 
Nations of Saskatchewan are going to listen very, very carefully 
to their chiefs. Here is the comment from one of the chiefs of 
the First Nation on this party’s position on gaming, quote: 
 

It seems to me every one of these people (Sask Party 
MLAs) have a different line, a different story to tell. If 
Hermanson is the premier-in-waiting, he should bring his 
people into line. 

 
Mr. Chair, invite the member from Wood River to get on his 
feet, ask the questions from his feet, and I’ll be very, very glad 
to get him on the record. 
 
What is the position of the Saskatchewan Party when it comes 
to First Nations and gaming? In fact what is the position of the 
Saskatchewan Party when it comes to working with First 
Nations people generally? 
 
The position of this government is to work with our First 
Nations brothers and sisters and neighbours in partnership. 
That’s what we’ve done. I and this government are very proud 
of a 25-year agreement negotiated, signed, that will take us 
forward in that aspect of First Nations activity and in many 
aspects of the life of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move the committee report 
progress and, as agreed, move to Labour estimates. 
 
 (17:30) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2719 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like to introduce a gentleman 
in the Speaker’s gallery by the name of Ken Finlynson. He is a 
constituent of mine. He lives near the Battlefords. I’d like to 
welcome you to the House today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the minister to introduce her 
officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Seated 
to my right is John Boyd, acting deputy minister; directly 
behind John is Dawn McKibben, director of human resources 
and administration; and sitting behind the bar is Glen McRorie, 
acting executive director, labour services division; also Jan Joel, 
acting director, Status of Women office. Then we have Allan 
Walker, executive director, occupational health and safety 
division; Pat Parenteau, policy analyst from the Department of 
Labour; and Gail Kruger, vice-president, budget and finance, 
Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like to thank the minister and 
welcome her officials to the legislature today. This is the fourth 
time that we have met in estimates. 
 
I have in my hands approximately 300 petitions, signatures on 
petitions from the Voice of the Blue Rose Advocacy and I was 
unable to present them in the legislature because the wording 
wasn’t quite right. So I’d like to present these petitions to the 
minister this evening. They’re from people that are concerned 
about citizens that have been cut off WCB (Workers’ 
Compensation Board) and SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) benefits. 
 
Also the other item I’d like to discuss with the minister is a 
letter I just received, and I’d just like to read a bit of it. The 
letter says: 
 

As (I) requested . . . (in) writing . . . in hope that you will be 
able to find . . . (some way) I have been refused access to 
my W.C.B file. 

 
And it goes on to say that she’s given written permission from 
an advocate to access this file. And the file has been given in 
part to this person, but a large part of it has been blocked out 
and much of it is missing. And she says the information from 
the doctor is missing from the file and so on. 
 
I would like to also send a copy of this letter to the minister, but 
could you . . . I’d like to ask the minister, what is the 
government’s position on requests for their files from WCB? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I’d like to thank the member 

opposite for the petitions on behalf of Blue Rose Advocacy and 
also the letter. A client has access to their complete file but it 
has to be a written request to the board. But they have access to 
their complete file. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. In that letter — you haven’t had a 
chance to read it of course, I understand that — but they have 
written in writing to access the file and they received parts of 
the file. The problem is that it’s incomplete and portions of it is 
blacked out. So I was wondering . . . You know, technically 
they did receive the file. They just don’t have all the complete 
information in the file and parts of it have been blocked out. 
And I was just wondering if . . . is that standard procedure of 
the department and Workers’ Comp? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, to the member opposite, it’s 
. . . when you look at the WCB deals with about 38,000 cases in 
a year, it’s pretty tough to comment on one individual case. So 
if you can pass over any information we can look into it further 
for you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Well thank you. That’s really the intent of the 
letter and I’ll leave that with you. If you could look after this 
situation . . . The person has given the WCB client number as 
well as her phone number and address, if you would look into 
that. 
 
At this time I’d like to turn over questioning to my colleague. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Madam Minister, and to 
your officials, I have a number of questions on what area . . . 
the area that used to be the Women’s Secretariat. And I received 
the global information from your department earlier and they 
talked about . . . I think it’s 11.5 employees that were in that 
department and yet when I look through the actual personnel 
report I see names that I don’t believe I . . . were part of the 
secretariat. Can you explain to me why there is . . . why these 
people are listed in the globals as members of the . . . working 
for the Women’s Secretariat? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Sorry for the length of time. I’m trying 
to figure out how the best way to explain this. 
 
But with the Women’s Secretariat changing and moving as a 
unit within the Department of Labour, with the structure 
change, these positions . . . some were maintained, some were 
posted, and we’re in the process right now of filling the vacant 
positions and establishing the unit within the Department of 
Labour. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, there’s 11.5 personnel that 
were employed, I believe your globals say, as of March 31. And 
when I look through the information I see that there is a 
gentleman who is on your personnel report, a senior ministerial 
assistant — I don’t even see the deputy minister. And I believe 
earlier, just before the budget came down, there was a lady that 
had been appointed as the deputy minister of the Women’s 
Secretariat. I don’t see her name on this information sheet. I 
don’t know where that person has gone to. 
 
And the 11.5 people that were basically let go when the 
secretariat was moved into the Department of Labour as of 
budget day they, unless somebody filled in for them overnight, 



2720 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

they should . . . there shouldn’t have been anybody there, I 
believe. 
 
Can you please clarify the number of personnel that was in the 
Women’s Secretariat position as of March 31? 
 
(17:45) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you very much for your patience, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
As of March 31 of this year, there was 11.5 FTEs (full-time 
equivalents). Two of those positions were vacant and there was 
one that was off on . . . it was an educational leave. It’s not 
positive as to the type of the leave, but we think it was an 
educational leave. 
 
Moving into the new structure, into the Status of Women office 
within the Department of Labour, there is a director position, 
senior policy analyst, a pay equity policy analyst, and also a 
senior administrative assistant. So those four positions were 
moved over from the Women’s Secretariat. Plus there was a 
communications person from the Women’s Secretariat that was 
moved into the Department of Labour’s communication branch. 
And also a position from the secretariat that was absorbed into 
our . . . or administration within the Department of Labour. 
 
Also when we look at the . . . the deputy minister of the 
Women’s Secretariat has moved into Executive Council. And 
that is part of the overall strategy of the changes in the 
Women’s Secretariat, that along with the advisers and policy 
analysts within . . . that have been designated within each of the 
departments, we also have Joan Pederson that is in Exec 
Council and also serves that role at that level. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So there are five 
women that have moved from the Women’s Secretariat into the 
women . . . status of women area within the Department of 
Labour from what you just told me. 
 
But, Madam Minister, many of us are aware of the fact that as 
of budget day I believe there was eight or nine people were 
basically sent home with pay for 60 days until they — or laid 
off — until a position could be found for them within Public 
Service Commission. And I think as of today there’s still four 
of those people that are actually on a contingency layoff right 
now or are waiting for another position to be filled. 
 
So there are . . . you’ve hired new people to take . . . some new 
people to take the place of some of the people that were in the 
secretariat. Other people have been shuffled around. And we are 
actually paying through your department for a number of people 
to be staying home, waiting for a job . . . a position to come up 
for them. Is that correct? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There is a couple of positions that are 
still going through the hiring process, and there is still some 
positions that are going through the bumping process and 
looking for appropriate positions. I’m not sure if the definite 
number is four in our department, but there is still some from 
the Women’s Secretariat that are in that process of finding a 
spot. 
 

Ms. Draude: — Madam Minister, so there’s four or five people 
that have been paid since budget day, March 27, and they were 
laid off at that time. So how much money has been spent by 
your department for people who have basically been home since 
budget day? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — First off, just a couple of comments in 
clarification. As soon as budget day came those people were not 
laid off. There was a period of transition where the Women’s 
Secretariat carried on. They didn’t move, physically move, into 
the Department of Labour until — it was later on in April, 
towards the end of April — by the time the space was 
rearranged for them to move in and the shifting was done. 
 
So it wasn’t like budget day the job’s ended. There was that 
transition period that has carried on. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Okay then, defining it in a different way, there 
are some people who had to . . . weren’t actually working 
within the building until the transition period was . . . until the 
actual locations for them were set out and a job description was 
fulfilled. But they were paid even though they weren’t working. 
How many of those employees are we talking about, and how 
much money did it cost us, and is it still costing us for people 
who are either stayed home during that time or are still at home 
right now? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — To the member opposite, I don’t have a 
breakdown of that right now. And we would have to look at 
notice, when notice was given, severance, all the other things 
that go along with the agreements that they would have been 
working under. But I can get that information for you and pass 
it along to you. 
 
But I don’t . . . We have yearly salaries but we don’t have it 
broken down here with us. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Madam Minister. It’s an issue that 
I know you’re aware of because it’s in the news right now and 
there’s a number of people discussing how many people are 
actually at home and being paid. So tomorrow we have the end 
of Executive Council and I’m sure that the information could be 
available and I’ll have our leader ask the Premier that 
tomorrow. 
 
And just one other issue. I’m very hopeful that the people that 
are still maintained within the Status of Women have the 
training and the education that goes along with gender equity 
and goes along with the issues that are going to be affecting 
women of this province. And I’m sure that when this 
department was put together, it was put together in a way that 
these issues are going to be at the forefront and that was the 
important part of issues in your mind when the plan was 
developed. 
 
So maybe when you’re getting this information, you could also 
tell me the names of the people that are there and what their 
qualifications are. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — We’ll try and have this ready for 
estimates tomorrow afternoon, for Executive Council. 
 
And I just want to say to the member, it’s not quite as cut and 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2721 

 

dried. We always try and give consideration. Many of these 
employees are long term, have been with the Secretariat for a 
while. So there’s always consideration given that we are placing 
them in a job that is appropriate and try and make the best 
match possible for their skills and the jobs that are available. So 
it’s not always a quick process. 
 
But thank you for the questions and we’ll get the information 
for you for tomorrow. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, to the minister. Since 
The Construction Industry Labour Relations Amendment Act, 
2000 came into force, how many workers of non-union 
construction companies have been forced to pay union dues? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — None would be forced that I know of. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Chair, well I understand that the whole 
point of the labour relations amendment Act was to make 
employees that were not unionized have to pay union dues and 
follow the union contracts. So I am surprised. I find that 
difficult to believe that there were none. Any company that was 
bidding on any jobs, on a Crown job, that was not unionized 
would . . . the employees would have to pay the union dues 
accordingly, unless you’re saying that no non-unionized 
company got any construction jobs. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The CCTA (Crown Construction 
Tendering Agreement) is gone, so that no longer exists. And 
The Construction Industry Labour Relations Act that was 
amended last year, the changes that were made that did away 
with double breasting of companies and spinoff companies, 
there is a number of those applications that are currently before 
the LRB (Labour Relations Board). But to my understanding 
the companies would be as is or as they were previously 
because there hasn’t been any decisions come forward that I’m 
currently aware of from the LRB. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — The budget of the labour support service has 
increased dramatically. Going back to ’98-99, it was 1.67 
million; ’99-2000, 1.941 million; 2000-2001, 2.315 million; and 
estimated this coming year, 2.507 million. Why are the . . . has 
that budget been increased so dramatically? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There’s no significant additions or any 
functions that were taken away from labour support services 
during the first couple of years that you had mentioned. So that 
would account, increases in salary. I mean there may be some 
minor staffing changes in there but nothing major. 
 
In the last budget, the last budget year, it would have been the 
bringing in of the Women’s Secretariat into the Status of 
Women office because that’s the category that they would fall 
under. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Mr. Chair, to the 
minister, the number of employees in ’98-99 was 26. In 
’99-2000, 27; and 2000 to 2001, 29.5. I was wondering, has the 
introduction of The Construction Industry Labour Relations 
Amendment Act have anything to do with the increased number 
of employees in the labour support services? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — No, nothing to do with it at all. 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, what 
policy does the government follow for construction 
procurement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — That would be a question that you would 
have to address to the minister of SPMC (Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation). 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Madam . . . to the minister, through the Chair, 
do you have the information on the fee schedules concerning 
tendering? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I’m a little bit surprised here. The 
Department of Labour really works in the regulatory area and 
OH&S (occupational health and safety), that type of thing. But 
when it gets into procurement and tendering through the 
government and through the arms of government, you would 
have to direct those questions to the Minister Responsible for 
Saskatchewan Property Management. That’s where it would be 
handled. 
 
(18:00) 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the minister: how many court 
cases are there pending right now concerning applications, well 
over the whole issue of The Construction Industry Labour 
Relations Amendment Act? I understand there is some legal 
action being taken concerning the Act. And I was wondering is 
the minister aware of how many and what is the intent of these 
court actions? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — There is no court cases that I know of. 
But there is seven applications before the LRB right now, the 
Labour Relations Board, but no court cases as your question 
asked. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I’d like to turn my next question to 
Workers’ Compensation Board. As we know there is a $69 
million actuarial adjustment made. I would just like to ask the 
minister, how is the WCB planning to replenish the injury fund 
that was depleted by last year’s actuarial adjustment? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — The shortfall that occurred last year, the 
$55.8 million, the . . . and also accounted for in . . . with the loss 
in investment revenue, and the $69 million actuarial adjustment 
which were covered out of the injury fund and the economic 
stabilization fund. There’s still 50 million in the stabilization 
fund and we’re keeping close tabs on this year how things are 
progressing. 
 
We’re just barely out of or coming to the end of the second 
quarter. So what we’re going to have to do is wait until later in 
the summer and early in the fall, that’s when the calculations 
are done, to see if there will be a need for any increases or not. 
The board has made a commitment that there will be no 
mid-term or mid-year premium adjustments in 2002. They will 
stay as is. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — What is the minimum amount of money that is 
. . . that is needed to . . . Well obviously, there’s none left in the 
injury fund, but what is the minimum amount of money that has 
to be kept in those associated funds to keep the WCB in 
operation? 



2722 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, the reserve funds — and there 
is a few of them — through the legislation it’s left to the board 
to determine the amounts that are kept in each reserve fund. So 
it’s board policy that regulates those, and they each have a 
different formula that they follow or different percentage that 
they keep in there depending on the reason for that fund. The 
only requirements by the legislation is that the WCB remain 
100 per cent funded for future liabilities or liabilities in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Well the injury fund is zero now, 
so I don’t know what the board policy is on the minimum 
amount that has to be kept in that fund because it is zero. The 
other item, what this all speaks to, is the distinct possibility of 
major increases in premiums to the employers who fund WCB. 
And the CEO (chief executive officer), Peter Federko, has told 
the CFIB (Canadian Federation of Independent Business) that 
business owners can expect a double digit increase in premiums 
next year. He’s on record saying that. Just like the minister’s 
comment on that. 
 
Given the circumstances of what’s been happening, how could 
there not be increases in WCB premiums and also taking into 
account the effects of Bill 52 which will add extra cost to 
WCB? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Chair, I know going through the 
material that we have it’s really premature to speculate on what 
the premiums may be in 2003. The WCB actuary will get into 
more detail as the summer progresses, and early in the fall there 
will be a series of rate setting consultations with stakeholders, 
with talks towards next year. And better financial information 
will be available by then. 
 
And again I’d like to say that there is no mid-year premium 
increases scheduled for the WCB in Saskatchewan. And I know 
there’s other provinces . . . I know we sometimes sit and look at 
the situation that we’re in and with the costs with . . . you asked 
of Bill 72, it will be a one-time cost of $33 million. I know 
there’s been figures batted around anywhere from 33, 35 to 
$100 million but the cost will be a $33 million one-time cost. 
 
And when we look at that the WCB is still sitting quite well. 
They are still 100 per cent funded. And you can look to the 
provinces on either side of us. Alberta’s premiums in this year 
have rose 27 per cent and their premiums are subsidized and 
they’re still raising . . . rose the 27 per cent. And 
Saskatchewan’s average increase and the premiums is one of 
the lowest in Canada. And the increase in this year was the 2.4 
per cent increase, so that’s quite a bit of difference. We’ve 
managed well and managed through some tough times in the 
’90s. Rebates were paid out, the last one being in 2001 when 
there was large revenue from investment income and it was felt 
that it should be paid back to the employers, which it was. 
 
So I think we’ve managed through some very difficult times. 
And when you look at the other WCBs, BC (British Columbia) 
had a $286 million deficit in 2001 and they’re expecting that to 
reach nearly $1 billion by 2005. So we’re sitting quite well. The 
board has managed well and I’m sure we will continue to do so. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you to the minister, through the Chair. 
Again your CEO, Mr. Federko, obviously has a better feel of 

what’s happening in WCB and he has said that he expects 
double-digit increases next year. I understand there won’t be 
any increases this year but in 2003 he’s saying there will be 
increases. Besides a $69 million shortfall in the actuary, you 
also have the injury fund being reduced to zero. 
 
Looking back in the introduction to the annual report it 
basically . . . in 1992 the same introduction put WCB basically 
in a state of crisis. And today I think we’re probably worse off 
than we were in 1992 as far as how Workers’ Compensation is 
being run. So I just have to say that it seems that possibly WCB 
is not being run quite as soundly as the minister would like to 
leave the impression, and your CEO already has stated that 
there will be double-digit increases. And it’s something that the 
employers of this province need to know in advance and be able 
to deal with, because this obviously is paid by the employers 
100 per cent and affects their businesses quite a bit. 
 
(18:15) 
 
A government press release dated March 25, 2002 stated that an 
objective evaluation of the performance of WCB’s early 
intervention program was carried out. Could the minister tell 
me what were the findings of this early intervention program 
review? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — When you’re talking about the early 
intervention program, Pricewaterhouse is doing the assessment 
and the committee isn’t expected to report until mid-2003. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. I assume the purpose of the early 
intervention program is to decrease the time an injured worker 
is laid off. And as we see from the annual report, the length of 
time for injury claims has increased. Again, Madam Minister, it 
seems that 2003 is too far away to make changes in order to 
improve this problem that WCB is having. 
 
The Dorsey report pointed out that injured workers who have 
had their injuries exacerbated or complicated due to 
professional negligence on behalf of their caregivers while 
receiving health care have no common law remedy against that 
professional . . . profession. 
 
And I understand that the minister has reviewed this before a 
decision would be rendered on correcting this. Has the minister 
completed that review? 
 
The Deputy Chair: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. Forbes: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much. I’d like to welcome two 
guests in your gallery, the Speaker’s gallery, to our proceedings 
tonight. 
 
We’re talking about Labour, the Department of Labour. And I’d 
like to ask all MLAs to give them a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2723 

 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Labour 
Vote 20 

 
Subvote (LA01) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Deputy Chair. For the 
member opposite, I want to make some clarification. The 
Pricewaterhouse work is more of a research project on the 
effectiveness of the early intervention program. That’s the one 
that won’t come till later, in 2003. 
 
But there is a series of work being done by Schubert and 
Schwartz and it’s more to do with caregivers and it’s more the 
practical side of the early intervention; working with the physio, 
the therapists, how we can speed up the process and the access 
that clients currently have and what they need. And those 
recommendations will be coming forward at the end of the 
summer, early into the fall. So that may be the one that you 
were referring to. 
 
And also, when you were talking about the recommendation 
that is contained in the COR (committee of review) report — 
that was COR, not Dorsey, I believe — the common law and 
dealing with medical practitioners, was in committee of review. 
That’s an ongoing . . . has been a long-standing concern in 
many areas and it’s going to be ongoing consultations with the 
medical community over the next little while. With session, 
there hasn’t been a great deal of work done on it currently. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. Minister, if you . . . if the minister 
has been doing a review, I would like to know who she has . . . 
she has been consulting with concerning that issue. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — As I said to the member opposite, there 
hasn’t been a great deal of work, as you can understand, with 
the committee of review being given to me early in January. 
 
And the work that was done — laying out the steps that we 
wanted to take to implement the recommendations or the 
number of recommendations that were being implemented 
through policy and with the board, things that went back for 
further consultation. And there was a portion that was 
housekeeping and a portion that was set aside for further 
consultation. This is one of those. 
 
So once the session has ended, we will have to get into 
discussions with the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical Association) 
and also the College of Physicians and Surgeons to get their 
feedback on this, and to look at it more closely. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you. To the Chair, the College of 
Physicians and Surgeons has already publicly said that they . . . 
that there’s a flaw in the Act and it should be remedied. 
 
I believe it’s just not acceptable that just because it’s a WCB 
claim, that if there’s a doctor has been negligent in an operation 
that that person cannot sue that doctor for damages. And I 
believe considering that even the physicians and surgeons are 
wanting this Act changed, that the minister should move 
quickly in that area. 

Hon. Ms. Higgins: — While the member is correct that in the 
recommendation the College of Physicians and Surgeons was 
very supportive of this recommendation, the SMA is not, so 
there’s going to have to be some consultations done. 
 
Also we have to look at the scope of the recommendation. 
There may be more areas that would fall into this same category 
where an employer by virtue of being an employer, even though 
he is giving . . . or he or she is giving medical care is immune 
from any kind of prosecution or malpractice, I guess it would be 
called, because they are an employer under the terms of the 
legislation and the Act. 
 
So it’s not quite that cut and dried, but it is something that we 
have to do more work on. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Chair . . . Deputy Chair, and 
Madam Minister. If an employee of the government takes a 
full-time job with the union, who pays their salary? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I would assume it would depend on 
contracts but you would have to talk to someone in the Public 
Service Commission. It’s not something I would cover. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — You would have no information or . . . I mean 
this is not a practice across government that is consistent, if an 
employee of the Government of Saskatchewan takes a full-time 
job with their union, whether they continue to be paid by the 
government or are they paid by the union? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Just going by my own experience, and 
it’s not that great deal with taking leaves of absence when 
you’re working for the government, with any job anywhere in 
the province or anywhere probably in Canada, if you took a 
leave of absence to go do another job, your new employer 
would be the one that would pay your salary and benefits. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So, Madam Minister, am I to take from what 
you said then that if someone employed by the Government of 
Saskatchewan went to work for the union they would take a 
leave of absence and the union would then pay their wages? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — This isn’t an area that the Department of 
Labour would be involved in but I’m told that it is . . . it would 
be paid by their new employer, benefits and all. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — They would be paid by the employer. Madam 
Minister, it’s been brought to my attention that within the 
Government of Saskatchewan there is an employee of the 
government that has gone to work for the union full-time, in 
fact I have the documentation, and the Government of 
Saskatchewan is continuing to pay this employee but they are 
working full-time for the union. 
 
Not only are they working full-time for the union, they are also 
receiving several additional perqs, I guess you would call them, 
from the government and they are a parking pass, a cell phone, 
a CVA (Central Vehicle Agency). They have an office that is 
paid for by the government that is fully equipped with a phone, 
computer, filing cabinets. They are also paid for their travel 
time as it’s included with their work hours. 
 
I’m wondering if you could comment on this and how the 



2724 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Government of Saskatchewan justifies paying an employee that 
is working full-time for the union and still being paid by the 
government? 
 
(18:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — I’ll actually need more information on 
the job to be able to give you more appropriate . . . or find out. I 
know in some cases if you are on a leave of absence what will 
happen was your salary will be continued and it will be billed 
out to the new employer who will pay back the government. It 
would be done in a roundabout way if it’s not a permanent job, 
may be a temporary. 
 
I don’t know the circumstance so it’s tough to give you a flat 
out answer when I don’t have the details of the job. In fact it’s 
just about impossible. And especially being it isn’t even in . . . it 
isn’t covered by the Department of Labour. That would be the 
Public Service Commission. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Madam Minister, could I just ask you then for 
a commitment to meet on this issue and to have it resolved? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — That’s not a problem. Any time. If you 
want to get together sometime in the House or tomorrow, not a 
problem, and then we can find out for you. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, I’d like 
to thank the minister and her staff for coming out. Possibly if 
your House Leader and our House Leader can make another 
agreement I’d gladly come back and go for another hour or two 
tomorrow, but you never know. So thank you. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well I’d like to thank the members 
opposite for their questions and their interest in the Department 
of Labour. Working people are everywhere in this province and 
the topics that we discussed tonight touch on all of us 
throughout the province, so I’m glad, pleased at the interest. I’ll 
get the information that I promised, tomorrow hopefully, and 
would look forward to meeting with you on any other issues 
that may be a problem. 
 
And also, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d just like to thank my officials 
for coming out. And it’s been a busy session and they have 
worked hard so I’m really appreciative of all their support over 
the last few months. 
 
Subvote (LA01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (LA02), (LA03), (LA05), (LA04), (LA07), (LA06), 
(LA08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 20 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Social Services 

Vote 36 
 
Subvote (SS01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I think the officials 
who are here today have been here before, but let me introduce 
them to you and the members of the committee. To my 

immediate right is Deputy Minister Bonnie Durnford, and 
behind her is executive director of income support, Phil Walsh. 
And beside Mr. Walsh is executive director financial 
management, Mr. Don Allen. 
 
Behind the bar, Mr. Chair, are Larry Chaykowski, executive 
director of housing operations; Craig Marchinko, director of 
social housing; Marilyn Hedlund, associate executive director 
income support; Deborah Bryck, director of child care; and 
Dorothea Warren, associate executive director of family 
services; Larry Moffatt, executive director of community living; 
and finally Peggy Buckley, acting executive director of 
Saskatchewan career employment services. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening to the 
minister and his officials. Mr. Minister, I just would like to start 
by asking you to clarify, I guess, for the people of Humboldt 
and area what your department’s rationale was in making a 
decision to close the Humboldt territorial office for the housing 
authority. We have had a number of petitions put forward in 
this Assembly from people throughout the area and even from 
Saskatoon to try to keep that territory operations office in 
Humboldt. 
 
We’ve also had the mayor of Humboldt, town council, and 
chamber of commerce and so on, petition your government to 
maintain it and with some very good rationale behind it. We 
have heard from two different officials, I guess, from your 
department and each of those officials had sort of a different 
story as far as cost savings go. 
 
And from one of the documents that we received there would be 
in fact an increase of $22,000 a year if that office is moved from 
Humboldt into a central area which is Saskatoon. So in view of 
the facts that there’s going to be added travel costs for different 
service providers to go out of Saskatoon and to go extensive, 
extensive miles, I guess we could say, and when we look at the 
whole picture, there’s going to be an increased cost of $22,000 
per year. 
 
And it seems to me that if we’re trying to ensure that rural 
Saskatchewan has an opportunity to grow in a very vibrant 
fashion and if we consider the fact that Humboldt is one of the 
fastest growing cities in Saskatchewan — and has been stated 
as only one of the three cities that has grown — I’m really very 
disappointed in fact, and I know the people around Humboldt 
are, that the minister has, I guess, refused to consider or 
reconsider this decision to close that office. So if the minister 
could please comment for me I’d appreciate it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for her 
question. And first of all, related to the figure that she refers to 
in terms of the saving, what she describes as the figure that has 
been identified and communicated to those who have inquired 
of the difference in saving between two options — the closing 
of the Humboldt territory housing operation or the closing of 
the Saskatoon territory housing operation. Mr. Chair, I think to 
put it into perspective, maybe I’ll give just a bit of background 
and then summarize, I think probably most efficiently, by just 
reading into the record the answer to the hon. member’s 
question that she put to me in a letter and that I responded to her 
on June 17. 
 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2725 

 

But the decision to close one of our territorial housing 
operations was driven by the desire to reduce the operations of 
government as was announced by the Premier at the beginning 
of the session, and that was encompassed in our budget that is 
before the legislature now. 
 
In doing that, we followed the guidelines of trying to maximize 
the reductions in downsizing. And I know that the hon. member 
and her colleagues have been critical of the downsizing effort, 
claiming that, as we heard earlier today, that it wasn’t large 
enough, didn’t go deep enough. 
 
However one of the facts of the matter is, Mr. Chair, when 
you’re downsizing then it affects people. We strove to, as much 
as possible, to downsize with the management positions and 
also to maximize the use of vacant positions. And that’s in fact 
what happened here. 
 
As we reduced the number of territorial support offices from 
seven to six, geographically the one that was the easiest to 
accommodate by distributing it to other territories was the 
Humboldt territory. And it also had the advantage of 
minimizing the actual effect on real people’s lives. 
 
The decision was made, Mr. Chair, to reach an annualized 
$342,000 saving for the operations of Sask Housing. And I 
think I can probably summarize the total decision in a copy . . . 
by reading into the record the response I wrote to the hon. 
member in regard to her letter asking this precise question. And 
which has also, as she pointed out, has been asked by the mayor 
and the chamber of commerce, and to whom I have already 
responded sometime ago. 
 

The key reason for implementation of this initiative is the 
province’s continued search for internal efficiencies and 
reduction of administration costs. Of all the options 
considered, the consolidation of the Saskatoon and 
Humboldt territories is the most practical restructuring 
option. 
 
Consolidation maintains reasonable travel times to the 
majority of housing authorities within each territory. Other 
options that were explored would have entailed a massive 
reorganization of housing authorities and/or the movement 
of several territory housing operation locations. 

 
Mr. Chair, this option as well has the least human impact. Of 
the five positions in Humboldt, two are currently vacant. The 
three remaining staff will have the option of filling the two 
positions available for the ongoing management of the 
Humboldt Housing Authority as well as other opportunities 
within the housing network. 
 
All three employees can be accommodated with employment in 
Humboldt. And, Mr. Chair, I think that summarizes the 
rationale for the decision that we took in order to increase the 
operational and management efficiencies of Sask Housing. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister, Mr. 
Minister, your explanation I guess is your explanation. And 
from the information you have, you have provided the 
Assembly and the people of Humboldt with the rationale for 
your decision. 

However, when I spoke with the people working in the 
operations office, the territory operations office, there was 
some, I guess, conflicting information that they had on, first of 
all, the numbers of people that are presently working there. 
 
There was also a different understanding that they received 
when they were told about the closing of the territory office that 
some of the information they had was that, for instance, one of 
the personnel there would have to be moving out of Humboldt 
in order to maintain a job the same status that they had in 
Humboldt. So if they would remain to work for the Humboldt 
office, they would not in fact have a job of the same status or 
salary. 
 
I guess when you look at the number of people working in 
Saskatoon and you look at the number that probably, you know, 
should be working in Humboldt, I would think that probably 
even maybe more than two or three should be working there 
and one more in addition to have a full complement of services. 
We could, I think, be more effective and more efficient in 
serving the people in the large area that now exists that are 
being served through the Humboldt territory operations office. 
 
It seems to me, Mr. Minister, when there’s such a very close 
margin, a close margin as far as costs, that this kind of a very 
unsettling move for the staff there may not be worth it. I can 
understand and I do agree that government should look at where 
they can cut back, but I think the efficiency should be to make 
sure that people that are working in the system are doing their 
job competently and fully. And in this case, the people in that 
territory office were certainly very efficient and effective, and I 
think that they served well and certainly served the government 
well. 
 
So I continue today, Mr. Minister, to ask you and your 
department to please reconsider this because I don’t think . . . I 
think the costs of doing it are too high, both human cost . . . and 
we’re going to incur certainly more financial cost because of the 
high travel costs that are associated. 
 
(18:45) 
 
The office is already there; it’s being maintained in a building 
that’s going to be used anyhow. There isn’t a great deal of costs 
other than for the personnel there and I think that it’s . . . when 
you look at things like utility costs and that kind of thing to 
keep the building open, well some of that is already being borne 
by having the Humboldt office in place. 
 
And I think when we weigh that against the high travel costs 
that are going to be incurred, sending different people, 
personnel out of Saskatoon, it certainly is going to be more than 
what you in fact are looking at right now. 
 
So I’m asking the minister if he would seriously reconsider this 
move. As I mentioned, it’s going to be very detrimental. When 
something like this happens and families have to move, it has a 
ripple effect on the community. There’s an uprooting of 
children from schools. There’s also just a great cost to the 
community. 
 
And many of these people have certainly plugged into different 
areas of the community in different service organizations and 



2726 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

service groups that really allow the community to function well. 
And this is the place they call home. And I think it’s something 
that I would like to see the government reconsider very 
seriously. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I appreciate the hon. member’s 
point of view and she has the luxury of looking at it from a 
single point of view. My responsibility as minister responsible 
for Sask Housing of course is to look at the operations of 
Housing and its obligation to meet the needs of the province. 
 
First of all, as I pointed out before, the objective here is to find 
some operational efficiencies, which was the whole objective in 
the downsizing as announced by the Premier, and that we were 
able to do it in the most humane manner because of the fact that 
there are two vacancies. 
 
I also understand that three other people who are employed with 
Sask Housing with the regional operational office, the territorial 
operational office, whose service I deeply appreciate, Mr. Chair, 
and I’m very pleased that it would appear that all three will 
have opportunity to continue to be employed in Humboldt. So 
I’m pleased that it works out that way. 
 
As the hon. member points out, for somebody to move — 
wherever it is — is upsetting. And in order to achieve the 
operational efficiencies, it would involve making changes 
somewhere. And this is by far the . . . involves the least amount 
of uprooting of people who work. And I’m sure that the hon. 
member would be just as sensitive about, say five people in 
Saskatoon having to uproot as she would for three in Humboldt. 
However, Mr. Chair, at the end of the day what we are 
achieving through the system is a saving of some $342,000 
annually when it’s fully realized. And that will enable us in 
order to assist us in our objectives of providing housing for 
Saskatchewan people which is by no means, Mr. Chair, a small 
task. 
 
I do remind the House that Sask Housing, through its various 
means, supports some 32,000 households through housing 
supports in various ways, shapes or forms and that we currently 
identify through the help of Stats Canada some additional 
56,000 households that are in need of housing support. We 
announced just a week and a half ago, about 10 days ago, our 
agreement with the federal government which will enable us, 
we believe, to address about a thousand of those, and that’s a 
big step but still by no means does it address all of our housing 
needs. 
 
So it is with regret on the impact it has on individuals or on any 
community but also with the responsibilities that come with 
administration of Executive Council that we make the operation 
in the interest of serving the housing needs of the province and 
finding the greatest amount of efficiency we possibly can in 
order to meet that important responsibility we have to those 
who are low and moderate income in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. I’d just 
like to change my line of questioning right now and draw your 
attention to the recommendations from the Special Committee 
to Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children through the 
Sex Trade. There are a couple of recommendations that I would 

like to talk to. 
 
Recommendation no. 10 spoke of the Attorney General setting 
up a joint RCMP- (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) city police 
unit in Regina, Saskatoon and P.A. (Prince Albert) to 
investigate and lay charges against johns and pimps. And this 
would be I guess equivalent . . . it was suggested it be sort of an 
equivalent to the integrated drug unit that was set up a couple of 
years ago and that the provincial government take responsibility 
for setting that up. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’m just wondering if your government has 
considered getting on with this recommendation. It seems to me 
to be one that’s really very necessary and that would 
immediately net some really great results as the integrated drug 
unit has. But it needs to have special funding by your 
government, and I want to know today if your government is 
looking into that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, we had discussion about that 
recommendation as we did about all the recommendations 
provided by the all-party committee of the legislature. And on 
that particular one, the advice that we received was that it would 
be more effective in the long run to enable the expertise of 
police operations who were currently in existence and are 
patrolling in communities that they’re responsible for, of course 
including the stroll areas, and that it would be . . . the advice we 
received that it would be more effective to enable and enhance 
their ability to deal with problems as they come across them 
than to have a special unit that would be focused on that task 
exclusively or primarily. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, the 
recommendations of the committee recommended that there be 
safe houses in all the major cities, as well as the consideration 
for safe houses in smaller cities throughout the province where 
it was evident that they could be very useful — for instance, 
North Battleford and even Kindersley. 
 
I’m wondering why, Mr. Minister, your government’s decision 
to put money towards a safe house in Regina . . . you know why 
particularly Regina was chosen and Prince Albert for instance 
was not? I understand and know that there is a safe house in 
Saskatoon, a voluntary safe house. And I’ve understood from 
the presenters to the committee that there was a need for a safe 
house in Prince Albert and Regina also, and your government 
chose to announce one in Regina. Why not P.A.? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the advice we received when 
dealing within the department, those who are dealing with kids 
who are being sexually exploited, and in the context of the 
budget that monies that we were able to make available, was 
that the clear priority was to provide the safe house in Regina 
specifically, because that’s where the need was the greatest. As 
the hon. member correctly points out, Mr. Chair, there is a safe 
house in Saskatoon and there is $300,000 in the budget that we 
are dealing with right now for establishment of a safe house 
here in Regina. 
 
That safe house is designated to be operated by First Nations. 
We see that as very important in the operations of it in order to 
be as sensitive as possible to the needs for kids who are at the 
safe house to feel secure and protected and to begin the healing 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2727 

 

process. 
 
Mr. Chair, in terms of Prince Albert, there was a stronger sense 
from those who are providing the services in Prince Albert now 
that the coordinated community programs are doing a fairly 
effective job of meeting the needs of kids. And certainly 
comparing the needs in Prince Albert to Regina, there was no 
question that the Regina need was more extensive. 
 
I would also point out to the members of the committee, Mr. 
Chair, that in the strategy there are also 31 designated spaces to 
provide care for young people who come to the attention of the 
department as children who have been sexually exploited, and 
those will be distributed around the province. So by no means 
are the safe houses the only resources that are available to these 
kids. But there is, I’m pleased to say, that — in spite of the 
difficult budget that in the circumstances that everyone 
understands, we don’t need to repeat here — that we are able to 
designate a new $300,000 for a safe house to be established in 
Regina. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the minister: Mr. 
Minister, another one of the recommendations — and I think 
that probably I should have or could have put this question to 
the Minister of Justice; however, there is always time 
limitations on budget estimates so I didn’t get to ask it of him 
— but there was a recommendation on the publication of 
offenders’ names. And the recommendation stated that, if 
necessary, the government should help with the costs associated 
with publication of offenders’ names in newspapers and that it 
should not necessarily be left up to the media to do that or the 
newspapers to do that. 
 
I’m wondering again, in your deliberations with your different 
cabinet ministers regarding these recommendations, if you are 
considering putting forward that recommendation and getting it 
into action. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, under the circumstances of the 
extreme demand that we have for resources to deal with this and 
other social programs, I’m simply not prepared to remove 
monies from programs directly in support of kids in order to 
pay for publication of names. 
 
I do have a sense of optimism and I think a fair degree of 
confidence that, given the profile that this issue has in our 
province at this point in time, that I suspect we can count on our 
good friends in the media to be fairly responsive, I think, in 
terms of bringing publicity to individuals who would find 
themselves officially determined to have been involved in the 
sexual exploitation of kids. 
 
So I think we can count on the news media doing what they do 
to bring attention and publicity, unwanted publicity, to those 
offenders, Mr. Chair, and that I don’t think . . . in my judgment, 
it would not be a wise expenditure of the public purse to take 
money away from programs in support of the kids in order to do 
that. And that’s simply one of the priority decisions that you 
make when you’re Executive Council and I made it. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, again I’d like 
to just change the line of questioning here just a little bit. I’m 
somewhat concerned because of information that has been 

brought forward to me about the effectiveness of programs at 
places like the Paul Dojack Centre. 
 
It’s been brought to my attention that a lot of youth that are in 
the Paul Dojack Centre are suffering from FAS and FAE, and 
that oftentimes there are rules put to them that they may not 
understand or that they have no concept of how to follow them. 
But nonetheless, the same sort of procedure goes on and on and, 
you know, it may be a merit system that cannot be achieved 
because of a lack of ability to understand how to meet these 
objectives that would give them merits, merit points. 
 
Is your department cognizant of that or aware of that and have 
you been able to find any, I guess, more effective programs that 
might deal in a better manner with youth that are experiencing 
FAS or FAE? 
 
(19:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, as the hon. member is most 
likely aware, I think, Paul Dojack Centre is no longer within the 
jurisdiction of Social Services and is in the Department of 
Corrections and Public Safety. So that all of corrections are now 
— both adult and youth — are under the one department of 
Corrections and Public Safety. But having said so, it would be 
inappropriate to talk about what they are doing now or what 
they’re planning to do. 
 
However, having said that, Mr. Chair, I certainly can comment 
that prior to . . . it was under Social Services before making the 
move the beginning of the month, of beginning of April. And at 
that time we were certainly sensitive to the need to have a 
relationship between the capacity of young people who 
understand the responsibility and the kind of programs that they 
receive in order to encourage and support being a responsible 
citizen when they return to their communities. 
 
And there certainly was some effort being put into that, some 
careful looking at program that I understand that nothing has 
changed, that that initiative is continuing and in a priority kind 
of way. However I’m unable to be specific and don’t have an 
official here who can assist me in responding in a specific way 
as Paul Dojack Centre is under the jurisdiction of Corrections 
and Public Safety. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, 
welcome to your officials. Mr. Minister, the other day we were 
talking a bit about housing since your department is now 
responsible for housing, and I would take that that includes 
seniors housing as well. 
 
One of the concerns that was raised recently with me, and we 
raised it actually in the Assembly I believe about a week ago, 
regarding the increase in fees. And I believe it was talked about 
4 per cent this year, 4 for . . . over the next, and 4 per cent over 
the next three years, a total of four years; which simplistically 
you could say would be a 16 per cent increase. But in reality it’s 
probably going to be a little larger than that because if we got 4 
per cent this year, and that increase comes into effect, and then 
another 4 per cent next year, it’s going to be on that increase. 
 
And the concern is that it may drive up the rental fees to the 
point that it’d be difficult for Sask Housing to even fill some of 



2728 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

its seniors housing as other units may now be available that may 
fit the need. Now I know we’ve discussed this and Social 
Services has a policy — Sask Housing had a policy as well — 
of charging according to the ability to pay. And we don’t have a 
problem with that, but if these fees come into effect, Mr. 
Minister, there’s some real concerns that there’s going to be a 
lot of housing units sitting somewhat vacant. 
 
So I’m wondering what your department is doing or what it has 
been contemplating in view of the increases and some of the 
concerns being raised by Sask Housing reps around the 
province . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Mr. Minister, I’m just 
wondering exactly what your department is doing in 
relationship to the increases that are being announced and the 
concerns being raised by housing authorities around the 
province as to the fact that they might drive the rental property, 
Sask Housing rental properties up to a point that people start 
looking elsewhere for housing opportunities. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, again, we’re kind of covering, 
retreading ground in our previous time that Social Services 
estimates were before the committee, but let’s just go back and 
re-cover it again. In the interests of clarity, I appreciate the 
question. 
 
Just to put it into a context, in the Sask Housing provided 
housing, there’s two categories: affordable housing and social 
housing. Affordable housing is housing that’s made available 
when there’s limited available rental markets and to assist low- 
and moderate-income people to have access, and at low end of 
the market rental rates. That’s affordable housing. 
 
The question that the hon. member raises, Mr. Chair, is on the 
other category; it’s social housing. And in the social housing 
units, then the rental rate is determined by one thing and one 
thing only, and that’s a percentage of income. So it is entirely 
dependent on the income and then the percentage applied. 
 
The national standard in Canada, Mr. Chair, is 30 per cent. 
There would be several provinces that are either at or moving to 
30 per cent of income as their social housing standards. 
 
Here in Saskatchewan, we’re currently at 25 per cent of income. 
And over the next four years, starting with this year, we are 
moving by 1 per cent of income over the course of four years so 
that at the end of the fourth year then, it will become 29 per cent 
of income . . . will be the rate at that time. 
 
The way it’s been implemented is that it comes into effect for 
someone who is coming to a social housing unit somewhere in 
Saskatchewan effective July 1, if they’re coming in brand new. 
But because it is the policy that anyone whose rent is changing 
is that they must be given three months notice, then notice was 
provided then on July 1 for those who are currently living in 
Sask Housing social housing units, which means that the first 
increase would actually come on October 1 and the last increase 
would actually be September 1, 2003. So that means that people 
who are social housing tenants are given at least three months 
notice and possibly as high as 14 months notice of a 1 per cent 
of income increase. 
 
So it’s based on income. It’s not a 4 per cent increase in rent; 
it’s an increase in 1 per cent of income. And so in that way, Mr. 

Chair, it’s not a compounding increase because it is totally 
related to only one factor, that’s income. 
 
Now the other thing that comes into play for an individual then 
of course, because the formula is based on household income, is 
that if the household income itself either goes up or down, then 
that will affect the rental rates. So you may have someone, for 
example, whose household income has gone up substantially, 
they would experience correspondingly then an increase. 
However, it’s entirely possible, depending on personal 
circumstances, that it could go the other way as well and that 
even though the rate schedule is increased from 25 to 26 per 
cent of income in the coming year, it is possible that there will 
be some cases where in fact the rent may actually go down. 
 
So it’s totally dependent upon the bump, which is 1 per cent of 
income for each of the next four years, a minimum three 
months notice, and then the household income of the family or 
individual who is in the social housing unit. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair and Mr. Minister, so . . . And in my 
comments before I did acknowledge the fact that rental rates are 
based on income, so . . . the thing that you pointed out is that 
you’re moving from a 25 per cent up to 29, whereas other 
jurisdictions have moved to 30. What about the affordable 
housing units? It there an announced increase in rental fees in 
those units? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, what the hon. member is then 
asking about is the affordable housing rates, to put it in the 
proper categories. And the answer is yes, in most cases there 
will be some rental rate increases. 
 
The guideline in affordable housing is that under no 
circumstance can it increase by more than 5 per cent in any 
given year. But there will not be a guideline that is true across 
the province because the purpose of affordable housing again is 
to make accessible to low- and moderate-income households, at 
the low end of local market rate, decent housing. And so the 
actual rates that are charged are determined by the local housing 
authority in co-operation with Sask Housing, and they’ll be 
influenced by what’s happening in the local housing rental 
market. 
 
I’m advised that probably on average this year, those 
Saskatchewan people who are living in affordable housing rates 
will experience, on average, 2 to 3 per cent, something in that 
neck of the woods. But under no circumstance would anybody 
experience an increase of more than 5 per cent. 
 
And as I say, it’s driven by the local housing market demand. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, so basically what you’re 
saying is then the housing authority has the ability to take a 
look at what the situation they’re facing in the community, let’s 
say for Regina, and housing . . . and rental of properties in 
general are in a neighbourhood of so many dollars, and the 
housing authority currently is charging . . . And while you’re 
calling for an increase, if it should put . . . if that should actually 
put that — an increase in Sask Housing units — all of a sudden 
put them past what the going market rate is, they have the 
ability to make some adjustments? 
 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2729 

 

Because the biggest concern is — that was at least brought to 
my attention — and the sense was that they didn’t have any . . . 
didn’t have a lot of say or involvement. They were just 
supposed to implement it, that that rental property would then 
go beyond what the local market might be bearing and would be 
difficult to rent those properties. And I think that’s the biggest 
concern out there. 
 
And so I’m not exactly sure where the individual was coming 
from in raising that, but I just want to have some clarification. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Again, I reassure the hon. member, Mr. 
Chair, that it’s the local housing authority assessing the local 
market. So if it’s in Regina, for example, it’s the Regina 
Housing Authority which will look at in the city of Regina 
what’s the going rates, and the affordable housing rates then 
will always be at the low end of market. So that it will ensure 
that there is, within the marketplace, competitive but low-end 
competitive pricing that will set the rental rates that those 
affordable housing tenants will experience. 
 
So that will not be dictated by policy, province-wide policy. It 
sounds to me as though the hon. member may be getting sort of 
social housing and affordable housing messages combined that 
you’re bringing into the House here, because it certainly would 
be true if someone was saying that there’s a provincial policy to 
increase by 1 per cent of income this year, province-wide. In 
social housing that’s true. Is there a provincial policy about 
movement on affordable housing? No, there isn’t. 
 
And so it sounds, from the hon. member’s comments, Mr. Chair 
. . . if he wants to press this further, we’d be happy to try and 
clarify but you may . . . it may very well be that you’re getting 
two distinctly different messages at the same time that are 
getting kind of blended together here, and contributing a bit to 
some confusion. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And, Mr. Chair, I’ll do 
some follow up on that in regards to the conversation I had 
recently regarding those numbers, just to get a clarification and 
pass on the information that we’ve shared tonight and see if 
that’s the understanding. And like I say, maybe part of the 
problem is we’ve got the two areas being . . . a confliction 
going on there, resulting in not totally understanding what is 
coming down the pipe. 
 
I want to go to the Child Benefit Program for a minute. Last 
year we raised the question — and if I’m not mistaken, I believe 
that it’s the right one — the federal government has actually 
made a commitment over a period of years to actually move and 
pay that, if I’ve got that program right, the Child Benefit 
Program, completely. 
 
I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, and I raise this question with 
some consternation, I’m a little concerned about the federal 
government. They say something . . . they’ve in the past said a 
few things and then as a province we’ve been left out to dry 
when you’ve designed a program — a national type of program 
— and you feel that you’re going to get some assistance. 
 
And I want to first of all ask, Mr. Minister, is the federal 
government actually increasing its support of this program? 
And if it is, what’s the anticipated time level when the federal 

government will actually take over totally the Child Benefit 
Program? How many people would be receiving child benefit 
and how much would they receive on a monthly basis, whether 
it’s per child or just a family? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, while we just take a moment to 
pull out the information to respond to that specific question, just 
on the first half of the hon. member’s comment regarding the 
housing information, I would certainly encourage him to 
provide the information to the party that he got it from as we’ve 
talked about here today and would commit to the member if he 
want . . . if he would like specific information about a specific 
housing authority area, that my office would be very, very 
happy to provide clarification on that as well. 
 
We’ll just take a moment and we’ll pull out the numbers to 
provide the response to the hon. member’s specific question 
about the child benefit. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Mr. Chair, we’re going to try and keep this as simple as 
possible, and I think I’m responding directly to the question the 
hon. member raises. 
 
First of all, it should be pointed out that here in Saskatchewan 
what we have chosen to do is to supplement the National Child 
Benefit with the Saskatchewan Child Benefit so that when it 
was introduced, when the National Child Benefit was 
introduced, we decided here in Saskatchewan to take the benefit 
for Saskatchewan families to that point right away. 
 
So that also has a corresponding effect on our budget. As the 
National Child Benefit increases each year, then we have a 
corresponding reduction in the provincial budget, but assuring 
that Saskatchewan families have been able to enjoy the National 
Child Benefit level of benefit right from the very beginning. 
 
Specifically, to respond to the member’s question . . . Oh, by 
the way, the national government has committed to the National 
Child Benefit till 2004 is their current time that they’ve made 
the commitment to and then there needs to be discussion 
regarding the extension beyond that point in time. So we can 
only speak with absolute certainty about the National Child 
Benefit until 2004, although I don’t have any reason to expect 
that it wouldn’t continue. 
 
Now what this means is that in Saskatchewan the maximum 
benefit available for one child — and this is combining both the 
National Child Benefit and the Saskatchewan Child Benefit 
together — one child, $221.33 per month; two children, 
$472.99 per month. I’ll just keep going and when you want me 
to stop, I’ll stop. We are up to 10 kids here that we can give 
you. Three children . . . 
 
What’s that? Okay. Well the hon. member can just tell me when 
to stop when we’ve got enough kids here and then we’ll stop 
there. 
 
But we’ve got $664.41 a month for three kids; four kids, 
885.82; five kids, $1,107.23 a month; six kids, $1,328.65; seven 
kids, $1,550.06. We might . . . what the heck let’s go all the 
way here. Eight kids, 1,771.47. I see the hon. member for Last 



2730 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Mountain Touchwood now he’s getting excited. He’s kind of 
seeing this as a money-making prospect back there. But I think 
. . . I know he’s a dad and he will know that this is not a 
money-making prospect, this is just helping to cover the costs. 
 
But a family in Saskatchewan with nine children would have a 
maximum benefit of $1,992.89; and with ten kids, $2,215.30 
per month. So that’s the monies that are available to 
Saskatchewan families as a result of the national child benefit 
combined with the Saskatchewan Child Benefit. And there are 
110,000 beneficiaries in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Well, Mr. Minister, I 
was kind of anticipating so much per child. And 221, actually 
that’s not bad, but as you started increasing I can see why and 
maybe wonder why families in Saskatchewan are down to about 
— what is it? — under 2 children per family or getting close to 
that if there’s an avenue, a benefit, through the child benefit. 
But at the same time I think you said 110,000 — is that 
individuals or families, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, families. 
 
Mr. Toth: — So basically that takes in any one who may . . . 
my assumption is that they would qualify based on income. And 
I guess the other question that came to mind is the child tax 
benefit is . . . Do you find that there is more people qualifying 
as a result of the child benefit coming in and not qualifying for 
child tax benefit? Or would this program actually just 
supplement and most people who would qualify for the child 
tax benefit would actually qualify for this child income benefit 
as well? You understand the question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — I’m not sure if I understand the question, 
Mr. Chair, but I do have an answer here. And if this . . . if this 
doesn’t answer the question, then I’m sure we’ll take another 
run at this, Mr. Chair. 
 
The benefit is when . . . I’m describing this as inclusive of the 
child tax benefit, the National Child Benefit and the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit. So it’s all three combined. 
 
Mr. Toth: — I guess the question was in a roundabout way, it 
was also if you would qualify for the child . . . national child tax 
benefit, you’d automatically then . . . basically saying your 
income is down, you would qualify here. If you don’t qualify 
for the child tax benefit, would you qualify for this child 
income benefit? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the child tax benefit benefits 
the largest number of families and then there will be a smaller 
number of families that benefit from the National Child Benefit 
and then a smaller number of families that will benefit from the 
Saskatchewan Child Benefit. And they’re all income related. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, just to move along here, recently 
you announced again and I think there was an announcement 
that there was a further reduction in the number of people on 
assistance in the province of Saskatchewan. And I’m not . . . I 
just don’t remember right offhand what the . . . what the 
reduction was. There was another . . . I think you bragged about 
. . . how many months? Can’t even remember that. Ninety 
months. Man. 

However, we have to ask ourselves exactly what that involves 
and whether or not there’s other avenues people are pursuing or 
have given up on the department as far as assistance. However, 
I’m not promoting people on assistance. I’ll compliment you for 
that. 
 
I would assume that you believe it’s important that people have 
. . . be given the opportunity to find employment and work to 
provide employment. But of that number, Mr. Minister, what’s 
the most recent statistics as far as people on assistance? And, 
Mr. Minister, I would like to know then of that current number 
and if there’s a correlating percentage, how many of those 
individuals would be considered as fully employable and 
partially employable and how many people would just be 
considered that it would really . . . wouldn’t be able to really 
have full-time or even partial employment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, first of all I do appreciate the 
opportunity to report to the committee that in June of this year 
that the caseload in Saskatchewan is down for the 90th, nine 
zero, 90th consecutive month. Month after month after month 
after month, for seven and a half years, the caseload in 
Saskatchewan has gone down. 
 
And I know that the hon. member and I . . . we’ve probably 
talked about nothing more often during these estimates than 
that. And I think it is a record about which our province should 
take some pride. 
 
Why is that happening, Mr. Chair? I think it’s . . . if I could just 
take a moment to expand on this because this is not just pure 
coincidence and people are not disappearing into space or 
something. These are real people who are not requiring social 
assistance. 
 
In many ways, Mr. Chair, I think there is a direct relationship 
between the June drop in caseload year-over-year by some 
2,389 people. Our caseload is down over 7 per cent. That’s 
phenomenal. Over 7 per cent from last year. 
 
And here in the city of Regina, the caseload, if I remember 
correctly, is down 12 per cent, and in the city of Yorkton, down 
17 per cent from the year before. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I think there’s a direct relationship between 
some of the things that we’ve just heard in the last few days 
about the job numbers. When we talk about here in 
Saskatchewan, the jobs year-over-year being up 12,800, I think 
is a big part of the explanation as to why the welfare numbers 
are down by nearly 2,400. 
 
And the fact of the matter is that people couldn’t be leaving 
welfare to go to work unless there was work to go to. Or 
correspondingly, people may be requiring welfare for assistance 
if there wasn’t work that was available to them that our 
employment supplement, the family health benefit, child benefit 
support them being in. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I think just in a nutshell, I know we’ve been 
there before and I don’t to belabour the point but, jeepers, I just 
couldn’t pass up an opportunity to report to the committee one 
more time that this is 90 — 90. Can you believe it, Mr. Chair — 
90 straight months, month after month, that the caseloads have 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2731 

 

gone down here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now of the caseload that we have in Saskatchewan, of the 
30,185 in June of this year, then just over 39 per cent, just under 
40 per cent, are employable; and then the remainder are not 
fully employable. I don’t have that 61 per cent broken down 
between unemployable and partially employable. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Well, Mr. Minister, is part of the reason people 
are off of welfare because your offices are now pointing people 
to jobs and suggesting that maybe they should get a job rather 
than just come in and expect to receive welfare? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well, Mr. Chair, first of all let me point 
out that nothing has changed in terms of the expectation. It has 
always been the expectation that people who are applying for 
social assistance and capable of working will work if that’s 
possible for them to do. So that’s always been the expectation; 
nothing has changed. 
 
But what has changed, Mr. Chair, is that I think we’ve been 
doing a substantially better job of helping people be where they 
want to be, which is working. One of the things that I expect is 
true for the hon. member, for the Social Services critic, and I 
know it’s sure true for me and I hear it all the time — for those 
of us who live in the world of economic development and 
investment — when people talk about coming to the province 
of Saskatchewan, they will oftentimes refer to the work ethic 
that exists in this province as a very attractive reason for 
investing in Saskatchewan. 
 
And when we’ve talked to people who are unemployed and 
receiving assistance or applying for assistance and understand 
where they’re coming from, Mr. Chair, I have absolutely no 
reason whatsoever to believe that their attitudes about the desire 
to be working, and self-supporting, and independent are any 
different from anyone else. That is in fact their first choice, is to 
have their form of income security come in the form of job. 
 
And when we’ve introduced the Jobs First program in a pilot 
project here in Regina and in the city of Yorkton in May of last 
year, I think we’re on to something, Mr. Chair, that has much 
more effectively enabled those who are applying for assistance 
and capable of working to be where they want to be, which is in 
the workforce. And the good news is that the work is there for 
them to get to. 
 
So what we’ve introduced is a system by employing the good 
work of the staff at the Career and Employment Services 
centres, who I’m pleased to say are now under the umbrella of 
Social Services, working together with the income security staff 
to provide an orientation to the work application process that 
we have at our Career and Employment Services centres in 
Saskatchewan — state of the art, best in the nation. 
 
(19:30) 
 
I don’t hesitate to say that — best in the nation — 20 centres 
around Saskatchewan. And taking advantage not only of the 
expertise of the staff in those places to provide personal 
counselling when that’s necessary, but using technology to the 
advantage of the consumer, which is what we should ought to 
be doing when we’re combining the resources of the federal and 

provincial government, Mr. Chair, in putting these Career and 
Employment Services centres in place. 
 
And as we’ve done this, Mr. Chair, what we’ve found from the 
pilots in Saskatoon . . . or sorry, in Regina and Yorkton, is that 
30 to 40 per cent of the people who come to the Jobs First 
program, they phone in, apply for assistance, determine that 
they’re employable. Their way of applying then is to come to 
Jobs First. Thirty to 40 per cent go to work. Another 40 to 55 
per cent don’t end up applying for assistance. Now I think that a 
good number of them are working, but we don’t know that for 
sure because they’re not required to tell us. If you don’t apply 
for assistance, then you don’t have to tell us why you’re not 
applying for assistance. 
 
But what we do know, Mr. Chair, is that somewhere between 
. . . as I’ve been around to the centres in Saskatchewan, that 
somewhere between 50 per cent — and oftentimes they’ll tell 
me it’s closer to 75 per cent — of those Jobs First participants 
who are coming in to the Career and Employment Services 
centres are coming there for the first time. They’ve never been 
there before. 
 
In other words, there is this best resource in all of Canada to 
connect people who are looking for work to employers who are 
looking for workers here in our province that they just didn’t 
know existed. And as a result of applying for social assistance, 
they got connected to the resource that is not only there for 
them now, but what I’m particularly excited about is it’s going 
to be there for the rest of their life. The best resource in the 
nation right here in our Saskatchewan, for them and anyone else 
that they know. Young people are finding out about it as they’re 
going through school and seeing it as a good source of 
information. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, there are jobs there, there are people looking for 
jobs, and what we’re doing is improving our system. 
 
We’re also looking at some other investments in this budget to 
assist people who are disadvantaged, including people with 
disabilities, to make the connection to the world of work and 
then to support them in that attachment to the world of work. 
That’s what our policy is all about in our battle against poverty. 
And included in that I want to see us make progress in terms of, 
to assist people with disabilities to be able to attach themselves 
to the world of employment as well, because they want to be 
there too. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I appreciate the opportunity to touch on this. And 
I think it’s probably a little longer answer than the member 
wished for, but I do admit to getting a little excited about this 
because I think we have reasons to feel pleased for the people of 
Saskatchewan who are the benefactors of this program. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
I think one of the biggest changes that has taken place over the 
past number of years is that we have a number of members 
sitting on that side of the House who have all of a sudden 
realized — and the mentality in regarding Social Services has 
changed considerably — because a few years back, it was what, 
that awful government that would suggest people should find a 
job, to all of a sudden, the minister just gave us a five-minute 
exhortation of how good it was for people to actually have the 



2732 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

opportunity to find employment and assist people to get on 
employment. 
 
It’s something that since being elected to this Assembly I’ve 
felt all along we need to work at working with people to find 
employment and also encouraging people to . . . about the fact 
that there is nothing wrong with getting a job versus assistance. 
And a number of years ago, one of the problems was some of 
the opportunities may not have been that . . . or the 
opportunities that were there, the employment opportunities and 
the income just didn’t quite match up to what social assistance 
was providing so people looked at it and said, well I can’t make 
it where we are today. 
 
So I would have to suggest changes that have come about such 
as the child income benefit program, the Saskatchewan income 
supplement have certainly gone a long ways. While it still has 
some cost at the feet of the taxpayer, the realities are, rather 
than covering 100 per cent in some cases, many cases we’re 
down to 25 per cent or less; 75 per cent of that income was 
coming outside personally . . . people individually making that 
income. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you’ve heard me compliment your 
department before for the fact that we’ve started to . . . we’ve 
really looked at that aspect. And we’re starting to look at now 
expanding on that and how we can really work with people to 
find not only full-time employment but quality employment. 
 
And the reason I asked the question a moment ago was I just 
recently had a call in from an individual who suggested to me 
that the department was being a little harsh when a special 
friend of hers went to ask about employment and was handed 
the phone number to an employment opportunity. Unfortunately 
it wasn’t locally. 
 
The realities are there may not be a lot of jobs at the local level, 
but there may be opportunities and they may be a couple 
hundred miles away. That’s the realities of our day. And the 
individual was a little annoyed and I really couldn’t disagree 
with the fact that a job opportunity was not handed for that 
person to follow up on. I think that’s important. 
 
And I guess that’s one of the concerns that people have raised 
in the past is why is this person over here — and you get in the 
small communities because people get to know individuals — 
they look as able-bodied as I am, and yet I’m out here slugging 
away, paying taxes so that person can live on welfare. And I 
think we need . . . it’s a whole educational format of saying, 
listen, there is nothing wrong with the job and the more we do 
to get people into the job opportunities . . . And I found that 
people themselves feel much better if they’re out working and 
bringing in . . . then all of a sudden they’re bringing in a 
paycheque that is theirs. It’s not just something that was handed 
to them by someone in an office to keep them going while 
they’re just taking it easy for the day. 
 
So I will compliment your department on that; we’ll 
compliment you, Mr. Minister; I will compliment your 
government for finally seeing the light, that it’s important that 
we really work and there is nothing wrong with being able to 
find a good, quality job. And I think that’s important. 
 

I do have a question on the other side, though. And that is when 
a complaint is raised by an individual about a person collecting 
welfare, and that maybe someone says, well why is that person 
on welfare when they could be working, they seem to have all 
the physical abilities that I have, what does your office do? 
 
Also, if a complaint is raised in regards to someone collecting 
welfare, but as well it appears they’ve got a job on the side, 
what steps does your department take to determine or . . . and to 
make sure that there isn’t an abuse of the welfare program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Following in the 
pattern of the question, let me respond to the first part of the 
non-question before getting to the answer to the question. First 
of all, I want to compliment the hon. member for getting on the 
program, and I do authentically appreciate the compliment that 
he extends to our government and to the department’s approach 
and to the good work that the officials in the Department of 
Social Services have done as well. 
 
However I do want to make it very clear, there was a time, a 
long time ago, when I sat on that side of the House and was the 
Social Services critic and in fact I think right about this desk, if 
I’m not mistaken. There was a Minister of Social Services, 
Grant Schmidt. And I make it very, very clear the program that 
we’re implementing here is not the . . . is not a program that 
would have been initiated and supported by Minister Schmidt, I 
suspect. 
 
I make it very, very clear that our approach to support for 
people to attach themselves to the world of work, as the hon. 
member correctly identifies, for the purposes of independence 
and self-sustaining income, but also in support of the dignity 
that comes with that, is a very, very positive kind of approach. 
It’s based on a belief that people have the entitlement to work 
for wages, not to work for welfare, and I make a clear 
distinction about that. 
 
And I do appreciate that the structural changes that were 
implemented back in 1998, Mr. Chair, and are being looked at 
across Canada and other parts of Europe, do put us in a 
favourable position, as other jurisdictions will say, how do you 
do what they’re doing in Saskatchewan? 
 
It is all based on two things: the belief that what people want 
first and foremost is to have their income through their job 
security through the form of employment, and that that is the 
dignified way of people enjoying their income in our world; and 
secondly, it also depends on the ability for people to find that 
employment. That’s got to be real in order for the system to 
work. And we have the fortunate circumstance that our 
economy is bumping along really not badly here in 
Saskatchewan as we hear these days increase in 12,800 jobs, 
year over year, from a year ago. And that’s the combination of 
the dynamics that assist people, individual citizens, to benefit 
from the policy and program implemented by their government. 
 
Now on the matter then of protecting the integrity of the 
system, because that’s the question the hon. member asked, and 
having to do then with people bringing complaints. Because 
obviously it is a system that is supported by the taxpayer of 
Saskatchewan and I feel honour bound, when we provide 
programs and support vulnerable individuals and families in our 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2733 

 

province, that contribute to their income security to protect the 
integrity of that. And it’s a very, very important, legitimate 
question the hon. member asks. 
 
When somebody would contact the Department of Social 
Services with a complaint about an individual, those are always 
followed up. 
 
Now I do have to say as well that there is an obligation that is 
paramount on myself, as well as the hon. member, and I know 
he understands that, as well as the staff of the Department of 
Social Services to not violate confidentialities of citizens. And 
that includes, of course, citizens who are receiving social 
assistance. 
 
So it is possible — in fact I’d say it’s quite likely — that 
someone will make a complaint, what they believe to be a 
violation of social assistance entitlement and that they would 
not get a report back as to what the investigation told them 
because it is not appropriate, clearly not appropriate for 
individual information about a citizen who’s receiving — of 
Saskatchewan — receiving assistance to be passed on to 
another citizen. So sometimes people will feel frustrated about 
that. 
 
I understand that, and I simply ask that as good, responsible 
citizens they take the action they see as appropriate and trust — 
and we’re certainly prepared to defend that, of course — that 
we’re just as interested as anybody, if not more, about 
protecting the integrity. 
 
We do the follow-ups on complaints and if they’re found to be 
accurate then that’s addressed and oftentimes monies can be 
gotten back. Sometimes there may even be charges. And we do 
have verification workers across the province of Saskatchewan, 
some 40 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 30 verification workers 
across the province of Saskatchewan who do follow-up checks. 
And in addition we have here in the city of Regina and in the 
city of Saskatoon agreements with the city police to do 
investigations related to fraud for social assistance. 
 
So I would say in terms of social benefits, the social assistance 
program quite frankly would be among the top in the nation in 
terms of the protection against fraud, quite frankly, and about 
that it is important because we’re protecting the integrity of a 
system that is very important to those who are vulnerable. 
 
In addition to that, Mr. Chair, we do some proactive checks as 
well. For example, we will do some checks with Revenue 
Canada, just random checks to see if we’ve got people claiming 
eligibility for social assistance when there is in fact available 
information to determine that they should ought not to be. So it 
is not entirely a complaints based system. And we take this 
very, very seriously. 
 
We’re not in people’s face. It is not my intention, it is not our 
intention that people should be demeaned because their 
circumstances in life cause them to be in financial need and to 
be entitled as citizens of our province to the social income . . . 
to the income security that is provided in this province. So we 
should ought not to be demeaning people. We should ought to 
treat them with respect and provide them the opportunity to 
maximize their sense of dignity and full participation as citizens 

of this province. 
 
And I think that outlines the criteria that we use in dealing with 
complaints investigations. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair. Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, I happen to remember your earlier comment about a 
former minister and sometimes you can say same paths, 
different goals . . . or same goals, different paths, pardon me. 
But on the other hand, I also remember is a lot of the criticism 
at that time. 
 
I remember a television interview, going out and talking to a 
number of employees who were employed at a job site. And I 
also remember the fact that the media personnel, while they 
really tried to find somebody who would criticize the program, 
had nothing . . . heard nothing but positive comments and the 
fact that it felt better to be out working as to just sitting at home. 
 
(19:45) 
 
So while that may have happened at that time, I think, Mr. 
Minister, at the end of the day you will have seen there was a 
significant move to really work to start finding ways of 
assisting people and helping people move from the welfare 
situations, or dependence on assistance, to actually find full 
employment. And I’m going to get into another question there 
in a minute. 
 
But one of the questions I do have — and we talked earlier 
about people considered employable, fully or partially 
employable — I’d like to know what the criteria is to determine 
whether you consider a person employable. And do you have it 
broken down on fully, and do you have a criteria for partially 
employable, what the percentages . . . but how do you arrive at 
what would be considered as fully or partially employable? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, this is a very credible question. 
It in fact is one about which we are currently — now what’s the 
proper term — we’re currently reviewing the appropriateness of 
it. The definition of somebody who is fully employable is 
someone who is determined to be capable of working 36 hours 
a week or more. So that’s fully employable; partially 
employable, if capable of working at all, but less than 36 hours 
per week. 
 
However, Mr. Chair, at this point in time what we’re finding as 
we talk with people who are receiving assistance, and I 
certainly know in the — goodness gracious, I guess it’s been 
about nine months here that I’ve been Minister of Social 
Services — that I’ve had opportunity to talk with people who 
are recipients of social assistance or advocates of people who 
are recipients of social assistance. 
 
I’ve certainly come to strongly believe that there is a strong 
desire to gain, as much as possible, income through 
employment. And I think it’s fair to say that we’re being 
sensitive to the desires of people themselves when we’re 
becoming more and more hesitant to say that someone is not 
employable at all. It may be that people will have different 
definitions of what they consider to be a desirable employment, 
interesting employment. And thank goodness we’re not all the 
same. 



2734 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

And it is certainly my experience as I’ve encountered a lot of 
good folks across the province in the last few months that when 
they’ve . . . when we’ve talked about the vision for the future of 
Social Services in this province, I’ve said to them very clearly 
that when I understand what is the desire of people themselves 
for their own purposes and desire to be as independent as they 
possibly can, to know that dignity of employment that is true 
for many; and also when I put that beside the marketplace 
reality that is being so significantly influenced by the retirement 
of the baby boomers that’s going on around this province and in 
this nation, in fact on the continent, and the opportunities for 
employment that realistically just weren’t there as recently as 
five years ago, it says to me for those of us who truly believe in 
the correctness, in the justice of a representative workforce, that 
there is opportunity today that I have never known before in my 
professional lifetime and the professional lifetimes of many 
who are working within the system in support of people who 
are vulnerable or disadvantaged. 
 
And so, Mr. Chair, I apologize for being a little lengthy in the 
answer but the straightforward question is fully employable is 
capable of working 36 hours a week or more. But we also want 
to be sensitive to the realities of the desires of Saskatchewan 
people to maximize their incomes through earned employment. 
And it is with some optimism that I look forward, and in some 
ways with some particular enthusiasm, for those who are from 
the disabilities communities for the potential to find themselves 
involved in mainstream employment. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I guess one of the follow-up 
questions, when we talk about fully or partially employable 
people, would . . . I guess I use the term, single mother — lots 
of times we use single parent but — would a single mother be, 
with one or two children or three, be considered employable? Is 
that one of the criteria or the aspects you look at? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, a parent of any gender would 
not be considered unemployable by virtue exclusively of the 
fact that he or she has children. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, how many single parents are on 
assistance today? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, we have 8,605 single-parent 
households receiving assistance and that makes up 28.5 per cent 
of our caseload. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, what if any efforts are being made 
to, while that person is providing care to a child, to assist them 
in furthering their education? Are there a number of those? Just 
from what I know in our area, a number of those parents do not 
even have a full grade 12. So that when an opportunity arises 
that they will have been able to complete even their grade 12 
diploma and maybe some other training so that they can 
actually move into the employment field once the child has 
become old enough to allow them to do that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I think the hon. member will be 
encouraged to know that when we look at the single-parent 
caseload and compare progress over a period of time, 
comparing March of 1994 when there were 11,826 to March of 
this year 8,357, that means a reduction of 3,469 — just about 
3,500 fewer single-parent families receiving assistance, a drop 

of 29 per cent. 
 
And that occurs for a variety of reasons, Mr. Chair, because 
again I remind us of our earlier discussion here in estimates. 
The introduction of the employment supplement, the family 
health benefit, the Saskatchewan Child Benefit provide 
incentive and security for any parent, including a single parent 
of course, to gain their income through employment. 
 
So some of that movement off of the social assistance caseload 
is simply because policies have facilitated being able to make 
the move to at least partial employment, maybe not necessarily 
full-time employment, and at the same time maintain the family 
health benefits which in the real world is often a very important 
criteria, a factor. Because as we all know it is not uncommon 
for low-income families to have kids who are having health 
problems and therefore the significance of the family health 
benefit. 
 
But there will also be then the, I guess, part of the discussion 
related to a little bit more to my former responsibilities, 
Post-Secondary and Skills Training. There will be the supports 
to enable individuals to acquire either their basic education or 
their post-secondary education to make the transition to 
employment. So these are not programs that will exist in 
isolation from one another of course and it’ll be a combination. 
 
But I firmly believe that, as has already been pointed out, that it 
is the income benefits which support people moving off of 
assistance but just as importantly — we sometimes are inclined 
to forget about this — just as importantly that enable a parent or 
parents to avoid having to come into the welfare system in order 
to be entitled to the protections that enable them to raise their 
kids with a decent standard of living, even though they may not 
have the top-paying job or maybe not a full-time job but are 
able to be in that labour market, and that enable families, 
therefore parents, to be good role models for their kids, the kind 
of mom and dad that they feel good about being and for their 
kids to feel good about seeing, and that model as kids look 
forward to make their own choices about values in life and that 
sort of thing. 
 
So, we’ve seen some short-term benefits I think in this province 
since 1998. I am totally convinced that it’s because of the 
generational impact that in fact we’re going to continue to see 
these benefits for the well-being of Saskatchewan families over 
a long period of time. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chairman. And thank you, Mr. Minister. And 
we’ve certainly discussed it somewhat before, the concern that 
some individuals have brought to my attention and we’ve 
discussed with your office, regarding the benefits as well. And 
low-income families, and especially when they move from 
assistance and started employment and found themselves on the 
edge, and yet dealing with medical situations that really made it 
difficult. 
 
So I think what your department has done in that regard . . . and 
I think what that basically shows is that we’re showing the fact 
that there’s some compassion as well out there recognizing that 
there may be people . . . yes they’re employed, but there are 
certain financial obligations especially with children and health 
benefits, that I think it’s imperative that we at least have some 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2735 

 

bridging until their income may move to that point where they 
don’t require that any more. 
 
Just going on a little further in regards to support programs, 
recently we met with both the Regina and the Saskatoon food 
bank. I believe some of your caucus did as well. The Regina 
Food Bank talked a little bit about an educational program I 
believe they’re adding especially on . . . almost like the adult 
basic education. They’re finding a lot of the people coming to 
utilize their services are lacking some of the abilities to actually 
find employment, and now they’re introducing some training 
opportunities. I suggested to them as well that maybe looking at 
talking to some of the business community, see whether or not 
they could work with them as we move . . . And when we talk 
business community, we’re talking of moving beyond just a 
basic grade 12 diploma, once you’ve received that, and maybe 
getting some training. 
 
I know the Marriott hotels, I believe in the United States, has 
offered, has worked out a training program with welfare 
programs in the States, and it’s worked out very well. In fact 
about three years ago, I believe something like 85 per cent of 
the people that came into their training program had now . . . 
were actually fully employed in jobs. 
 
So I compliment the food banks for moving beyond just 
handing out food hampers and realizing maybe there’s another 
avenue that they can work together with . . . and I think . . . I’m 
just wondering, Mr. Minister, what your department is doing in 
looking at organizations of this nature and maybe working hand 
in hand, rather than starting a totally new program to assist 
people in not just receiving some assistance in food but as well 
receiving some educational benefits that may assist them in 
moving from the need to access the food banks into a fully 
employable situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, first of all I want to 
acknowledge, as I think we have earlier in the estimates as well, 
the good work that food banks do here in Regina and in other 
places around this province. And the hon. member, in my 
judgment, is quite correct when he identifies the food banks 
themselves. In fact I think I remember a similar question, in fact 
making a response very much to that effect last time we were 
here or the time before. 
 
And it will be through, again aided by the reorganization that 
we’ve done in Social Services here. We talked earlier about 
bringing housing to Social Services and support for low- and 
moderate-income families and households, and also in the 
Career and Employment Services coming to Social Services 
and its place in the Jobs First program. The Career and 
Employment Services offices also do have then some contracts 
with food banks that are used here in the province to provide 
life skills training. 
 
And so this is, I think pretty much as the hon. member 
represents it, Mr. Chair, in support of people developing skills 
that lead towards independence. Sometimes that’s with a work 
orientation to it. Sometimes it’s a pre-employment orientation 
to it. It is also true that here at the Food Bank in Regina, there is 
some funding from the Department of Social Services that’s 
related to child care, and being provided there. 
 

(20:00) 
 
And so at first glance, if you didn’t know what was going on in 
a food bank, you’d say, what in the world does a food bank 
need a daycare for? Well the answer is because a food bank is 
much more than a place for low-income people to go and get 
some help with the food. There are other things that contribute, 
eventually I think, to what many would see as a nucleus of 
community supports, and certainly training is among them. 
 
And I compliment the boards and the staffs of the food banks 
who see themselves as a comfortable place for low-income 
people to get access to counselling and services and training in 
a comfortable way that will assist them in developing their own 
independence. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there’s 
. . . I’d certainly like to pursue it even a little more but in view 
of the time constraints we’re kind of working under right now, 
we’re going to have to kind of move along. And I look at all the 
officials sitting back there and I think to myself, some like to 
think, oh, we’re getting let off the hook. 
 
We don’t want them to feel that they didn’t come here in vain, 
but, Mr. Minister, I have in my hand a — I think it must have 
been an election platform 1999 — it’s got an individual 
smiling; I think he had a broader smile here when he drew up 
this document than as the election results rolled in on that day 
in 1999. However, part of the platform was to increase daycare 
spending by something like $500,000 a year to help pay for 
increased spaces. 
 
The part was under entitled “Help for Families” and it finished 
off by saying: 
 

. . . review tax rules that penalize families with a parent 
who chooses to stay at home with children. 
 

I guess that’s the area I’d like to focus on somewhat, not the 
greater spending but what have you done or have you done 
anything to actually recognize the families where the parent has 
indeed chosen to stay home and be a parent rather than to 
putting a child in a daycare spot? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, this in the budget that’s before 
us now in the world of child daycare, the budget initiatives 
involve a . . . it says right here on the document that I have, lo 
and behold, what a coincidence, Mr. Chair. 
 
It says in the 2001 throne speech the government made a 
four-year commitment of $500,000 per year to enhance the 
quality of child care services for children in the licensed child 
care sector and to improve access to services for vulnerable 
children in the families — just like we said in the election and 
there it is. That’s the plan and it’s happening. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, in this budget year, the increase is not 
$500,000 but $1.7 million in child care. That’s dedicated by the 
means of $750,000 to create 150 new licensed child care spaces, 
$450,000 dedicated to support kids with special needs. That’s 
above and beyond the seven-fifty and also another half a 
million dollars for child care staff wages to support the 
recruitment and retention of the staff in these important child 



2736 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

care centres. A grand total of $1.7 million in support of licensed 
child care. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, the actual question at the end of the 
day was, what has your department done to review the tax rules 
that penalize families with a parent who chooses to stay at home 
with children? 
 
It’s fine to just put money into child care spaces but it appears 
that you’ve heard from as many people as I have that there are 
many, many families where a parent chose to stay home, in 
many cases the mother, and provides that care rather than 
sending their child to a daycare centre. 
 
And you indicated that you were going to look at how we could 
address that concern. And I’m just wondering, Mr. Minister, 
what have you done or has your department or your government 
done anything to look at that avenue to recognize the benefits of 
the stay-at-home parent? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, the question the hon. member 
asks, unfortunately our officials don’t have the specific 
response to it because it falls in the area of Minister of Finance. 
 
The hon. member will be aware that we’ve undergone a 
significant reform of the income tax system here in 
Saskatchewan, I would add the largest single income tax 
reduction in the history of Saskatchewan. And included in that 
has been a shift in the tax benefit for families, but also including 
in that specifically affecting in a positive way families where 
spouses are . . . you may have one working parent and one 
parent at home that do a system that way. I don’t have that 
specific detail with me but let me undertake, Mr. Chair, to 
commit to the hon. member that I’ll respond in a specific way to 
describe that benefit. And it certainly is true that in 
Saskatchewan today there is a substantially more attractive 
income tax system as a result of the reforms that have taken 
place over this term of office. 
 
The officials also point out to me, also not in Social Services 
but through Department of Labour legislation, that the 
maternity/paternity benefit leaves that are entitled to mothers or 
fathers has been extended; which will be very, very helpful to 
some families in terms of having that leave from employment in 
order to be involved in the raising of a new child or a newborn. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I think, Mr. Minister, we 
certainly can thank the electorate — and the electorate spoke 
very well in 1999 because I don’t remember the current 
government really talking about major tax reductions — and we 
thank you as well for recognizing that the populous recognized 
that point and we have actually seen a move in that regard. 
However, Mr. Minister, you didn’t indicate you’d get back to 
us. I think it’s important also just to point out what has been 
done. 
 
While we’ve talked about major tax reductions, we’ve seen tax 
reductions that affect everyone on the personal income tax side. 
I just want, Mr. Minister, if you can point what would be 
directly related to the family where one parent has decided to 
stay home and care for the children versus while the other 
parent is working — if you could point that out as well. 
 

And going on to another area, Mr. Minister, community-based 
organizations. We have many of them across this province. We 
have many of them providing services to handicapped or 
disabled people. And we’ve got a major concern amongst these 
organizations. And, Mr. Minister, I think you will have also 
attended the reception that these organizations had about a 
month ago. 
 
And a number of them pointed out the fact that they’re dealing 
with employees who are at a lower wage scale level, and one of 
the difficulties they have is they nicely have a person trained to 
work in their group homes or in their organization, only to find 
that with the training that they qualify to move on to higher 
paying jobs in special care homes or in care homes of that 
nature. And, Mr. Minister, I’m wondering what your 
department is doing to address the inequities and the requests 
from these organizations for . . . actually increases in the wage 
levels so that they can maintain or at least hold on to a number 
of the employees that they have trained. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, first of all in . . . the hon. 
member has finely tuned . . . Mr. Chair, you will note, I’m sure, 
because you’re kind of a foxy sort of fellow yourself, that he’ll 
ask two questions but just end with one. So let me answer both 
of them, but the first one first, and remind the hon. member that 
during the last election campaign, at the end of which the 
coalition government represented 60 per cent of the electorate, 
Mr. Chair. 
 
An Hon. Member: — I don’t think so any more. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Well the hon. member may be of the view 
that it’s gone up since then. I don’t know if it has or not. But 
let’s just assume, for argument, that the government still only 
represents 60 per cent of the electorate like it did at the 
beginning of the term. But let’s . . . although I quite . . . would 
accept the hon. member’s argument that it’s higher than that, 
but, Mr. Chair, let’s not distract ourselves from there. 
 
But I will . . . I do remember very clearly, Mr. Chair, going 
door to door during that election, talking to the good people of 
Moose Jaw North and committing to them a significant income 
tax review and reform in the . . . I think in the amount, if I 
remember the figure correctly, that it would result in the 
reduction in income tax. And I think as a result of the reform — 
the Minister of Finance can correct me — as a result of the 
reforms that have been implemented for the average 
Saskatchewan family, a $1,000 a year reduction in income tax 
payable here in Saskatchewan . . . Saskatchewan income tax. 
 
So I’m very, very proud that the province has made progress for 
many Saskatchewan families in that regard. And regarding the 
specific additional information the hon. member wants, we’ll 
provide that to him. 
 
In terms of funding for community based organizations, which 
are very important for the Department of Social Services, the 
fact of the matter is, Mr. Chair, that the majority of the people 
who deliver social services in the province of Saskatchewan 
take home a paycheque that doesn’t have Government of 
Saskatchewan on it, but take home a paycheque of their 
organization. And related to social services, there are some 
nearly 1,000 community based organizations. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2737 

 

It is with a high degree of sensitivity to the needs of community 
based organizations to recruit and retain competent staff to 
deliver the services, which is a growing issue across the piece in 
the province in which we live. Same reasons we talked about 
earlier that provide opportunity for a representative workplace 
are challenges in the recruitment and retention. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I’m very pleased that in this budget, as a result 
of the sensitivity to that, that funding to community based 
organizations for the salaries for their staffs was increased by 
four and a half per cent. And that brings, Mr. Chair, over the 
past six years to increase in funding targeted to salaries of 
people who work in community based organizations, an 
increase in their funding of twenty-seven and a half per cent. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, that has been a very conscious decision of this 
government to support community based organizations in 
recruiting and retaining staff and dealing with that very 
important issue of payment of salaries and benefits. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, there are a 
number of families throughout this great province of 
Saskatchewan — and particularly the families that have 
contacted my office live in rural Saskatchewan, some of our 
towns and villages and so on — these families have family 
members with special needs. And your government has a 
number of services that these families can access, but one of the 
concerns that these families have is that there seems to be a lack 
of coordination of the services. 
 
And I know some of the families have met with the Child 
Advocate’s office in the hopes that that office would advocate 
on their behalf with government to take their message forward 
and so on. And I would hope that . . . I believe some of that 
work has borne some fruit and so on, but some of the more 
immediate needs, I guess, are the need for group homes, for 
respite care, and that sort of thing. 
 
I’m wondering, has your government, and I would think your 
department would play an integral role in that area, do you . . . 
Is there a program within your department that would help 
parents in establishing group homes in certain communities? I 
realize that in particularly rural Saskatchewan that you can’t 
have a group home in every other community but perhaps in 
regional areas so that families could access those type of things. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, we certainly do have the ability 
to respond to that kind of request. Any interested family or 
party, or parties preferably, who identify a family need for 
support through a group home, should be in touch, I would 
recommend, with the community living division, the closest 
available. If the hon. member, Mr. Chair, wants to be specific, 
and I don’t want to discuss specifics here in estimates, and I 
won’t, but if he wants to know who’s the closest contact, I’d be 
happy to . . . if he wants to identify then to recommend that. 
 
I should add, Mr. Chair, for the benefit of the hon. member, that 
currently there aren’t any current requests for a group home in 
rural Saskatchewan, so we haven’t had that identification need 
come forward to us in consideration of the current budget that’s 
before us right now. 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, did I understand you to say that 
there are no new requests or there are no group homes in 
operation at this time in rural Saskatchewan? Is that what 
you’re saying? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, currently all of these would be 
through community living division. There currently exist in 
Saskatchewan today, 110 group homes. In addition to that, there 
are 500 approved homes, but there are no current requests for 
additional homes in rural Saskatchewan today. 
 
Mr. Hart: — For families that live in the community or in an 
area where there aren’t any group homes, is there a respite 
program or some financial and perhaps facility assistance for 
those families, whether it be perhaps even the local nursing 
home and that sort of thing, where the families can take their 
family member and have them looked after while they have a 
small break from the constant care that they give their family 
member? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, currently for a family with the 
. . . Now when the person that the family is wanting to have the 
respite available for is under the age of 18, is a child then, there 
is respite available for up to 60 days. So community living 
division again is the appropriate contact for the pursuit of 
inquiry about that, their eligibility and arrangements. And it can 
be in a variety of arrangements that would be what’s ever best 
and specific to the needs of the individual. 
 
Of course then if the person is over 18, then they’re no longer a 
child, they’re an adult, and then by their own means would be 
eligible for social assistance and the social assistance system to 
possibly provide support for access to services. 
 
I would also add, Mr. Chair, that I have had some discussions 
with groups in more than one community in Saskatchewan 
where families are coming together, they’re identifying each 
other, who have . . . and what they have in common are needs 
for respite care. And they’re identifying that available to them 
in their community now doesn’t exist the resource that they 
would like to have. 
 
But they’re also recognizing then, by working together with the 
health district — and the health district should be part of this 
picture as well — that, and by pooling in an identified way, 
pooling their common needs, they’re looking at perhaps the 
creation of a community based organization or tapping into 
currently existing systems, but enabling the system to more 
capably predict the need for respite and therefore make it 
available. 
 
So it is very important from my point of view that families do 
what they can to empower themselves and to take advantage of 
the good folks of the community living division who are always 
willing to talk with them and to help facilitate these kinds of 
contacts. We have what we have now. By no means does that 
say that we’ve maxed out or we see it as a limit. We just don’t 
currently have any requests for a group home per se. But group 
homes are not always necessarily always the resource that’s 
most desirable either. 
 
And my advice would be, if the hon. member is talking to his 
own constituents or others, that they recommend contacting 



2738 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

community living division but also . . . I think it’ll be common 
that families will know other families who have got similar 
kinds of needs, and my advice is band together, communicate 
that with the department, and we’ll try to . . . we’ll be part of 
that. We’ll try to facilitate finding the community based 
solution that best serves the needs of families. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that answer to that 
question and that information. In fact that’s what has happened. 
I was contacted by a constituent in Wynyard and there are 
families in Wynyard that have met with families in Lanigan and 
Watrous and that sort of thing, and I believe they have 
contacted community living. 
 
And I would hope that this process is moving along, and I’m 
sure that if it isn’t that we will be talking and helping to move it 
along. Just one other comment that these families had and I 
guess, as you indicated in your answer, that there is a division 
between children and adults, and yet quite often they require 
very similar services as such. And I think there is some 
frustration in that area and I think from what the families are 
telling me that there needs to be more coordination between 
various agencies of government. 
 
And one other . . . or a couple of other concerns I guess, and I 
just raise them just for the record and so that you are aware of 
their concerns, particularly with the children that are in school. 
Come this time of the year, the families have made 
arrangements and, with the help of schools and so on, the 
special needs children are looked after. But there really is 
nothing for them in the summertime and they see that as a void. 
They’re doing as much as they can on their own but they’re just 
not being successful, at least not to the extent that they would 
like to see. And they really feel that perhaps there needs to be 
something in that area. 
 
And then the final concern that they raise is that I understand 
that for certain activities and needs there is some financial 
assistance, but as with many other things, they seem to feel that 
it’s not adequate in many cases. And in fact some families are 
left with the difficult decision of perhaps, if they can’t cope 
financially and also just because of the stress involved and all 
the extra effort that’s required by parents, that sometimes 
they’re faced with a very difficult decision of perhaps placing 
their children as a ward of your department. And I mean 
families don’t make that decision easily; that’s the last resort. 
And I think we all want to work towards helping families so 
that they don’t have to make those sorts of decisions. 
 
So, Minister, I just would like to raise those concerns on behalf 
of those constituents, and as I said earlier, if that process isn’t 
moving along, perhaps we’ll help it move along. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, just very quickly in response. 
First of all I appreciate the hon. member bringing it to my 
attention, and I know I can count on him alerting me further if it 
doesn’t appear to be evolving as it should ought to, and I would 
welcome that. 
 
I do want to remind him that, as we’re looking at means for 
providing services, we always strive to have age-appropriate 
services so kids’ needs are not always the same as adults’. And 
one of the things that is true about adults, regardless of their 

abilities, is that there is always the desire to be living as 
independently as possible and as self-sustaining as possible. 
And that’s not the same for all of us. We’re not all the same, 
thank goodness. And also those desires and realistic 
possibilities can change over a period of time as well. So we 
want to be sensitive to that. 
 
Regarding the summer response for families with kids with 
special needs in school, I do point out again . . . I go back to our 
previous question about the respite, that it may be that that’s an 
appropriate time of the year when it’s most helpful to the family 
to look at requests for respite support, funds for respite services 
to be used in summertime. 
 
And I do point out as well that through another portfolio hat 
that I wear as the Minister Responsible for Gaming, for the 
Saskatchewan Gaming Corporation and the revenues that are 
generated there from the profits through Casino Regina and 
soon Casino Moose Jaw, that there are funds made available 
through the Community Initiatives Fund. I’m aware that a good 
number of organizations around the province will apply for 
funds specifically for summer recreation activities, oftentimes 
for kids with special needs. 
 
So I would urge the hon. member, Mr. Chair, if this is not 
something his constituents have made themselves aware of . . . 
This summer we’re into now, so it’s too late now. But they 
should be in touch with their local, regional intersectoral 
coordinator, the RIC, R-I-C (regional intersectoral committee). 
And if you don’t know who that is, get in touch with the 
Department of Social Services — that’s probably where they 
are — in order to make application, get the forms for making 
application for that. So that’s another resource that’s available 
to Saskatchewan families that many are using around the 
province of Saskatchewan specifically for that reason. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, how many 
individuals today in the care of your department would be 
recognizing as having FAE or FAS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I’m not able to specifically 
answer the hon. member’s question because we just don’t 
collect data that way. What I can tell the hon. member, Mr. 
Chair, is that we have 2,900 children in the province of 
Saskatchewan who are under the care of the minister, 1,100 of 
whom are long-term care children and the other 1,800 of whom 
then would be temporary care. 
 
When children come to the care of the province then, of the 
minister, they do have an assessment regarding their needs and 
their disabilities, and FAS/FAE may be one of the factors that is 
identified. But it’s not always that clear, as I think the hon. 
member understands. There may be disabilities that a child will 
have that you may suspect FAS/FAE but not be certain, and we 
do not keep statistics to be able to know how many children in 
care, of those 2,900, specifically do have FAS/FAE. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, some information I have from . . . 
regarding neuro-educational development and FAS/FAE says: 
 

Of FAE individuals, 95 per cent will have mental health 
problems; 55 per cent will be confined to prison, drug or 
alcohol treatment centres or a mental institution; 60 per 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2739 

 

cent will have a disruptive school experience; 60 per cent 
will have trouble with the law; 52 per cent will exhibit 
inappropriate sexual behaviour; 82 per cent will not be able 
to live independently; 72 per cent will have problems with 
employment. 

 
(20:30) 
 
In your department, if you have children in your care and you’re 
. . . I would assume that your department is always looking for 
homes to place children in. And if there is a concern that there 
may be, a child may be exhibiting symptoms of FAS/FAE, what 
does your department do to . . . is an assessment made of that 
child? 
 
And then if an assessment is made, if it varies, it appears there 
is certainly a strong indication that there is maybe some of these 
problems, what steps are taken to inform the adoptive parent of 
the fact that this child has some symptoms and there’s 
precautions that need . . . maybe should be taken or avenues 
should be pursued in regards to educational opportunities that 
may assist in helping that child develop in view of the 
restrictions as a result of FAS/FAE? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, it would not be the case that 
every child who comes into care would be thoroughly assessed 
for FAS/FAE, but if the indications are there, then the thorough 
assessment would be done. 
 
Now the question that the hon. member asks has to do with the 
information provided to the potential home. Before going there 
I would like to say as an aside, now this . . . if the child is in 
temporary care the first priority would always be to assist the 
child returning to their natural family. That’s first and foremost, 
the number one objective. 
 
If it is a child in long-term care then, where that’s no longer a 
possibility, then it may very well be that foster home placement 
or adoptions would be among the options that would be 
considered. And foster parents would be provided the 
information about the disabilities, whatever the nature of that 
might be including FAS/FAE. And foster parents then would be 
provided opportunity for training in order to accommodate that. 
 
When the question . . . it relates to adoption as I think the hon. 
member asked, Mr. Chair, then there would be a very thorough 
history of the child that would be made available so that the 
prospective adoptive family would be fully aware of the 
disabilities that the child — that they’re considering bringing to 
their home — of the disabilities that that child may have and, 
Mr. Chair, then there would be in that case as well there would 
be supports provided to the adoptive family in support of their 
care and nurturing for the child that they’ve brought into their 
home. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I think in view of some of the 
problems that we are now seeing coming to the forefront re: 
FAS/FAE . . . And I think over the past number of years it 
hasn’t been an issue that we’ve really understood a lot about 
and maybe we’re still in the dark in a lot of ways in regards to 
FAS/FAE. 
 
And unfortunately I think we find in our First Nations 

community there tends to be . . . has been a number of 
situations. I know the First Nations community is trying to deal 
with some of the problems regarding drug and alcohol abuse, 
especially by an expectant mother. 
 
However, about a month ago, and I’m not sure if anyone in 
your department happened to catch it as well, or you yourself, 
Mr. Minister, there was a bit of a program. I believe CBC 
(Canadian Broadcasting Corporation) ran a special regarding 
FAS/FAE. 
 
And on that special they talked about music as . . . working with 
music to address some of the problems, actually not addressing 
the problems as much as the involvement of music and how it 
can assist a person who may have some FAS/FAE problems 
and just working with them and helping them to overcome, and 
maybe using that format, to overcome some of the problems 
and help develop character of that individual. 
 
And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if your department has been 
doing some research as to what can be done or how it can be 
used, what avenues can be used to address the emotional 
problems that result as a result of people with alcohol syndrome 
or effect? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I think there is some accuracy 
when the hon. member represents FAS/FAE as an issue about 
which, as time goes by, we’re increasingly becoming familiar. 
And in that, learning how to more effectively support people, 
mostly kids I guess is where we’re identifying it, but people 
with FAS/FAE in order to adapt to the demands of living in the 
community as independently as possible. 
 
The department is not conducting research per se. And on the 
specific question of the music therapy, although I am aware that 
music therapy is used in some circumstances, I’m afraid I’m 
just not in a position to comment during estimates this evening 
about the effectiveness of music therapy related to FAS/FAE. 
 
I would however want to give Saskatchewan people the 
assurance that we continue to work with professionals to 
increase our understanding as well as to expand the training — 
first of all the awareness, the understanding, and then the 
training — in order to deal with the disabilities really to 
FAS/FAE. 
 
We should also note when the hon. member made some 
references to some of the characteristics of life experienced by 
people with FAS/FAE that, as it is in the case of so many 
disabilities or illnesses, there are ranges of degree. And not 
everyone with FAS/FAE is in the extreme circumstance. 
 
So it is with the . . . in some ways the inherent wisdom of the 
people at the Abilities Council that I think guides us to focus 
ourselves more on identifying abilities and building on 
strengths in order to be able to live independently. In the long 
run, that’s the more helpful kind of process for individuals than 
to get hung up on simply identifying FAS, FAE, and saying, 
there we know it is, and isn’t that a problem. So it is important 
for us to move forward as best as we can. 
 
And in that regard, although I don’t want to diminish for a 
second the importance of providing support and care for people 



2740 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

with FAS, FAE, it is also . . . I draw attention of the members of 
the committee to the Kids First program that’s been 
implemented here in Saskatchewan, which is a mechanism by 
which — in communities which have identified families, the 
highest percentage of families of at-risk parents for children — 
to identify prenatal programming needs. So that not only is Kids 
First focused on the early childhood development support for 
at-risk, particularly high-risk families, but also in a preventive 
way in the prenatal world. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I think it’s fair to say that as we approach the 
often complex and extremely difficult circumstances related to 
. . . for someone with FAS and FAE to deal with the world 
around them, and others to deal with them as we must, we must 
also at the same time be zoned in on trying to do as good a job 
of preventing as we can. And I think the Kids First program 
here in Saskatchewan is a strong step forward in that regard as 
well. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Minister, I know we’re really squeezing the 
time clock here in some cases. An issue I’d like to raise and I 
want to pursue it just somewhat, it’s an issue that you’ve 
received a number of letters to your office from. It’s an issue 
that I’ve received a stack of letters here. It’s regarding a family 
up in the Melfort area, and I have some major concerns. 
 
Mr. Minister, you were here about nine years ago when the 
Martensville case hit the floor of the Assembly. You were here 
when I debated that case with the former Minister of Justice. 
You were probably here when the Minister of Justice at that 
time suggested I should make some comments outside the 
Assembly. As lawyers always do, they like to be able to sue. 
 
I think you may have remembered the fact that I suggested to 
the minister that there were a number of things in this case that 
were very irregular and some day he may live to pay for that. 
And we’ve seen what’s happened in that case, the number of 
lawsuits that have arisen. 
 
Now I have a young gentleman here who says . . . he asks a 
number of questions, and you would have this letter in your 
possession: 
 

Why was I removed from my family against my will? The 
police (and I won’t name the social worker or the 
interrogation person) informed me that sexual abuse had 
taken place in my house. I know this is not true. They 
interrogated me to the point of emotional collapse, trying to 
force me to agree with them. 

 
Why was I denied access to my family and friends while in 
the foster home? Why did this individual on September 25 
say that I could go to my Aunt Isabelle’s and then deny me 
that small privilege? Why did my family have to hire a 
lawyer to get me away from Social Services? 

 
And then we have the family basically saying as well, Social 
Services provided them with no care, didn’t take the time to 
even talk to them, just came in, removed the children. They 
didn’t take the time to do a risk . . . a home study or risk 
assessment. 
 
And these people were looking after, had taken these children 

in, and while one psychologist would suggest you shouldn’t put 
more than one individual who may have an FAS or FAE 
problem in a home, this family actually asked for the 
individuals because they were all of a family. And we’ve had 
this discussion before about keeping families together, children, 
rather than putting them in three different homes. 
 
And I’ve got a major concern here. And I realize as well, Mr. 
Minister, you’re going to stand up and say, well that’s in the 
legal process now, I can’t say much about it. In general though, 
I’m approaching it on the basis of how your department 
investigates and the work that is done and assessments are made 
before a decision is made to just jump in and move . . . remove 
children from a home. 
 
One letter from a psychologist talks about: 
 

While it is obviously crucial to investigate allegations of 
sexual abuse and to ensure that every child is safe, it is 
equally crucial that when assessing the situation we 
understand the larger FAS/FAE picture I listed above. It 
takes a person with special character, commitment, and 
selfless love to choose to adopt an FAS/FAE child rather 
than just foster them with the financial remuneration that 
provides. 

 
Mr. Minister, I am concerned about what may happen. We’ve 
got a family here that’s been sitting in limbo for almost a year 
now. There’s supposed to have been a report done by the 
department. To my knowledge, that report has not been done. 
 
And while we talk about possibly staff people maybe not being 
well, in the meantime we have children . . . And I want to read 
into the record a letter from one of the children affected, who is 
one of the foster children. And this is what it says, and I read it 
because the Child Advocate in a report last year talked about 
listening to the children. And I’m wondering, Mr. Minister, if 
your department has taken time to listen to the children. 
 
Maybe you’ll listen to this letter: 
 

I miss my family a lot and would like to go home. I don’t 
want to go to a different foster home in the summer. I wish 
I could see my mom and dad again. I can see Aaron, but 
not too often. I’d like us all to be a family again. 

 
Mr. Minister, it’s a family situation that I’m really concerned 
about. I’m concerned about the way it’s been handled. I’m 
concerned about the way everyone moved and I wonder if a 
proper assessment was done before the decision was made. And 
I’d like to know what your department is doing, what it does. 
 
(20:45) 
 
And I guess all I can say I hope, Mr. Minister, at the end of the 
day, that this one doesn’t come back to haunt the Department of 
Social Services as well. We’ve given a lot of authority to social 
workers as a result of the Karen Quill situation and I hope 
we’ve got — I hope we’ve got some checks and balances in so 
we don’t put other families through. And that case 
unfortunately was a tragic, tragic death of an individual but this 
is a tragedy . . . this can be a tragedy as well when people’s 
lives are disrupted for a long period of time. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2741 

 

And so I’d like to know, Mr. Minister, what has . . . what is 
done. And in this case I hope we’re not just waiting for the 
Department of Justice now to complete an investigation. If 
there’s things that need to be done or can be done to address 
this situation today I hope, Mr. Minister, we’ve got an avenue 
that we can follow up so people’s lives aren’t just put in limbo 
for a period of time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, well as the hon. member 
correctly understands, I believe, two things. First of all, I have a 
strong respect for the law and the rule of law which on the one 
hand requires that I and he not make comments on matters that 
are before the courts. And certainly when I come to this 
Chamber as a legislator that is a principle that is paramount and 
must be preserved. 
 
I think the hon. member does not take issue with that and 
doesn’t say that in a critical kind of way but recognizes that’s 
one of the restrictions when you live in a free and democratic 
society in which you value the rule of law. Secondly, Mr. Chair, 
it is a requirement of the law that not only the Minister of Social 
Services but in fact the hon. member himself not reveal 
confidential information and specifically related to individuals 
or families who are under the care or the support of the 
Department of Social Services. 
 
And that is certainly true when it comes to the child welfare 
circumstances and so, Mr. Chair, I think the hon. member will 
understand why it is I will . . . I cannot and will not make 
comment which would in any way remotely identify any 
individual or family who may or may not be under the . . . 
dealing with or under the care of the Department of Social 
Services. 
 
However let me say about the approach of the Department of 
Social Services, that it is the law of the land in this province 
that if anyone, anyone, suspects that a child is abused that that 
individual has the responsibility to report that. That’s the law of 
the land. Teachers will be well aware of that. People in the 
medical profession will be well aware of that and will often be 
the source of the report. The report can go to Social Services to 
a social worker or it can go to the police, and it does — people 
do both. 
 
Social workers, Mr. Chair, do not for a second act unilaterally. 
Social workers are obliged by law, by requirement of their 
profession, that when they receive a report of suspicion of abuse 
they must investigate, because their first obligation is to act in 
the protection of the child. 
 
It is also high on the list of priorities that in dealing with 
children they’re a whole child welfare system. And I would also 
add when the hon. member refers to the Children’s Advocate’s 
involvement and the comment about the Child’s Advocate — or 
sorry, the child welfare system in Saskatchewan — I do remind 
the hon. member, I don’t have it here with me tonight, but in 
her recent report the Children’s Advocate did indicate . . . she 
was very positive about the response of the Department of 
Social Services regarding the recommendations that she made 
because of her review done not many years ago. 
 
But it is, it will always be, Mr. Chair . . . The first objective is to 
ensure that if there is substantiating evidence, including 

interview with the child — him or herself — that is reported to 
be a victim of abuse, that if the social worker’s of the view that 
for temporary purposes, in order to ensure the safety of the 
child that the child must be removed, then that decision with 
great hesitation will be made. 
 
The social worker does not have the legal authority to make a 
permanent decision — doesn’t exist, can’t be done. Ultimately 
if circumstances do evolve to such time as we talked about 
earlier that a child becomes eventually say a ward of the 
province under the care of the minister, that can only happen by 
virtue of a court decision, not a social worker’s decision. 
 
And it must be pointed out that is a high priority for the 
department, and the social workers who deal with these 
sometimes — well virtually always — highly emotionally 
charged — sometimes, and I think usually very complex — 
very rarely would it be black and white — kinds of decisions to 
act in the interest of protecting the safety of a child. It is always 
a high priority to ensure, if at all possible, the child will 
continue to remain in the family, or if there is a temporary 
removal, to return to the family with appropriate supports for 
the family in order to accommodate what might be needed in 
order to support raising a child in a nurturing kind of way. 
 
Mr. Chair, I think that probably, I think, is in a nutshell how the 
department approaches these kinds of matters. They’re taken 
very, very seriously. It is considered to be very precious in our 
province, the relationship between a child and his or her family, 
and it is considered to be sacred that children in Saskatchewan 
must be able to grow up feeling protected from abuse. And it is 
that line that social workers are charged with the responsibility, 
and it is those social workers, Mr. Chair, who I deeply 
appreciate the very important work that they bring to the 
Department of Social Services in support of Saskatchewan 
families, kids. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, I appreciate the 
comment. But in view of the problems that can arise . . . And 
when it comes to the law of the land, who makes the law of the 
land? People that are elected in this room. People that are 
elected in Ottawa. Bureaucrats will give us their opinions and 
views and we’ll look to them for our views. But at the end of 
the day, you and I are responsible. Right now we are. 
Somebody else will be elected tomorrow; they’ll be responsible. 
 
And I think it’s imperative that we, as legislators, really not 
only recognize . . . and as the Child Advocate said, to listen to 
the voices of the children. We need to do that. We also need to 
listen to the voices on the other side as well. And I think we 
need to really . . . I think there’s some real serious questions 
we’re going to have to ask ourselves because I believe, to be 
honest with you, Mr. Minister, the pendulum is swinging too 
much the other way. We’re giving too many opportunities, and 
it’s too easy when someone makes a flippant comment. And I’d 
like to know that we really have some guidelines in place that 
we don’t put families in a real, tumultuous circumstance as a 
result of maybe a flippant comment made on the playgrounds or 
whatever because just the way . . . through television, whatever, 
we have all these . . . we have these play out scenarios of 
abusive situations. And it’s quite, very conceivable, that a child 
in anger could say something because they’re trying to get back 
at . . . and certainly a part of the behavioural patterns of 



2742 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

FAS/FAE children can be of this nature, just getting back at 
someone. 
 
So I think it’s imperative, Mr. Minister, that as lawmakers — 
and certainly the bureaucrats deal with this everyday — we 
need to start taking a careful look. So that we don’t . . . there’s 
an equal balance, the pendulum, so we’re treating the children 
with the respect. We’re helping children to grow up in a vibrant 
society and life, and they’ve got that family to grow up with. 
 
But it’s as well . . . I think it’s important that we look at 
protecting families as well and making sure that we don’t get 
ourselves caught in situations where as a result . . . you know 
the courts system, the legal process. I know it. It doesn’t happen 
overnight . . . so that something can be dealt with, and it’s 
addressed, and people get on with their lives. It can drag on for 
years, unfortunately. And so I guess what I’m suggesting is that 
we really be very careful as to how we set up . . . and guidelines 
so that we aren’t putting people’s lives in jeopardy because 
we’re trying to be . . . now being overprotective of a certain 
segment of our society because we maybe weren’t quite as 
protective in the past. 
 
And while I’d like to pursue this and certainly we could pursue 
other avenues, Mr. Minister, I’m going to have to close it there. 
But I want to thank you for the time we’ve had over the past 
few months and your officials for their attendance and the 
assistance they have provided in addressing a number of the 
concerns. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I thank the hon. member for his 
concluding remarks, and I appreciate them deeply. Before 
similarly thanking the officials and acknowledging the 
important exchange that we’ve had here, I do want to comment 
on our final subject here. 
 
It is a sobering thing to know that as Minister of Social 
Services, at the end of the day in this democracy, that there are 
2,900 kids who are officially your kids. And, Mr. Chair, it is, I 
think, Mr. Chair, true that there will be no single responsibility 
that will feel more onerous to any minister of Social Services 
than that. 
 
I want to be very clear to the members of the committee and to 
the House that this Minister of Social Services feels 
comfortable with the legislation that we currently have. It is my 
view that it is properly balanced. And that is why it is 
absolutely imperative that no social worker would ever 
intervene in the relationship between a child and the family on 
the basis of a flippant comment. It just . . . it couldn’t, it 
wouldn’t happen, it couldn’t happen. That kind of conclusion 
can only occur when there is substantiating evidence and some 
. . . including discussion with the child, him or herself, before a 
social worker would reach that point. 
 
So I want to give the assurance to the hon. member, recognizing 
the seriousness with which he makes his comment, that in my 
judgment the current legislation that we have doesn’t permit for 
that to be able to happen in our Saskatchewan, which is one of 
the reasons that I feel comfortable with that. 
 
Having said that, Mr. Chair, I do also want to thank the hon. 
member for . . . the Social Services critic of the opposition and 

his colleagues for their questions. It is my view that these have 
been a good review of the Department of Social Services. We 
had some questions and factual responses. But we’ve also, I 
think, engaged in some discussion/debate about important 
social issues that confront us in our Saskatchewan. 
 
And I do want to join with all of the members of the committee 
in saying thanks to the officials of the department. It is my 
judgment that this department is blessed with some very 
dedicated professionals, hard-working professionals who serve 
their province well and who contribute to the building of a 
better world by the way that they carry out their responsibilities 
as public service employees. And I want to join the members of 
the committee in expressing thanks to the officials in the 
Department of Social Services for their good work, including in 
assisting in these estimates. Thanks, Mr. Chair. 
 
Subvote (SS01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (SS02), (SS03), (SS04), (SS05), (SS09), (SS06), 
(SS07), (SS10), (SS12), (SS11) agreed to. 
 
Vote 36 agreed to. 
 
(21:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Saskatchewan Housing Corporation 
Vote 143 

 
Subvote (SH01) — Statutory. 
 
The Deputy Chair: — That concludes the estimates for the 
Department of Social Services. Thank you very much. 

 
General Revenue Fund 

Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 
Vote 1 

 
Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I would recognize the minister and ask 
the minister to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I have 
with me tonight Mr. Hal Cushon, who is the assistant deputy 
minister just on my right here. Directly behind me is Ms. Louise 
Greenberg, who is the assistant deputy minister of programs 
and services division; Mr. Jack Zepp, beside her, behind Mr. 
Cushon, director, administrative services branch; Mr. Ross 
Johnson, who is the budget officer just seated next to Mr. Zepp. 
And in the back row, Dave Boehm, who is the director of 
financial programming branch; Mr. Ken Svenson, who is the 
manager of customer services and field operations with Crop 
Insurance; and Mr. Al Syhlonyk, who is the Crown branch 
resources from lands branch, Mr. Chair. Those are my officials 
who are with me this evening. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I welcome the 
minister and his officials here tonight. 
 
I want to begin with discussing how I realize that Sask Ag and 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2743 

 

Food and Rural Revitalization provides funding to various 
organizations for different projects and initiatives. And in the 
Public Accounts book 2000-2001 there were two women’s 
agriculture organizations that received funding under the 
subvote of AG06. And that subvote’s objective is to provide 
funding to support research into the development of new 
agriculture technology and to facilitate diversification and 
value-added opportunities in the agri-food industry. 
 
SWAN, Saskatchewan Women’s Agricultural Network, 
received $5,598 and the Saskatchewan Women’s Institutes 
received $6,000. Could the minister tell us the nature of the 
projects that these two organizations were conducting for which 
they received their funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the very first 
question you asked me I need to go back to the department to 
get some additional information for you because they don’t 
have any information with them handy. It’s TAD (Technology 
Adoption and Demonstration) funding, and one will be for a 
conference where my staff tell me that . . . the one will certainly 
be for a portion of a conference. SWAN, the 5,598 on that one I 
expect some of it will be for some policy work that they likely 
did in relationship to developing policy around some support 
services for agricultural farming women. But I don’t have that 
detail with me this evening. I’d certainly be happy to get that 
for you as quickly as we can. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister, and I hope this isn’t 
going to start our evening with how the questions are going to 
be answered. 
 
I received a number of letters from members of the 
Saskatchewan Women’s Institutes requesting funding 
assistance, and I’m quite sure the minister’s receiving those 
letters as well. The Saskatchewan Women’s Institutes is a very 
well-established organization here in our province, having a 
presence since 1911, and they have a number of objectives, one 
of which is to promote the improvement of agricultural and 
other rural communities and to safeguard the environment. And 
so it’s interesting to note that the Saskatchewan Women’s 
Institutes has other provincial affiliates and together they form a 
national organization that also has a link to the Associated 
Country Women of the World. 
 
So again going back to the Public Accounts, I noticed that 
SWAN had received funding each year through subvote 
(AG03), including the year that they also received funding 
through subvote (AG06). In ’98-99 they received $14,000 and 
’99-2000 they received $12,836 and then in 2000-2001 they 
received $12,000 in addition to the 5,598 that we mentioned 
earlier. 
 
So that subvote, the objective is to provide financial assistance 
and compensation programs to support development, 
expansion, and diversification of the agriculture industry. 
Would the Saskatchewan Women’s Institutes not also qualify 
for funding support under the industry assistance subvote 
(AG03)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, what we have 
is, we have two of the women’s organizations that you’ve 
identified and they both do very valuable work across the 

province. Certainly the Saskatchewan Women’s Institute, I too, 
as you have, have received some correspondence. I think the 
issue and the concern here is that, as you know in reviewing the 
estimates, have seen that the TAD funding has now made its 
way from the department to, from the Department of 
Agriculture and Food now to the department of industry and 
resource development. And I expect that what’s happening here 
is that some of the, that organization in particular is concerned 
about what the lifeline for its funding will be. 
 
There’s no question that in the work that the Saskatchewan 
Women’s Institute has done in the province it’s been most 
significant and our task will be, in my view, to try to encourage 
into the future the Saskatchewan industry and resource 
development to continue to provide the kinds of support dollars 
that will be important for them to continue not only their work 
in Saskatchewan but some of the international work, and the 
Canadian work at the national level that you talk about and I 
know that you’re aware of as well. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I’m just going to get the minister to clarify 
that. I believe what he just said is now they have to apply for 
funding under a different department, not under Sask Ag and 
Food? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s right, Mr. Chair. The TAD funding 
this year in the reorganization of government, the Department 
of Agriculture and Food transferred the responsibilities for 
TAD programming to industry and resource development. And 
into the future that funding would be directed through industry 
and resource development as opposed to our department. And it 
would be under that auspices which they would make their 
applications. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
we’re going to move on to the farm land property tax rebate. 
And when your government first initiated this program, what 
was the intent of the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, and to the member, the 
initial intent as you can appreciate in the onset was to try to 
address the issues that rural property owners, farmers, were 
experiencing in terms of trying to deal with some of the 
operating costs of operating their farms. One of the questions of 
course that has always been an issue for producers of rural 
Saskatchewan, as you can appreciate, is the fact that they are 
looking for some mitigation in relationship to the costs of 
paying the education property tax. 
 
Two years ago it was the decision of this government, and 
certainly through the work with SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) to look at how we might 
begin to initiate some way of mitigating some of the costs that 
farmers were experiencing in terms of the education property 
tax. 
 
And so we implemented the two-year program of $25 million a 
year to assist farm families across the province to absorb some 
of the cushion on the education tax side. I know that the 
program has met with overwhelming success across the 
province. Farm families have used the program to assist them 
with some of their operating costs and so the idea of the 
program was to reduce some of the operating costs for farm 



2744 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

families in the province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to point out that the 
intent of the program, if it was to reduce in the costs for the 
producers, it’s more than obvious that those costs are still there. 
If anything it’s become more critical than ever because we are 
in a drought situation, the second year of it. 
 
The producers are somewhat . . . well they’re in dire straits in 
most regions and you admitted that the program was successful, 
and yet that’s one that you’ve cut. So I fail to understand the 
logic in that. But moving on, according to your answer to a 
written question asked by the member from Saltcoats in 2001 
for the 2000-2001 program, approximately $21.5 million of the 
budgeted 25 million was actually paid out to the property land 
owners. So can you tell us how much has been paid out for the 
year 2001-2002? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the number for 
this year . . . the amount for this year paid out is $23,035,024. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could the minister please tell us where the 
surplus of the budgeted 25 million each year, that’s not paid 
out, where does the surplus go? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, the money goes back to the 
consolidated revenue fund. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — What efforts have been taken by the 
department to make the producers aware that this farm land 
property tax rebate program is available and when the deadline 
is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Through the course of both developing the 
program on an annual basis we had a very extensive media 
campaign advising producers when in fact the program was 
enacted, for what periods of time the producers had an 
opportunity to collect the rebate, and then what the official 
deadlines were. 
 
I believe in the first year of the program we extended the 
deadline from the January 31 date to the middle of February, 
and then of course had the same timeline in this year as well. So 
it was, I think February 15 was the timeline in which producers 
across the province had the opportunity to submit their 
applications. 
 
And we have made that information extensively available 
through a variety of the medias that we have in the province, 
both provincially and . . . The Western Producer — we carried 
an article in there on a couple of occasions to identify for 
producers what the timelines were. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Again I’m sure that the minister is hearing 
from the same number of people that the opposition’s hearing 
from. But there’s been a large number of phone calls and letters 
that I and my colleagues have received from producers who 
have missed the application deadline. And it would seem that, 
you know, there wasn’t adequate awareness because it seems 
like there is a large number of producers who missed the 
deadline. Could the minister tell us how many late applications 

there were? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We had this year I believe, my officials 
tell me 95,000 applications. There were 1,300 that were late 
filers. So about 1 per cent of the applications were late filers. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — What process does the department have in 
place to deal with the late applications? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — When we established the program we also 
established an appeal mechanism and had an appeal committee 
that was in place. This appeal committee would receive the 
information. 
 
If in fact somebody was a late filer, they would advise us that 
there was a circumstance as it relates to why they late filed. 
That information would make its way then to the appeal 
committee. If the appeal committee found that there was an 
extenuating circumstance, then if fact what they would do is 
make an exception for that particular individual or family. 
 
I should say to you that . . . Your next question might be how 
many of those extenuating circumstances were in fact dealt 
with. Of those 1,300, if my memory serves me correctly, there 
were about 300 I believe that were in fact approved by the 
appeal committee when they reviewed the applications. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for the answer and that 
sort of did cover indeed my next question. It seems like a very 
small percentage of the applications that go through the appeal 
process is granted an exemption. And so that explains why I’m 
not very surprised that I haven’t heard of one exemption that’s 
been granted. 
 
One particular letter that I received was a copy of a letter that 
was sent to the Premier from Mr. Riviere. And in this letter he 
states, and I quote: 
 

A copy of the rejection letter is enclosed and you will note 
that it states that the review committee carefully reviewed 
my letter of extenuating circumstances, but I was never 
asked for such a letter, nor did I send one. 

 
So it would appear that the review process is severely flawed 
when they are basing their decision, in this case, on a letter of 
explanation that wasn’t even sent; it didn’t even exist. 
 
So I would like to point out to the minister that there appears to 
be a great number of applications that were late, and very few 
of them are granted exemptions for being late. And yet the 
money is available. It’s budgeted for and the property 
landowner really, truly is entitled to that rebate. 
 
So the rebate is a fixed amount of money that can be calculated 
in advance. It’s not a matter of only being able to allocate a 
fund once we know how many claims there will be. 
 
So can the minister tell us what circumstances are considered to 
be acceptable in order for an exemption to be granted for a late 
application? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think there were, Mr. Chair, sort of two 
questions that the member asked. One is that the importance, 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2745 

 

the necessity for the timeline. The necessity for the timeline 
would be that when you establish a program of this magnitude, 
where you have the responsibility of disseminating public 
taxpayers’ money and being accountable to the Provincial 
Auditor, the Provincial Auditor requires that you set a specific 
timeline at which a program would end and that there would be 
a set of circumstances that would be set in place to ensure that 
there would be a process of due diligence if in fact there was 
exemptions that needed to be granted. 
 
The appeal committee has used primarily the issues of death or 
illness in relationship to when somebody might be exempt from 
not having . . . from having late filed, sorry. And so those 
appear to be the two sort of areas that they have been using 
primarily. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I want 
to join with my colleague from Watrous because I’ve had a 
number of letters sent to me with exactly the same issue, where 
they were either late by two days, a week, two weeks, whatever. 
Some of them have gone through the process of appeal, and all 
of them, from my understanding, have been turned down. If the 
budget was bare and all the money was used up by the ones that 
were in time, I could understand that, Mr. Minister. 
 
If my addition is right here, between the first and the second 
year of the $25 million, you’ve put back into general revenue 
very close to $5.5 million. You extended the timeline on the 
first year, and we had dollars left in the pot. Why wouldn’t we 
take time to extend it, put an extension of a month on there 
because the money is there? These farmers definitely need this 
money. And because of late applications, they’re turned down. 
And once again, Mr. Minister, you’ve approved I believe about 
25 to 30 per cent of the appeals but turned down the rest. So 
once again here we go picking winners and losers. 
 
Wouldn’t it be simpler, when the money is sitting there, to 
extend the deadline for a month or whatever it would take to 
catch these up and pay that excess money out instead of quickly 
returning it into general revenue? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I appreciate the member’s concern, and 
clearly I, like you, have received some letters as well. And 
partly when we established the program, as I’d said earlier, 
there’s an importance here of making sure that we have a 
timeline because it needs to meet with the expectations of the 
Provincial Auditor. And so we need to set the timeline. 
 
And we found that in the first year that there needed to be an 
extension, and that’s why we extended the program by six 
weeks from the time of which the deadline of tax payment was 
due. And we should also remember here that there were 95,000 
applications that were filed in the province. In some of those 
cases that I’ve had an opportunity to review personally because 
they came to me, there are people who got a return last year and 
were on time and this year filed their return late which says to 
me that there needs to be some responsibility here by the 
individuals because they know, because they got the payment 
last year. 
 
Now the reality here is, is that because it’s taxpayers’ money 
that we administer, we set up the rules in relationship to the way 
in which the public accounting system in this province works, 

the expectation of what the Provincial Auditor is. That’s why 
we have the timeline. 
 
And we set up an appeal process in Saskatchewan. We have 
two individuals who sit on the appeal who in our view . . . sit on 
the appeal both for C-SAP (Canada-Saskatchewan Assistance 
Program) and sat on the appeal for CFIP (Canadian Farm 
Income Program). These people are at arm’s length from the 
government. They’re producers in the province. And so it’s my 
view that you need to have a process. 
 
And at the end of the day, it’s unfortunate that we have these 
kinds of circumstances, but I mean we need to live within the 
guidelines. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, Mr. Minister, 
and to your officials. Mr. Minister, I think that process is 
always important, but really what the important thing is is the 
end product. And the end product is what happens to the 
taxpayer and the people who have filed their application and 
have been banking on this money to be part of their farm 
income. 
 
Mr. Minister, you indicated that there was 95,000 applications, 
and from our information I believe there’s only 55,000 farmers 
in the province, so maybe you could clarify that number for us. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, we all have letters from constituents, 
from farmers who’ve had, for extenuating circumstances, have 
had their applications rejected. The member from Saltcoats and 
Watrous both indicated that there’s money left over, the money 
had been set aside for paying to the farmers. It’s not that you’re 
going to have to go back to Treasury Board and ask for more 
money. That money could be given to these farmers who are 
banking on it. 
 
In the last few years the burden of paying for education tax on 
farm land has become extremely high. It’s just an added burden 
in this last year when drought has been a real problem in many 
areas in the province. There’s farmers who are constituents, 
citizens of this province, are saying that there should be some 
way of looking at this and adjusting the process or the 
guidelines if it means that these people who have paid their 
taxes and help pay for education in this province can actually 
get some type of a rebate. 
 
Is there any way you’ll reconsider your deadline and give these 
farmers an opportunity to get the funds that you’re already 
budgeted for that’s in the budget, the money is there, give it to 
the people that you had actually planned on them having it in 
the first place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I don’t disagree 
with you that the money was available and that the money could 
have been paid out to the producers. The reality is is that we 
had a deadline. And if you were to say to me that producers in 
Saskatchewan didn’t know that there was a deadline and that 
we didn’t do a very good job of advertising the issue, that if it 
was only a one-year program and not a two-year program, then 
I think we could easily make the case that we should be 
extending the deadline or making sure that we pay out the 
money. The reality is that the money makes its way back to the 
General Revenue Fund. 



2746 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

And that when I said to you that there were 95,000 farmers in 
Saskatchewan, I thought for a minute you might have thought 
that we’re growing the number of farmers in Saskatchewan 
within a year. And the truth is that we are growing the number 
of the farmers in Saskatchewan, but we haven’t grown them by 
twice as much. That 95,000 is about two years, it’s two years of 
the program, and so that’s for that period of time of which that’s 
covered off. 
 
The money today that we . . . or the farmers who haven’t 
received their applications or haven’t received the funding, in 
my view we’ve provided the kinds of due diligence on and it’s 
unfortunate that we are in this kind of circumstances that we are 
with some of those families. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Minister, I too have a 
handful of letters from constituents who received the Dear John 
letter and were rejected for a number of . . . basically because 
their applications were too late. 
 
And these constituents had a variety of reasons. A couple of 
constituents that raised this issue with my office were away, 
working out of the province so that they could support their 
farm and one was I believe five days late and another one was 
approximately 10 days late. Another constituent went into the 
hospital and had surgery in late December and wasn’t able to do 
the administrative duties that were required to apply for the 
rebate and that constituent was also turned down. 
 
So there’s a whole variety of reasons. And that’s our thing as to 
why some of the producers applied after the February 15 
deadline, and, Mr. Minister, a lot of . . . in fact all of this could 
have very easily been solved and these problems could have 
been anticipated and dealt with in a much easier fashion. 
 
If you ever have the opportunity to apply for the grant, you 
realize that all the information you need to fill out the 
application comes from your tax notice and your tax receipt and 
all that information is generated at the RM office. 
 
And, Minister, I know SARM made a proposal to your 
department that they would administer the program for you, and 
it would have been a simple thing for the producers, and I 
would suspect for your department, to have gone that route and 
would have alleviated all these problems that we’re dealing 
with here tonight. 
 
And my question to you is, why wouldn’t you have taken 
SARM up on their proposal and had it done right at the RM 
office? Because as I said all the information you need to apply 
for this rebate comes from your tax assessment form and your 
tax receipt. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair, to the member, 
I say we did have a conversation with SARM about them 
administering the program and would have liked for them to 
administer the program. In fact we had numerous conversations 
for them to take it on. 
 
The problem that we had, both which they identified and we 
identified, is that we had the home quarter exemption in the first 
year of the program which made it very difficult for RMs (rural 
municipality) to administer it because you have people who 

have farm land all over the province, and so that they weren’t 
able then to track from a central location where in fact the home 
quarter that would be designated would be exempt from. And 
that was a real, huge issue for them. 
 
(21:30) 
 
Because we could do the central administration and the 
management through the central program that we had 
established, that’s the rationale for in and which we built the 
program around. 
 
This year we changed the home exemption issue, and that 
would make it far easier then for them to administer the 
program. But it was in the second year of the program, and 
that’s the rationale for why and which we did it. 
 
I know the member might be somewhat concerned about the 
issue, but there was a great deal of dialogue with SARM around 
this particular issue. They couldn’t find a resolve on the home 
quarter exemption, and that’s why we administered the program 
in the way in which we did. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Chair, the minister said that you have a 
problem with identifying the home quarter because some 
number of farmers farm land in different municipalities and so 
on. Well for one thing, you could have a farmer sign a 
declaration saying that this is his home quarter, and the other 
thing is, if you’ve got an $80 million system in land titles that’s 
supposed to be able to provide all of these services, you would 
think that $80 million system could provide you with the 
wherewithal to administer this program at the RM offices, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I just want to say to the member that we 
did offer the program to SARM in the first year. We did offer it 
to them. And based on the criteria which we had — and I have 
correspondence that relates to the discussion that we had — it 
was very difficult for them to do it and that’s why we set up the 
administration to operate it. 
 
Had this program had a longer life, it’s my view that this would 
have been a responsibility that we would have provided to 
SARM to do into the future. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I would like to let the 
minister know that SARM offered to administrate that program 
actually. And they didn’t foresee the difficulties that the 
minister just made out. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — We’re moving on to a totally different topic 
again which is the Conservation Cover Program. And the Sask 
Ag and Food Web site states that it is a four-year, $26 million 
initiative that will contribute to the cost of converting crop land 
to perennial cover. 
 
Can the minister tell us where the program can be found exactly 
in the budget Estimates book, because I had difficulty finding it, 
and if it is 26 million for each of the four years or 26 million in 
total to be divided by four years? 
 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2747 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the estimate can be 
found on page 27 of the Ag and Food Rural Revitalization 
under the farm stabilization and adaptation area, and it’s within 
the adaptation Initiatives, and so it’s within that category. And 
the announcement of the program last year was for 26 million 
over a period of four years. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could the minister tell us how much was 
paid out in the program last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It was 7.6 last year. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could I ask the minister if he could tell us 
how many applications were received, and did they all receive 
funding, or were some applications turned down? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Last year, Madam Member, we received 
approximately 11,000 applications, and as I mentioned to you, 
we paid out 7.6 million at the $15 per acre at the maximum of 
50 acres. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — In 2001 as the minister mentioned, they 
received $15 an acre for a maximum of 50 acres, and I 
remember the press release explaining that very well. But in 
2002 I noticed the applicants will only receive $7.50 an acre. 
Why did the government make the change to the program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We made it, Mr. Deputy Chair, this year a 
two-part payment, so in the first part of the application we will 
pay out the $7.50. Then upon the completion of the program, 
what we’ll do is we’ll pay out the remaining portion to the 
allocation that we have this year in our budget. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Could the final payment then be less than 
$7.50? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It could be, Mr. Deputy Chair. It could be 
less than the seven fifty. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — What ceiling is the minister looking at for 
allocating for this year? Is he looking at allocating only 7.6 
million and he’ll divide that by the number of applicants, or is 
he looking at 8 million? How much money does he plan on 
spending on the program this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Based on the information that my officials 
have provided me this year to date to June 12 — or not to date, 
to June 12 — we had 1,170 applications. So there is a good 
chance here that we’ll pay out the entire 7.50 in the remaining 
portion of the program. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Again I’m going to ask the minister, is there 
a ceiling for this year? Are we looking at spending a maximum 
of 8 million or a maximum of 7.5 million this year? You must 
have some total money in your mind in order to know how to 
divide it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The member is asking what our budgeted 
number for this year is, I believe, and it’s 3.9 million. And 
that’s why I’d indicated that based on the number of 
applications that we have to date, the second portion of the 
payment will likely meet those expectations of paying out the 
$7.50. 

Ms. Harpauer: — The minister will have to cope with my 
re-asking a question again then. Last year you said you spent 
7.6 million. This year you’re budgeting 3.9 million, which is 
significantly less. Why are you making that decision? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — As I’d indicated on my earlier response 
that we had budgeted 26 million to be paid out over the period 
of four years, we anticipated that this year what we would see is 
a reduction in the number of seeded acres in the Cover Program 
because of how dry it was last fall — as the member would 
know — and anticipated that we would be in a situation again 
this year where producers would likely seed down less cover, 
and so budgeted a smaller amount this year to anticipate that 
there would be a lesser seed down in the province. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister, and I have to admit I’m 
very taken . . . surprised that there is less . . . or you’re looking 
at less applications this year because I’m sure the minister 
answered one of my questions during question period by saying 
that this program was such a success that there was many more 
acres this year going under permanent cover. However, I don’t 
have that in front of me, so perhaps I’ll look it up and maybe I 
was mistaken and he didn’t actually say that to me during 
question period, but somehow I remember that. 
 
Are there any other changes that were made from the 2001 
program to the 2002 program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Only the two-part payment was the only 
change that we made to the program. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister, and we’re moving on to 
another topic. Sort of a marathon session tonight. 
 
The minister is well aware of the concerns of the non-quota egg 
producers, and in particular those of Terry Motz and Curtis 
Jensen. Saskatchewan has a very small percentage of our 
country’s egg quota — I believe we only have about 3 per cent 
— which is quite frustrating considering that we have the 
resources in our province to produce so much more than that. 
That 3 per cent of the country’s quota is owned by I believe 68 
producers, and the non-quota producers remain on the waiting 
list to obtain quotas for years. And some I believe have been on 
there for well over 10 years. 
 
Some of the issues that the non-quota producers have raised 
surround the practice of the Saskatchewan egg board, and in 
particular how they allocate and transfer the quotas. It is my 
understanding that the minister has hired an agrologist by the 
name of Eugene Bendig to investigate these allegations and to 
ensure that the egg producers board is complying with the Act 
that regulates the board. 
 
Has Mr. Bendig completed his investigation; and if so, would 
the minister table a copy of his report for us; or in the future, are 
we going to be able to see that report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I have not yet received the report, but I 
expect to receive the report very, very shortly and will have it 
then available for review. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Will that be available for the public to see as 
well as the opposition members to see, or is that going to be a 



2748 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

report that will only be for the eyes of your department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The only rationale for not releasing the 
report would be if there is personal information as it relates to 
one of the producers or to the producers that would put them in 
jeopardy if we were to release the information. Otherwise, 
certainly I’m intending to make that available to you. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I have a constituent who is 
planning on increasing his feedlot so he can accommodate 
5,000 head of cattle, and he’s now learned that he’s going to 
have to not just get a permit, a livestock operations permit, but 
he’s also going to have to have a hydrologist’s study which is 
going to cost him between 10 and $15,000 or up to $20,000. 
 
Can you tell me what kind of . . . first of all what number is 
required to . . . what constitutes an intensive livestock 
operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, Madam Member, the number is 
300. So as long as you operate your livestock operation under 
the 300 limit, then you aren’t expected to be exposed to the 
kinds of work that you’re talking about that needs to be done 
here. If in fact you grow that operation beyond that limit then 
the expectation is that you would then need to — as the 
owner/operator or as the community feedlot would then need to 
— go through the kinds of work that you’re talking about to 
expand the permits, the hydrologist’s study, to ensure that there 
is appropriate manure management, that there isn’t any effect to 
the water sources or the drainage sources. 
 
In some instances as it relates in more particular to the hog 
industry, where there appears to be by people who live within 
areas more concern about the stench or the smell that comes 
from the hog barn as opposed from a livestock feedlot, there is 
always concern about air quality as well. So the hydrology 
report tries to take into account all of the environmental issues 
that need to be addressed here, and that’s when it would engage 
itself beyond the 300 limit. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then are you saying that this 
individual who will have this feedlot with his own cattle in it, is 
he going to require the hydrologist’s report? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m told by my officials that the hydrology 
report in some cases is only, is only needing to be done if in fact 
the feedlot is attaching . . . is nearby a water source, or in fact 
the feedlot may be sitting near an aquifer. And I’m familiar 
with one that’s being developed in our area of the province of 
which they are requiring a hydrology report because the feedlot 
is very closely located to an aquifer of which the town receives 
its water source from. So it’s primarily due in instances where 
there is a water source that’s nearby or that might be affected by 
the establishment of an intensive livestock operation in that 
area. 
 
(21:45) 
 
Ms. Draude: — So, Mr. Minister, then your department will 
come out to determine if a hydrologist’s report is required for 
that specific operation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it would be Sask Water 

that would be the people who would be responsible for doing 
the work. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, is the hydrologist that can be 
hired, is he through Sask Water, or through your department, or 
are there private individuals that will be doing the work? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think I would say, Mr. Deputy Chair, that 
the hydrologists are provided either by Sask Water or they 
certainly are within the private sector, and it would be from 
those sources of which the people would make themselves 
available. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, this specific case that I’m talking 
about, I’m wondering if I can just talk to you about it and we 
can get some of the details ironed out to see if this constituent 
actually will require the hydrologist’s study? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’d be happy to take a 
look at that individual case at your convenience. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, my questions are surrounding intensive livestock 
operations, as you are I’m sure very much aware. Mr. Minister, 
in my constituency we have a number of barns that have been 
built, specifically hog operations that rely on open air lagoons. 
A number of barns in the Preeceville, and Sturgis, and Rama, 
and in fact near Theodore, Mr. Minister, which I’m sure you’re 
very familiar since that is close to your land. 
 
Mr. Minister, lately in the last couple of months I’ve heard from 
not only people who have been opposed to the expansion of 
intensive livestock operations, but also the people who have 
been supportive. And as you’ve mentioned tonight already, 
many people understand that there is a need to address air 
quality, there’s a need to address water quality, there’s a need to 
ensure that there isn’t pollution of the land. 
 
And as a result of those concerns that have been raised I would 
like to find out from you, Mr. Minister, that I believe it was 
about a year ago the provincial Department of Agriculture along 
with the federal department put forward some, I’ll call it 
research money or pilot project money, to a corporation in 
Saskatoon that was going to implement a pilot project at one of 
Quadra barns at Broderick and that was going to be a pilot 
study that was going to look at anaerobic digestion of the hog 
waste and look at production of the methane gas as well as a 
power source. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you inform us as to the state of that pilot 
project. Is it fully implemented already and are we seeing 
research data that is being compiled from that project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, you are 
absolutely right that it is about a year ago now that we provided 
some additional resources with the federal government and the 
province to look at this particular type of manure management. 
We yet do not have the kind of information that we think is 
important here to analyze to see whether or not into the future, 
when we’re seeing the expansion of the hog industry, that you 
could use this kind of technology to ensure that we can do the 
kinds of . . . particularly air and water-source management that 
we need to do as it relates to the hog industry. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2749 

 

The minute that we get that kind of information we’re certainly 
going to make it available because it will have impact, in my 
view, in terms of what we do in the future as we build this 
industry because there’s all kinds of potential as you know for 
it. And we need to be sure that we can not only protect the 
environmental . . . and be good environmental stewards here, 
but also it provides some discomfort and some inconvenience 
for people as you’ve said, and not only those people who today 
are not necessarily proponents of the hog industry but are folks 
who support us who understand the importance of what this 
industry is doing in our regions. And it’s for that purpose that 
we need to also build a better understanding of what’s available 
today and we’re waiting for that research to make itself 
available. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for your answer 
about being able to share that data. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question still is, is the pilot project actually 
underway in Broderick? Like if there was to be a tour of the 
Quadra barn, would we see an active project where there is 
generation of power and the like? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, also in conjunction with the Broderick 
operation, I saw in the media just not too long ago an article 
that SaskPower was also considering a pilot project that 
sounded very similar, Mr. Minister. They were talking about the 
generation of methane gas and the ability to produce power also 
from an intensive livestock operation . . . a pilot project was 
going to occur in the pork industry. Is this the same project 
that’s going on at Broderick or is SaskPower considering 
alternate testing and an alternate project as well somewhere else 
in the province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — My officials, Mr. Member, tell me that 
these are two separate projects. These are not the same projects 
and that the first project of which we made the investment last 
year, we don’t have the detail yet that we need to have. 
 
Can we make the tour? I expect that shortly we’ll be advised by 
the partners who are involved that they’ll be prepared to allow 
us to see some of the work that they’ve done there and to have 
also a tour of the facility. Today much of what we can see is 
from the outside and that’s really not what we’re wanting to see 
at the end of the day. We want to see the results of the data that 
they’re analyzing for us. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I would 
appreciate, and I’m sure that many people in the province 
would appreciate knowing where the SaskPower project is 
going to go as well. Because, Mr. Minister, I’d like to sort of 
conclude by indicating to you that . . . and I know that you’ve 
heard from many people in the province about intensive 
livestock operations — both the positive things and the negative 
things. 
 
And while people understand the benefits that may occur from 
the ability for farmers to sell grain, for the ability that there will 
be maybe job creation, the concern that I’ve heard very, very 
strongly from, from not only the very strong opponents to the 
intensive livestock operations but supporters who are saying 
that air quality is of utmost importance. 
 

And, Mr. Minister, I can tell you that I have a barn that is 
located about four miles from where I live in my home 
community of Invermay. And when the actual direct application 
of the waste product occurred from that barn not too long ago, 
everybody in the neighbourhood knew for a week, and more 
than a week, that indeed this had taken place and the odour was 
not very good. 
 
So we have had a number of people that are saying that it is 
time to stop expansion of the livestock industries through the 
method of open-air lagoons. And I know, Mr. Minister, that 
you’ve been involved in discussions with I believe the company 
is called Pure Lean which uses a different method which is not 
the water method and the lagoon method but uses a dry compost 
and relies on something different. And I understand that the 
odour is not as bad and indeed the air quality is improved. 
 
So while we’re looking at the Broderick project, while we’re 
looking at the SaskPower project, and we’re going to, I 
understand from you that we’ll be seeing data in the course of 
this year and probably into 2003. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, if the information that comes from 
these projects is such that the open air lagoon would be a 
situation that needs to be changed and we would need to move 
to the system that you have put some dollars into in Broderick 
to allow sort of a different plan to occur, what will you do with 
projects like the Big Sky operations in my constituency, of 
which the government is a significant shareholder in those 
projects? Will you be looking at retrofitting those fairly new 
sites, those operations that have been put into those 
communities, or into those areas near the communities, to 
correct what obviously will be a weakness in the system, if that 
is indeed what is proven at these pilot projects? 
 
Is there going to be a commitment from Sask Ag and Food to 
encourage retrofitting of existing open air lagoons to move to 
whatever will be determined at these pilot projects if indeed that 
is deemed to be more beneficial for all concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, you ask a 
very, very important question because, as you know, as we’re 
moving along in developing the industry, we’re also looking at 
ways in which we can enhance the environmental standards 
across the province and are looking at data that other people are 
working with today in the areas of which you’ve already 
described, those operations that are in place. 
 
Today when I speak and meet with the hog industry as you do, 
particularly those who are the large producers in Saskatchewan 
. . . and we have another one that’s just being built in the Leroy 
area, a very, very large project, and they are using the earthen 
pit manure storage facilities. If in fact and when we find — and 
I know that we will — some environmental standards of which 
you can process the waste in a far more efficient fashion, we’ll 
eventually need to get to the decision about, what do we do with 
those that are already established in the province? Will there be 
some additional resources that will need to be provided to those 
operators in the province because today . . . They built those 
operations on the margins that they have, without adding the 
significant infrastructure costs that would be required here to 
meet the kind of standards that we’re talking about. 
 



2750 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Today we’re suggesting that when we get there, and I expect 
we’ll get there sooner than later, we’ll need to look and evaluate 
that with the industry, in developing the kinds of environmental 
standards that we’re going to want. 
 
And I can appreciate your comments about the way in which, in 
the area of the province of which you live and from time to time 
when the prevailing winds are coming in the right direction, you 
get the full impact of what the earthen pits are giving off. 
 
I’m told that you live somewhere between the barn and where 
our cottage is. And so I’ve often wondered whether or not 
you’re contributing to any of that that’s coming from that part 
of the province. But I know that that’s not the case. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Well, 
Mr. Minister, I hope that I’m not contributing to your air quality 
at all. 
 
Mr. Minister, my final question is, while we’re studying the 
examples that you’ve identified with SaskPower and with the 
company at Broderick, are there examples that are similar in 
nature that are successful in other provinces, in other countries, 
that your officials have had an opportunity to study to enable 
you to put forward a plan for the future? 
 
And I understand where you are today in terms of moving the 
intensive livestock operations in the pork industry, you know, 
into the future and you’ve expanded that industry rapidly in 
Saskatchewan, but I’m looking at protecting the people of this 
province, protecting the air quality, the water quality. Are there 
examples in the world or in some part of Canada that would 
lead you to say that we will be able to copy some particular 
intensive livestock operation that indeed is exhibiting the kinds 
of quality controls that you need here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, what we’re 
certainly doing on a regular basis is making sure that we stay 
close to what the industry is developing, not only in the country, 
in Canada or in the US and North America, but we’ve also been 
speaking and working with the young man from Saskatoon who 
has done a fair bit of work in this area. He has been studying the 
Dutch models because they have some very good proficient 
technology in Holland. And so when you ask the question about 
whether or not we’re trying to be close to that, we absolutely 
are. 
 
We have, my officials tell me, a tri-provincial conference 
coming up this summer of which the three Prairie provinces are 
coming together looking at the whole issues of manure 
management and trying to enhance and improve our technology 
on a regular basis to try and alleviate some of the issues that 
we’re having today as it relates to the environmental future. 
 
(22:00) 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Deputy Chair. Mr. 
Minister, according to the new 2002 policy on crop rotations, 
there’s no insurance coverage for loss if chickpeas are seeded 
more than once in four years on the same land. In cases where 
loss is caused by drought, hail, or flooding, it seems that crop 
insurance should cover the loss even if the rotation has been 

shortened from one crop in four years on the same land. 
 
These days with vigilance and timely spraying, it’s certainly 
possible to grow chickpeas on the same land, more than one 
crop in four years, very successfully. It may be understandable 
if crop insurance were to refuse coverage for disease damage in 
cases of shortened rotations. However, why does crop insurance 
refuse coverage for crop loss due to the other causes that I have 
listed? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, when 
we go to develop crop insurance programs particularly for new 
commodities — and in 1998 the chickpeas would have been a 
new commodity — we spend a good deal of time with the 
industry trying to ensure and determine whether or not . . . or 
what the criteria should be when we’re actually providing the 
insurance coverage. 
 
And I should say to you that in our consultations with the 
industry, the policy of which we’ve adopted at the crop 
insurance is really the policy driven by the industry. Through 
their work over the years, they’ve had an opportunity to test this 
with us, and they’ve said to us that they do not wish for us to 
insure crops outside of the four-year rotation because of the 
problems from time to time that they will cause with their 
neighbours, the concern that they have about ascochyta, and 
certainly sort of the disclosure loss that would occur to the 
industry itself. 
 
So this policy is not one that’s been determined in isolation by 
the Crop Insurance Corporation. It’s been really the direction 
that the industry has provided for us, and that’s how we’ve 
arrived at the position that we have. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there’s 
been some concern over the level of coverage for chickpeas. 
Has any consideration been given to individual coverage for 
chickpeas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, we are looking at 
providing the individual coverage. We don’t yet have sufficient 
data, but we’re certainly intending to go in that direction. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Do you know if 
sufficient data will be available for the next crop year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, we’re just 
developing some of the area yield averages today. If the 
question is, will we be . . . We’ll be in a position to have the 
program available next year, my officials tell me that with the 
industry we’re probably not prepared yet to have the coverage 
available next year, but we expect that that will happen for us 
within very short order. 
 
What’s happening, of course, is that we’re seeing larger 
numbers of acres that are being seeded across the province. 
We’re finding that as the crops are being produced in other 
parts of the region, that the industry wants to be sure that when 
we’re going to the individual averages that we’ve established all 
of that data. 
 
So I expect that we’ll have that fairly shortly, but my officials 
tell me that likely not yet in the new year. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2751 

 

Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could 
you tell me what the total cost of operating the crop insurance 
program is? That’s the federal, provincial, and farmer or 
producer contributions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — On average, Mr. Chair, to the member, it’s 
about 25 to $26 million a year. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And can you break 
that down as to what portion would be producer claims and 
what portion would be administration? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The 25 million or $26 million is the 
administration portion. I’m just getting the producer claims 
from my official as we’re speaking now. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. What portion of the 
total costs of the program would be federal, provincial, and 
producer payments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, if the question is what 
percentages we contribute to the program, the province 
contributes 35 per cent, the federal government 28 per cent, and 
the producer 37 per cent. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Then if the 25 or 26 
million is administration, what is the total cost of the program 
including all contributions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, the total premiums last 
year were 225.226 million and then you would need to add to 
that the $25 million of administration costs of which the $25 
million administration cost would be cost shared 50/50 with the 
federal government. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, you 
will remember, I’m sure quite well on Monday, where a number 
of the opposition members that represent a large area of the 
province talked about the serious drought condition that still 
exists in our province. And in particular the livestock producers 
are becoming more and more desperate for feed and water, and 
sadly it appears that massive livestock has already been sold at 
fire sale prices. And I fear that many more of the livestock in 
the province will be sold this fall, before winter, because there 
isn’t the feed available to carry through to be able to keep the 
livestock over the winter. 
 
One example of one area, I just received a phone call today 
from a fellow from the RM of Connaught, and they apparently 
were one of the driest areas last year already, and this year the 
fellow told me that they’ve only received 32 millimetres of 
rainfall since April 1. Beside the fact that the crops are finished, 
the livestock producers have absolutely no hay land. 
 
And I notice in my own area, and I’m rather on the edge of 
what is severe drought, there is bodies of water that I’ve never 
seen in my lifetime dry. They’re totally dried up. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, your government has identified the need to 
increase livestock in this province. We have fallen drastically 
below the numbers of livestock in our two neighbouring 
provinces, and it’s largely due to a lack of vision and a lack of 
policies, I might say, that would attract the livestock sectors to 

our province. 
 
But now I believe that your department and yourself recognize 
that we need to change that, but the instant that there is a hurdle 
such as this drought, again I feel that your department has 
dropped the ball. The drought started last year, and in my mind 
that would be the time to at least give some consideration to 
what type of programs you could implement the following year 
to address a drought situation, should it happen a second year 
and indeed it has. 
 
And yet your particular department not only has no programs to 
address an additional year of drought, but you cut your own 
budget so that it doesn’t have the flexibility that’s needed to 
address the drought, although I would like to point out that you 
obviously have a surplus from the farm land property tax rebate 
that could have perhaps been put into a water program. 
 
We need to address the disaster that’s occurring right now in the 
livestock industry, and the most immediate and the one that 
we’re hearing from the most is the cattle producers. And APAS 
last week, it’s my understanding, asked for the province to 
change its crop insurance policy to allow for a total write-off of 
drought ravaged crops that are either too thin or meagre to 
provide a higher income than what the costs would be just to 
harvest it. 
 
Or there are other crops that are out there, and I know there is 
quite a few in my area, that’s far too late. It’s not going to make 
the season. It’s going to freeze before the crop is ever mature 
enough to harvest. This would allow the producers the 
opportunity to write off their crops and then allow their cattle or 
their neighbour’s cattle — they themselves may not have 
livestock — but if they could write off their crop, would allow 
another producer to bring their livestock on to the land. And it’s 
my understanding that at one time during the ’80s, crop 
insurance did indeed do this, and they allowed farmers to graze 
cattle on fields and cut it for forage. 
 
So I was wondering if the minister is even considering doing 
such a thing, taking such an initiative, to try to address the feed 
difficulty that we have in our province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much. Mr. Deputy Chair, 
to the member, I appreciate your concern, and I do recall the 
conversations that we had on Monday, and I am most aware of 
the kinds of pressures that some of our livestock producers are 
faced across the province. 
 
And I was surprised, to say the least, that when I reviewed some 
of the data just recently that what happened with our livestock 
numbers over 2001 to 2002, and I was looking at the total 
heifers and cows on farms as of January 1 and in the year 2001, 
we had 1.296 million head. In January 1 of 2002, we had 1.331 
million head. So in spite of the very, very difficult year that we 
had in the livestock industry last year and the serious, serious 
drought that we had in the province, we actually saw our heifers 
and cow herds in the province grow slightly over that period of 
time. 
 
Now the reality is that we’re now into year two of the drought, 
and fortunately we have a larger tract of the province this year 
of which the hay crop and the grain crop will be far better than 



2752 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

it was the last year. And that will be most helpful, in my view, 
to address some of the shortages that parts of the province are 
going to experience this year. 
 
Now what we did last year, or late last year, is a number of 
things. We got the additional water money — not only from our 
own budget but we got some federal money — for wells and 
dugouts which producers said were important for them. And 
we’re prepared again this year, as I’ve said before on a couple 
of occasions, I think to you and to other members across the 
way, that soon as we hear what the federal portion of the $589 
million for water will be, and that $100 million that they’ve set 
aside this year for a variety of different programs of which 
water will be cost shared with the provinces, we’re prepared 
then to put our share into that because it’ll be 60/40 and to do 
the kind of work across the province that’s necessary. 
 
(22:15) 
 
Last year I attempted, as you know, in October/November, to 
get the federal government to increase its crop insurance 
contribution to producers across the province because what we 
wanted to do, of course, is we wanted to enhance the crop 
insurance program that would provide better coverage for the 
. . . not only the grain producers across the province and oilseed 
producers but also for livestock. And so then we made the 
changes that we did this spring, with some criticism I can 
appreciate, where we took the spot loss hail, took that chunk of 
money and put it into the grass and into the forage program — 
difficult decision for us to have made over here, but for sure the 
right decision when it comes today to looking at what’s 
happening in the various different parts of the province where 
it’s dry again. 
 
We got the tax deferral extended for yet another year which will 
be very helpful for our producers in the livestock industry, and 
they’ve told me about how important this is. I meet with the, as 
you know, the farm organizations and farm groups, I meet with 
them every six or seven weeks. And what they have said to me 
now, unequivocally again, is that we shouldn’t be putting any 
additional money into transportation either of feed or livestock 
because it’s by and large a business plan which livestock 
producers have included in their cost of doing business every 
year. 
 
We also extended, as you know, some additional grazing land 
and land for haying — both SERM lands and Crown lands; 
we’ve opened it up this year, just recently announced an 
additional 10,000 acres of wildlife land so that producers could 
make their livestock available to them. And just a couple of 
days ago, we announced the additional equipment from Sask 
Water for water pumping. 
 
We continue to have our feed and grain forage listing service so 
that producers have access to the information, and I can say to 
you, in the area of the province that I come from and the 
member from Saltcoats comes from, we will see a relatively 
good hay crop which will make itself available, I know, as it did 
last year for other parts of the province. 
 
And then of course, as much as we don’t agree with the fact that 
the NISA or the CFIP program was not very beneficial for 
many producers across the province, those two safety nets are 

still in place this year: both NISA and the CFIP program. My 
hope, of course, is in our conversations in the next several 
weeks that we’re going to be able to find for Saskatchewan 
producers a far better crop insurance program where that crop 
insurance program can provide the kinds of coverages that you 
and I will both want for our producers across the province, and 
it will be, certainly, determined by the level of funding, at the 
end of the day, that gets put in by the national government, 
which we’re waiting to hear. Not only here in Saskatchewan are 
we waiting to hear, but we’re waiting to hear as Agriculture 
ministers across Canada what the federal government’s 
participation in that is going to be. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — The minister touched on a number of issues 
that I would like to address. He mentioned additional funding 
for water, and I think there can be no doubt in this House where 
the Saskatchewan Party position has been on additional funding 
for water and how desperately we need that to be addressed. So 
I’m hoping when the minister says that fairly soon he will have 
an announcement for additional funding for water, I hope that is 
very, very soon. And I hope it gets into the producers’ hands in 
a very timely manner. 
 
The other issue that the minister mentioned was the number of 
head of cattle that’s in the province and how it’s increased. And 
I cannot explain in detail how those statistics are found, but I 
know I have had it explained to me by the cattle producers of 
how that number is very inaccurate because the tracking system 
is inadequate, and often the number of head of cattle that are in 
the province is a deceiving number. 
 
And you’ll have to pardon me if I question those statistics and 
how realistic that they actually are. The auction marts tell the 
story. I mean we have Heartland that’s saying that their sales is 
up four to five times what a normal year would be, and they’re 
not the only auction mart that is recording those types of 
increases in sales. So the two don’t jibe obviously, where we 
have more livestock in a province but we’re not selling it. Of 
course we are. The producers are not lying to us. They are not 
trying to be deceptive by any means. They are selling their 
cattle. 
 
The minister also mentioned the listing that he had. And by no 
means, I don’t discourage his department from having a Web 
site available that has listings of feed. However I have checked 
that Web site on an ongoing basis to see it it’s increased. The 
last time I looked I think there was 22 listings. A lot of the bales 
that were available were straw bales. They’re not adequate feed 
to sustain livestock. So therefore the amount of listings on that 
Web site might be helpful for some, but by far isn’t going to be 
adequate to address the difficulties that many producers are 
facing. 
 
So I want to return to the question, and the question was the call 
that APAS made last week on changes to crop insurance. I 
believe it’s been done in the past. I know of one producer in my 
area whose crop is particularly poor. He had sprayed it once for 
weeds. The dry conditions meant that the crop didn’t come up. 
It’s extremely sparse. He had an adjuster come out to write off 
his crop. The adjuster told him that he would not be covered for 
crop insurance unless he sprayed it yet again. So the farmer’s in 
a dilemma. He either just takes the loss and doesn’t collect the 
crop insurance or he has the additional cost of the spray. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2753 

 

It’s just a ridiculous decision that was made. This is a crop that 
could be allowed to a livestock producer and the livestock could 
be turned on to this field. It is a very poor looking crop but that 
is the decision the adjuster made. And that’s decisions that’s 
being made far too often. 
 
So I’m going to return to the question that I asked originally. Is 
the minister and his department even going to consider the 
request made by APAS? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, we have 
had the conversation, and I know that APAS has also had the 
conversation at the national level with the federal government. 
The federal government is not prepared to change its program 
this year. And as a result of that they are not prepared to cost 
share in the program. So in this given year we’re not in the 
position to go back to change the program and the kinds of 
requirement that APAS has asked. 
 
Clearly this year’s issues would be easier or far easier resolved 
had we got the appropriate amount of dollars at the beginning. 
And that would have meant by putting the additional funds into 
the crop insurance program this year as we asked in October 
and November of last year, because we realized that there was a 
need here for an enhanced crop insurance program. The national 
government was not very accommodating as you know. And as 
a result of that we needed to make the kinds of changes to our 
own program as we have this year. And . . . I can stop there, Mr. 
Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and I really question his 
answer. I know the crop insurance programs in the provinces 
are conducted differently. It was my understanding that the 
provincial government administrated the crop insurance 
program. I could be mistaken and corrected here but I’m sure a 
phone call to the federal government will help clarify that for 
me. If indeed the federal government is the controlling factor in 
how the crop insurance in this province is run, has the minister 
even asked the federal government if they could make these 
changes? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, to the member, the 
member would know that the crop insurance program is cost 
shared, and it’s cost shared, as I think I mentioned earlier to the 
member from Thunder Creek, on the percentages this year of 
which I identified. We sign on a three-year agreement of which 
is just expiring now, the percentage of involvement that the 
federal government makes with us. And it’s within those 
parameters of which we operate the program. 
 
We administer it here in Saskatchewan, absolutely, and we cost 
share the administration costs, but we’re fixed in terms of the 
amount of dollars that the federal government puts in. Less so 
fixed as we are, because as you know, this year we put an 
additional $14 million into the crop insurance program. 
 
The federal government is moving right along in its last year of 
the agreement not putting any additional money into the 
program. So any time that a province makes a decision that they 
want to change the makeup or contributions of the program, 
certainly within their own purview a province can add 
additional dollars as we did this year. But the federal 
government did not add any additional dollars this year. 

And because it’s a tripartite agreement wherein which 
producers contribute, and provinces contribute, and the federal 
government contribute, we can’t just make a decision 
unilaterally on behalf of the federal government and say, well 
this is what we’re going to do here and, ladies and gentlemen in 
the national government, you’re going to participate. 
 
Because this year is a good example of how they chose not to 
participate both . . . from two fronts — not by putting in the 
additional $200 million that we asked for last fall and not by 
topping up the crop insurance program this year as we did, 
matching our $14 million in a year in which producers across 
this province are facing yet again, in some parts, very, very 
severe drought of which crop insurance in my view would have 
been most helpful. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Again I question the minister if these crops 
are going to be a high claim. I’m not talking about the good 
crops that are going to yield extremely high or the crops that are 
already at an average rate of maturity. We’re talking crops that 
are basically going to be a write-off. Could we get them written 
off and allow cattle to go on the land or allow it to be cut? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I have . . . my officials have provided for 
me, and I think what might be helpful here is for me to provide 
a copy of this for you as well, because it really is the options for 
what producers need to do. And it states here and there are five 
quick bullets of which I can address and it says here that: 
 

If the original insured crop has failed, the producer can take 
the establishment benefits and reseed to green feed. 
Insurance coverage may be purchased on the reseed green 
feed until July 15, the seeding deadline for green feed. 
 

And then the second bullet says this: 
 

Producers may graze, they can bale, they can silage, or they 
can summer fallow and insure crop. If the crop is put into 
any use other than harvest, the salvage value of the crop is 
appraised at the time the crop is put to its alternate use. 

 
And thirdly it says: 
 

Appraisals are based on the yield estimates determined by 
plant and kernel counts. 
 

And fourthly it says: 
 
Alternatively if the crop is grazed or baled the salvage 
value may be assessed based on the actual harvest green 
feed value. Bale or clipping weight of the Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance insured price for green feed is $76 a tonne. 

 
And then finally it says: 
 

If the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance were to deem the yield 
to be zero, when fields are grazed or baled the extra cost 
must be reflected in the premium rates. (And then) 
producers who do not have livestock, they may not be 
willing to pay extra premiums or insured incentives that 
benefits only livestock producers. 

 
So I can make this note available for you because I think, 



2754 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Madam Member, it would address the issues that you have as it 
relates to this specific producer. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. Around the year of 
1989 there was a program that was in place to encourage 
livestock production in our province that was called FeedGAP 
(grain adjustment program). And it cost the province, going 
back in the estimates of that time, it cost the province between 5 
and $10 million a year. And from reading different articles and 
news releases on the program, it was well received by the 
livestock producers of this province. And without going through 
the detail of the program in itself I found it very, very 
interesting that there was initiatives in place to expand the 
livestock production in the province, and yet in 1992 this 
government scrapped it. 
 
It sort of sounds like GRIP (gross revenue insurance program). 
Again it was a program that was in place. Had the government 
had vision, had they had a plan for the building the province for 
the future and not toss this program, perhaps there would have 
been funding in place that would’ve addressed years such as 
what we’re facing right now. And as long as we continue to talk 
about future programs but never put anything into place, every 
time there’s a wreck we’re going off the rails, because we will 
have nothing in place that’s going to address the issues. 
 
There’s an article that was written at the time that the 
government chose to scrap the program and the article was 
called: 
 

FeedGAP end may ruin cattle industry, says ag economist. 
University of Saskatchewan agriculture economist, Hartley 
Furtan, estimates the loss of FeedGAP will mean an export 
of 117,000 cattle — more than half the industry. It would 
also mean the immediate closure of one packing plant, he 
said. 
 

(22:30) 
 
Another article, “Livestock industry working to revive 
FeedGAP” states: 
 

In the May provincial budget the government ended the 
FeedGAP program that paid producers $13 a tonne to help 
offset the cost of feeding livestock in the province. 
Saskatchewan producers say they can no longer compete 
with producers in Alberta, who have a similar program. 

 
Now we all know . . . I know your members have said it in the 
House. Our members are well aware that the reason why 
Alberta has considerable more healthy or a healthier cattle 
industry is because of policies and programs that they put into 
place to encourage it in their province. The reason why 
Manitoba has a healthier hog industry is for those same reasons, 
and yet every time we’ve had something that’s working well 
that can address years where we run into difficulties, this 
government has scrapped the program. 
 
Are you even considering putting a program in place that can 
handle these situations when they occur? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member . . . or Deputy 
Chair, to the member, I very much appreciate your support 

today because this is how I would recognize it . . . is that I hear 
you suggesting that we should be taking some public dollars 
and investing public dollars into growing the primary industry 
in Saskatchewan, and this is a refreshing position for someone 
from your side of the House to take because much of what 
we’ve been hearing from members of your side of the House is 
that we should not be investing in the public growth of the 
primary industry. 
 
And I very much appreciate you recognizing how, in fact, 
Alberta grew their feed industry because their livestock industry 
in Alberta — and everybody knows this — was bought in 1972 
where the Government of Alberta took a large chunk of public 
taxpayers’ money and dumped it into the livestock industry in 
the same way that Manitoba took a large chunk of their public 
dollars and dumped it into the livestock industry on the hog 
side. 
 
So clearly, we’re making that investment today in 
Saskatchewan. We’re going to do it in the . . . we’ve already 
done it in the pork industry. We’re going to do it in the ethanol 
industry, as you already know, and we want to attach ourselves 
to the feedlot industry in Saskatchewan as well. And when we 
go there to provide that kind of both technical support and 
possibly financial assistance, it will be helpful for you to repeat 
what you’ve just said to me tonight because that will be most 
useful when I travel the province and say to producers across 
the province when we’re developing the feedlot industry, that 
the opposition party is most interested in investing public 
dollars into the development of those programs. 
 
We certainly will look at and have looked at the FeedGAP 
program. I’ve had some conversations with the industry about 
that. The industry is very, very concerned about how quickly 
we would move in that direction given that we had a US 
countervail just a couple of years ago through R-CALF. 
 
And there’s a great deal of hesitation here to move rapidly 
down that front. So if the question is, are we looking in some of 
those fronts, absolutely we are. Are we going to build a 
livestock industry in Saskatchewan? Absolutely we are. We’re 
doing it already on the hog side. We’re going to work closely 
with livestock producers and we’re going to grow it on the beef 
side as well, and on the cow-calf. 
 
And the support of this government and this ministry and this 
department in investing in the primary production in 
Saskatchewan is critical because it’s one of the areas that we’re 
going to see our quickest and fastest development. So I 
appreciate your comments and support as we move ahead on 
this front. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I would just like to remind the minister that 
we’re not going to play the game as to what I meant in what I 
had to say or the question. We’re not talking equity positions 
here. We are clearly not talking equity positions. We’re talking 
good policy and good programs that have a vision. So let’s not 
get too excited about my comments playing into your hands. 
 
I would like to read from a document that states clearly: 
 

This is a major commitment for the government but it is 
also an opportunity. First and most important it sends a 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2755 

 

clear signal that we are committed to agriculture and to 
farmers. 

 
That document is the minister’s own document. It’s one that he 
put together for the federal government, presentation for the 
federal government. The words I left out was Government of 
Canada but it also applies to the Government of Saskatchewan. 
It’s time that we started to look ahead. It’s time that we started 
to put meaningful programs in place. And you know clearly 
what I mean when I talk about programs and policies. 
 
And we’re not going to play the game whether or not I mean 
equity position. With that I’m going to turn it over to the 
member from Cypress Hills. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Now, Mr. Minister, 
we’ve raised the issue of Crown grazing lease rates in private 
discussions with you, in correspondence with you, and I believe 
even in estimates at one time last year we raised that particular 
issue. And I’d like to go back there again because from 
everything I have been able to read and from the answers you 
have provided for me on previous occasions, I have not been 
able to satisfy myself yet that the Crown grazing leases are 
arrived at in a manner in which you have suggested is the 
means by which those lease rates are set. 
 
I think that the experience in the area of Cypress Hills and in 
other dried out areas last year, where ranchers could not make 
full and adequate use of the Crown grazing leases that they have 
under their control, where in many cases there was no water of 
any kind on the leases, where cattlemen were being forced in 
large numbers to sell off their herd because of inadequate grass 
supplies, their lease fees went up. And when we raised the issue 
with the department the explanation was that calf prices had 
gone up. Cattle prices generally had gone up; lease fees were 
going up proportionately. 
 
Well, Mr. Minister, I’ve looked at the Crown grazing lease rates 
in several independent and different instances. And the increase 
in lease rates has been substantially higher than the cattle 
market has increased in the same period of time. If you’re 
talking about a four-year history, many of those producers who 
have grazing leases have seen their Crown grazing lease rates 
go up by 30, 40, 50 per cent, and in some individual and 
specific cases higher than that. 
 
You and I both know that calf prices have been good but they 
haven’t increased up to 50 per cent in the last four years. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, could you delineate for us tonight exactly 
what factors are worked into the formula? Can you walk us 
through the formula, item by item, to give us a clear 
understanding why Crown grazing leases have escalated at such 
a dramatic level? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I might start by 
saying that what we have . . . what I’m reading from here is the 
history from 1998 to 2002. And what we would take here, we 
would take the weighted average per pair of cattle sales. And in 
those years, and I’ll just give you these numbers, in 2002 the 
weighted average price of cattle sales is $137.11 — that was in 
2002. And then the formula rent per annum was $6.41 and the 
actual rent per annum was $5.78 in 2002. 

If you were to take the 2001 year, the weighted average price of 
cattle prices that year was $133.80, and then the formula rent 
per annum was $6.28, and then the actual rent per annum was 
also 6.28. 
 
For 2002, that price was — the weighted average price — was 
$117. The formula per annum was . . . animal unit was $5.51 
and the actual rent per animal unit was $5.42. 
 
In 1999 the weighted average price for cattle was $100, the 
formula for rent per animal unit was 4.72, and the actual rent 
per animal unit was also 4.72. 
 
And then in 1998 the weighted average price for cattle was 
$1.03, the animal rent per unit was 4.87, and the actual rent per 
animal unit that year was 4.59. 
 
When you take a look at what’s happened over that period of 
time, you will see that the actual rent per animal unit in the last 
two years has in fact gone down — this year by I believe about 
9 per cent for 2002. And it has actually to do with the price of 
the animals and then taking the rental per animal unit based on 
the formula that we’ve established, not in isolation, with the 
livestock industry. 
 
On a regular basis our staff meet with the livestock industry. In 
fact I think this year there has been a change to the period of 
time that we use to determine when the price of the livestock, or 
the weighted average price of cattle sales, I think we moved the 
date — I believe to November, for four months, for a 
four-month period — in order to assist us with reducing the 
level of the actual rent per animal unit this year. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — For the reduction, Mr. Minister, in rent this 
year might represent a 9 per cent, if I understood you correct, 
total. But when you look at the figures from approximately 
1998 to 2002, you had an increase on your figures from $4.72 
to $6.41 which is awful close to $2. That’s almost a 50 per cent 
increase as I indicated earlier. And calf prices, I don’t believe, 
saw that kind of an increase in that four-year period. So there’s 
something else; there’s got to be something else in that formula 
that accounts for that dramatic increase in the rates that you’ve 
established. 
 
May I suggest that the other possibility that might come into 
play here is the province’s determination to get a return on 
investment as part of that formula which is exceptionally and 
unnecessarily high. My understanding is that last year, the 
provincial government deemed its value of land to be returnable 
at a rate of twelve per cent, and this past year, that rate was 
deemed to be twelve and three-quarters per cent. 
 
Now Mr. Minister, I don’t know any place where an investor 
can get that kind of return for their investment, and I would 
think that we’re almost reaching credit card proportions when 
you have that kind of an interest factor built into this particular 
formula. 
 
You know, at a time when farm incomes are being hammered, 
when producers are facing drought, when they’re selling off 
their herds and trying just to salvage something of their lifelong 
endeavour, maybe we should look at how much money the 
provincial government takes out of the pockets of producers 



2756 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

based on the type of interest rate they’re charging in this 
formula. I don’t think that you could justify that level of interest 
in any other area of business. I don’t see why the provincial 
government should assume they have a right to that level of 
interest on the backs of producers. Would that be one of the 
factors that makes these lease rates so incredibly high? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I’m most interested in the member’s 
sort of assessment of what’s happening here with the formula 
because if he were to look at the weighted average price of 
livestock sales over that same period of time, you can see that 
the price of the animal has gone from $103.80 to $137.11 over a 
period of five years. 
 
The member should know, and I’ll say this, that the formula 
here hasn’t changed at all for years and years and years. This 
formula and the way in which it’s calculated has stayed exactly 
the same as it has and that there has been no . . . there are no 
interest rates that are charged in the formula. So I would caution 
the member to not sort of strike out on an analysis of how the 
formula works today, draw some analogies or hypothesis on his 
own as to, you know, the fact that the formula has changed in 
some way, because the formula has not changed in any way. 
 
(22:45) 
 
And currently the way in which the practice works today is that 
the rental rates are based on only 80 per cent of the actual cost 
to ensure that when we have situations where it is dry, as we 
have had in the last year or two, that there is a compensation 
here that’s provided over that period of time — over a five- or 
six-year period of time. 
 
Because you can be assured in a province like Saskatchewan 
that we’re going to have a drought and that we’re going to have 
droughts on a regular basis in a province of this magnitude. And 
certainly for those people who produce and raise livestock 
inside the province like you do, it’s not uncommon for us to 
have droughts on a fluctuating basis. 
 
So I would caution the member when he reviews the 
information that I’m providing for him, that he would not draw 
the analogy at all that the formula has somehow changed here 
because it has not changed over that period of time. And clearly 
there are no interest rates that are built into this formula 
whatsoever. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Madam Chairman, to the minister. What is the 
12, the figure 12 represent in the formula from last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Madam Chair, it’s a percentage of the 
share or percentage of the gross that represents a fair return to 
Saskatchewan. And that’s at 12.75. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — The 12.75 is the figure for this year, the 12 per 
cent was a figure used in the formula, as I understand it, last 
year. Why is there a difference of three-quarters of a percentage 
point from last year to this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Madam Chair, my staff tell me that there 
has not been a change to the percentage share, that it remains at 
the 12.75. 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, has there been a change in the 
last several years? Because I’m informed that the rate of 
percentage was set at 12 per cent some time in the recent past, if 
it wasn’t last year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Madam Chair, my officials tell me that 
that percentage share has been there for several years but what 
we’ll do is . . . the member’s asking specifically over what 
period of time it’s been there and we’ll provide that information 
for him, from when there was a change. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Madam Chair, 
through you to the minister, just recently I was made aware of 
the range assistance program that your department has provided 
information on for producers that have been affected once again 
by drought, especially in the areas of the southwest, west, and 
maybe the northwest of the province. 
 
I don’t know if this plan has been made available to other 
producers or not, but I’ve had several calls to my office since 
the information has arrived in share . . . I’m sorry, in 
leaseholders’ mailboxes. And the general response from these 
individuals has been that while this program might have been 
well intentioned, it will be of most benefit to those leaseholders 
who intentionally mismanaged their leases during drought 
conditions through overgrazing during the past year or two or 
three of exceptionally serious drought. 
 
Now the problem as I had it explained to me by my constituents 
is that for those leaseholders who were very conscientious about 
good husbandry and good management of the resource on those 
leases, they often paid the lease to the provincial government 
but did not graze cattle on those leases or substantially 
under-grazed those leases. Maybe, instead of stocking rates of 
seven or eight head per quarter, cow-calf pairs per quarter, 
maybe they reduced it to half of that. But whatever the case 
they managed very carefully the limited resources they had. 
 
Now that this program has come out, those individuals who 
were careful about managing those resources will have 
re-established grass or grass that is adequate for returning to 
normal stocking numbers, but those producers who did not take 
care of their lease to the extent that others might have, will 
benefit substantially from this program even though they may 
have exhibited very poor management practices in the years of 
drought. 
 
I would like the minister to explain if he can why they have 
decided to go to a range assistance program that has a very 
difficult set of criteria to allow anybody to qualify — it’s going 
to require substantial personnel to manage, it’s going to require 
a huge burden of paperwork for everybody involved — when 
there might have been much simpler options available, one of 
which I might explain to the minister in a few minutes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I just want to say to the 
member, and I’m reading now from the policy document of our 
own department. The member indicates that this is somehow a 
new program. The range assistance component has been in 
place since 1991. So this is about 11 years now that this 
program has been around and the program’s key elements are 
like this: 
 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2757 

 

The qualifying lease signs a range improvement agreement 
that reduces the stocking and the result rental to reflect the 
actual productivity of the resource. 

 
It goes on to say that: 
 

The range improvement agreement covers a term of five to 
ten years in which the lease agreement does three things: to 
stock at appropriate levels including not use where 
appropriate; submit an annual return to the department 
indicating the actual stocking levels that occur; make the 
necessary management changes that are recommended by 
the department to improve utilization. 

 
Well if we have, in the case that you speak about, an individual 
who is not utilizing the resource to the degree of which they are 
. . . have signed the agreement for, then the individual should be 
clearly making it known to the department. The department 
would then provide the kinds of reductions that would be 
necessary within the agreement. 
 
So if that’s the situation that’s occurring with the individual 
whom you’re referring to or groups of individuals whom you 
are referring to, clearly the policy here permits for there to be 
adjustments made for good stewardship, I expect is what you’re 
speaking about and clearly the department would be in a 
position to do that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the 
Chairman to the minister. I’m quite aware that this is not a new 
program and in fact I know of people who said that they have 
been made aware of the terms of this program in years 
substantially past. But in the estimation of producers this 
program is a little bit like closing the gate after the horses run 
away. 
 
This is a program that addresses an issue after the damage has 
been done. And the problem is that the more damage that has 
been done the more this program benefits the leaseholder. This, 
I don’t believe, will adequately address the individuals who 
have managed their resource very carefully — the individuals 
who have paid their lease fees, who have reduced voluntarily 
the stocking rates, and who have tried to save and salvage 
whatever grass might have been on that particular lease. 
 
So what you’ve got is a situation now where the people who 
abused their lease will actually qualify for more assistance 
through this particular provision than those who provided good 
management capability. I understand too that this is going to be 
very complicated and difficult because, aside from the 
completed application that requires quite a bit of detail, also a 
detailed copy of an aerial photo or map that clearly shows the 
location of fences, water sites, and corrals will be a 
requirement. 
 
Now there aren’t many producers who have those types of 
information readily at hand. It’s not the kind of thing you keep 
in your desk drawer, and there will be some substantial cost 
associated with providing that. And then a completed 
self-assessment of range land form provided by the department 
that will provide information about water, moisture conditions, 
stocking practices, and range conditions and so forth. 
 

I guess, Mr. Minister, what I’m saying is that this is a lot of 
paperwork. It’s going to require a lot of hours on the part of 
department personnel. It’s going to be an imposition on the 
leaseholders to meet all these qualifications. 
 
Wouldn’t have something much simpler been available? For 
instance, when we first raised the issue of drought last spring, 
early last spring . . . I think my first letter to your department, 
your ministry office was dated March 9, last year, warning of 
impending drought. Wouldn’t it have been better to look at the 
possibility of just taking a percentage of lease fees and reducing 
it by a fixed amount to address the concerns of leaseholders 
who were caught in this particular set of conditions? 
 
Now you might argue that you wouldn’t know which 
leaseholders would be affected. Well I think the response to that 
is that somebody knows that. The PFRA certainly knows that. 
They determine which RMs are drought affected in fairly timely 
fashion. By November, they already provide that information to 
the federal department that’s going to allow for tax deferrals in 
drought affected RMs. 
 
So that particular information would have been available to 
your department. You could have seen from that information 
that leaseholders in X number of RMs are going to be drought 
affected, and in recognition of the problems that drought is 
creating for producers, just done an across-the-board reduction 
of 10 per cent of their lease fees would have been adequate 
recognition of the problem and probably would have satisfied a 
lot of the leaseholders. Something quite simple, direct, and 
immediate would be preferable to another program that requires 
a lot more management time and initiative on the part of 
producers. 
 
Would the minister consider something a little less stringent in 
terms of these kinds of requirements? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I think that in my 
earlier comments I indicated to the member that, on an annual 
basis, we already recognize that in one in every five years that 
we anticipate that there’s going to be a drought or that the 
pastures will be at such a level of which you wouldn’t be able to 
obtain the full capacity for grazing your herd on. And that’s 
why we already make an adjustment on an annual basis of 80 
per cent as opposed to charging the 100 per cent that I think I 
hear the member say we should be doing. We should be 
charging the 100 per cent on an annual basis, and then when we 
have a drought, we should be then trying to find a program that 
would adjust the rates downward or we should not be involved 
in the rangeland practice that we’re using today with the 
program that we have in place which, by the way, happens to 
meet with the approval of the livestock producers. 
 
So the formula that we’re using today is not one that the 
Department of Agriculture and Food dreamt up in the last two 
years. It’s been a program that’s been around now for the better 
part of 11 years or going on 12 years. And it meets with the 
approval of the livestock industry today and those people who 
have grazing leases with the department. 
 
This is about being good stewards of the grazing lands of 
which, by and large, I would say to you we have an excellent 
relationship with those people who are already utilizing the 



2758 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

property for maintaining their herds. If in fact we have a 
situation where the land base of which somebody is leasing 
today is not able to manage or handle the stock that’s on it, 
clearly we’re in a position to make the kinds of adjustments 
downward. And it would only be the responsibility of the 
leaseholder to advise the department. The rangeland agrologists 
are available for all kinds of specialized work which they do 
with the industry today. So I’m not sure that I’m understanding 
the member’s request here. 
 
If you’re saying to me that we should be taking the lease 
agreements today, charging the full rate of 100 per cent, and 
then trying to mitigate them in years of which you have a 
drought, which we’re saying today you’ll see one, one in every 
five years, and the current formula seems to address that. It 
seems to be working for us. 
 
And so if there’s a different direction that the member opposite 
thinks that we should be moving down and is interested in 
bringing that forward with the industry, I’d be happy to look at 
it. But I should say to you that this particular formula and the 
way in which we’ve been managing it over the last number of 
years seems to meet quite nicely with the producers from whom 
I’d had conversations with. 
 
(23:00) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Well, Mr. Minister, if you’ll excuse me for 
being just a touch cynical, you know I’ve had more 
conversations with producers who have Crown grazing lease 
who express a very clear dissatisfaction with the formula and 
the way the rules are applied than I have had people who 
express complete satisfaction. 
 
I mean, you can stand there and indicate that you’ve got a good 
working relationship with the industry and that everybody 
seems happy. But frankly that’s not the experience that I’ve had 
in the Southwest. And I know you can discount it as anecdotal, 
but the reality is that public policy is made up of one anecdotal 
experience after another, ultimately. 
 
And I think that you’ve indicated several times that the current 
formula is based on a one in five year drought scenario. You’re 
only charging 80 per cent of what the deemed value is of the 
land, and so forth. 
 
But you know, a one-size-fits-all formula in terms of grazing 
leases doesn’t work. The grass production in the Southwest is 
significantly different than the grass production in other areas of 
the province. And to talk about normal capacity and normal 
growing rates and volumes and tonnage and all the rest of that 
just doesn’t simply apply equitably in the Southwest. And I 
think that the 80 per cent figure, while it sounds completely 
justifiable when you explain it that way, in practice, in reality, it 
is not working adequately in the area that I represent. 
 
But having said that about the Crown grazing lease formula, 
this particular range assistance program, if I can take what you 
said at face value, you say that the industry supports this. Well 
you know, sometimes the industry is just about willing to take 
anything that the government provides because they get sick 
and tired of beating their head against the wall. There is a point 
at which some people are not prepared or able to continue the 

fight. 
 
And if you took this set of conditions, as outlined in this range 
assistance program, and took it to most producers, they’d say, 
what the heck is this? Who dreamt this up? What kind of a 
nightmare is this? Do I have time to fool with this kind of stuff 
— an aerial photo or a map, not to mention a long application 
form and a self assessment that’s going to be managed by the 
department personnel, on and on and on — when these people 
are interested in providing the best possible management 
techniques themselves. 
 
Why don’t we recognize the leaders in the industry, the ones 
who take good care of the Crown grazing leases that they have, 
and reward good management practices, as opposed to putting a 
program together that basically will reward poor management 
practices? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Madam Chair, to the member, I 
want to just say that in my conversations with my officials 
there’s a couple of things that they say to me. And I don’t know 
that every producer in Saskatchewan today who has a Crown 
land lease is happy with the form of the arrangement. I can’t 
speak to that. 
 
But we do have a forum in which we go through the process on 
a regular basis, twice a year. My officials tell me that they meet 
with the Crown land grazing forum, they review the formula 
and they review the issues that we’re speaking of tonight, and 
talk about whether or not there should be adjustments made to 
the package. 
 
And within that environment from which they have the 
conversations they do not hear the kinds of things that you’re 
raising today, where producers are feeling inconvenienced by 
the process. In fact it’s quite to the contrary. We have more 
demand today for Crown land leases than we can provide, far 
more demand for Crown land leases than we can provide. 
 
In fact many producers, and some in your part of the province, 
think that this is a pretty good deal today in terms of what we’re 
able to provide. And furthermore that when you make the 
comment that there is disparity within the graze lands across the 
province, it’s true. There is disparity amongst the grazing lands 
across the province. 
 
But you should know that the capacity from which the grazing 
land can support a herd, adjustments are made. So a particular 
piece of land in my part of the province would have a different 
rate attached to it than it would in your part of the province, 
given the capacity of that piece of property to support a herd of 
livestock. 
 
So as much as you may stand in your place and talk about how 
it is that producers today are inconvenienced, are not 
necessarily happy with the process that’s in place, I’m told that 
it’s a far different scenario in terms of the people who represent 
the grazing forum when they meet with us twice a year. 
 
And so if this is a similar scenario that we painted when we did 
the horned cattle, then you should bring for me those people 
who are not happy with this process. Or you should direct them 
to this particular group of men and women today who support 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2759 

 

the industry and look after the Crown land lease on behalf of 
producers. And if there are adjustments that we need to make 
through those people then I’d be happy to try and fix them. 
 
But that’s not the direction from which I’m hearing we’re 
getting any kind of pressure today for changes. And so I’d ask 
you and invite you, that if you have those kinds of concerns or 
you have producers who have those kinds of concerns, we can 
direct them to provide for you the name of the people who sit 
on the grazing forum, whom we meet with on a regular basis. 
And you might direct them through that process to make sure 
that we get the kinds of things that are issues for you resolved. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I have to say thank 
you after that introduction. 
 
I would like to ask the minister, for C-SAP programs I and II, 
how are they cost share funded? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, the cost share 
on the 19 . . . or the 2000, sorry, the 2000 program was 80 
million for the province and 180 million for the federal 
government. C-SAP II was 60 million for the province and 138 
million for the federal government. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Now the minister had said actually in 
estimates on April 13, he stated that of the 190 million, but I 
think he meant 195 million, that the federal government had last 
year . . . and he was discussing the year 2001. The minister said 
they didn’t use it all in the crop insurance program. They didn’t 
use it all, so they put it into the C-SAP II program. So they took 
their money, and they transferred it into a different account. 
 
So if that was the case then, and C-SAP II, the minister just told 
me that their contribution provincially was 60 million, the 
federal government was 138 million; was the federal 
government portion supposed to be in actuality 108 million, and 
in fact the C-SAP program was increased in funds by 20 
million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I believe that 
the last time we were together and the member from Thunder 
Creek — no, I think not from Thunder Creek, from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood — the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood corrected me where he said it wasn’t 190 
million, it was actually 195 million. 
 
And so when you take a look at what the federal government’s 
contribution has been over the last three years — and we don’t 
have any dispute about that — it’s been 195 million, 195 
million, and 195 million. The province’s share over that same 
period of time was 130 million, 130 million, and 143 million, 
where this year we put more money into the crop insurance 
program because we knew that this year we would have a 
problem on the crop insurance file. 
 
And so when the federal government says that they took a 
portion of their money and they redirected it — yes, they took a 
portion of their money and they redirected it — but the province 
has lived up to its commitment on the safety net fees for the 
entire three years and added additional money yet again this 
year so that we could enhance the crop insurance program in 
Saskatchewan. 

And that’s exactly the position that I’ve taken with the federal 
government in not signing the agreement today, because it’s 
going to be imperative for us to know what portion of that 
money that’s in the risk management package will make its way 
to crop insurance, because if we’re going to build a strong crop 
insurance program in Saskatchewan for producers we need to 
be sure that we have enough money in that pool. And today that 
pool has $1.1 billion in it. 
 
And we need to know what kind of flexibility we’re going to 
have if the two safety net programs that we’re going to have are 
going to be NISA and crop insurance, how much of that will we 
be able to build on the crop insurance program? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Minister, I’m going to try and ask what 
I just previously asked in a different way perhaps, because in 
my mind the answer didn’t begin to cover what I was looking 
for. 
 
Prior you said that in C-SAP I the province contributed 80 
million, the federal government contributed 180 million. In 
C-SAP II the province contributed 60 million and the federal 
government contributed 138 million. 
 
Now when we return to the 195 million which was an 
agreement — it was a three-year agreement, I fully understand 
it. And the federal government took 20 million of that and 
moved it into the C-SAP program. Did . . . was their 
commitment to the C-SAP program supposed to be — and I’ll 
correct the number that I gave earlier of 108 to 118 — was their 
contribution to C-SAP II supposed to be 118 million while the 
provincial government was 60 million? 
 
Then when they added the 20 million from the $195 million 
agreement, they increased the funding available for the C-SAP 
II program or — and I will let the minister know what Mr. 
Vanclief has told us — is that the 20 million was to make up for 
a shortfall that the provincial government couldn’t put in. Was 
the provincial government’s portion supposed to be 80 million 
or was it supposed to be the 60 million they put in and did they 
indeed put that all in as the minister previously stated? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I listened 
carefully to your question today and I listened carefully to your 
question I think in April when we had the conversation. And I 
listened carefully to the leader, your Leader of the Opposition 
who also talked about the fact that somehow you’re of the view 
or of the belief that the federal government provided a loan to 
the provincial government over a period of last year. 
 
In last year’s contribution or programming that the federal 
government invests in Saskatchewan, they had a reserve of $20 
million left that they didn’t expend and they put it into the CFIP 
program which meant that Saskatchewan . . . C-SAP program of 
which . . . in the C-SAP program of which Saskatchewan 
producers got the benefit of the money that the federal 
government could have easily put into crop insurance program. 
 
But you should make no mistake — there should be no mistake 
here in this Assembly or to any producer in Saskatchewan who 
is paying attention to this discussion that we’re having tonight. 
The federal government’s contribution over the last three years 
has $195 million and not an additional penny more or less — 



2760 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

195 million. 
 
The province’s contribution over that same period of time to 
match the federal government’s share was 130 million for two 
years and this year $143 million. There has been no loan 
provided to the provincial government. There has been no loan 
provided to this administration to assist us in any fashion or 
form. 
 
This is the federal government’s contribution to Saskatchewan 
producers and, if I might say, underfunded this year in a year in 
which we should have got an enhancement to the crop 
insurance program when in fact they said to us, well that’s the 
amount of money that you get. Our budgets are fixed, take it or 
leave it, that’s all you get. 
 
And so in this given year, we have $195 million from the 
national government to run a crop insurance program and to run 
a NISA program. 
 
(23:15) 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I find your 
answer to the member from Watrous’ question rather 
interesting. But I would suggest another scenario that maybe 
more factual as to how this all unfolded under the two 
programs, C-SAP I and C-SAP II. 
 
I suggest, Mr. Minister, that your government and the federal 
government determined that for C-SAP I, that a figure of $260 
million was the amount of money that both levels of 
government would put into this program. And then you went on 
for the following year to . . . you arrived at a figure of $200 
million. 
 
And the mechanism to administer this program, Mr. Minister, 
you used the NISA administration to do the calculations based 
on a maximum of $125,000 of eligible sales for an individual 
and then took a percentage of that. And in order to actually cut 
the checks and distribute them to the producers, you used the 
crop insurance to administer the administration of the delivery 
of the funds. 
 
So in essence, to simplify this whole picture, what each level of 
government decided to do was to deposit their funds with crop 
insurance so that those cheques could flow . . . that money 
could then flow to the producers. 
 
And in C-SAP II, your government came up short by $20 
million and you went into the federal people and said look 
we’re short $20 million. The Government of Canada made a . . . 
under the safety net agreement, provincial safety net funding 
agreement, said that they would provide $585 million over three 
years. So therefore that money was there. You were short $20 
million so they put it in for you. 
 
Now this year, in a letter that you sent to me dated April 17, 
you indicate that the federal government put in $20 million 
under C-SAP II. There’s nothing here in the letter that says that 
there was any money by your government or the federal 
government that came out of this particular agreement for 
C-SAP I. 
 

So then for the program year of 2000, the crop insurance 
program year of 2000, you have to repay that. In other words 
that money wasn’t there. That portion, that $20 million, that 
portion of the 585 million you’ve already used for part of your 
requirements for C-SAP II. So therefore you’re short the $20 
million that the federal government had committed for this 
program, Mr. Minister. 
 
And so therefore as a result, it just happens to be that by your 
own admission in the estimates earlier in this session, that the 
provincial requirements for spot loss hail would have, by your 
own estimation, would have come to $20 million this year. And 
I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that that’s more of an accurate 
picture of how this whole funding arrangement worked — that 
for C-SAP II you were short $20 million, the federal people put 
it up for you, and this year it’s not there to meet the federal 
requirements because you used that money for part of your 
commitment of C-SAP II, Mr. Minister. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that that is more accurate as to 
how this whole funding arrangement has evolved in the last two 
years. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I say, Mr. Chair, Mr. Deputy Chair, 
to the member, you can draw your own conclusions and your 
own hypotheses as to how you think it is that the federal 
government provided a loan to the province of Saskatchewan or 
to producers for that matter. 
 
But the reality is that yes, the federal government had sitting 
from its three-year commitment to the province, $20 million of 
the $195 million. And they could have just as easily made 
C-SAP II last year $118 million. You’re right about that. They 
could have just as easily made it that. But instead they made it 
$138 million and then shorted us up this year and made the 
commitment, still filled their commitment this year on the crop 
insurance, because they assumed that a crop insurance program, 
I expect this year, wouldn’t have the additional load that it had 
or that it wouldn’t have the kind of difficulty that it had this 
year. 
 
Last year, as you know, we paid out $350 million in crop 
insurance payments in Saskatchewan. And when we got this 
year to develop our new crop insurance program, we found that 
in order to make sure that we didn’t load the premiums to 27 
per cent or 28 per cent — which the federal government did — 
and to sustain ours at the 35 per cent which we have for 
historically now, we needed to put additional money in. 
 
So when we went to the federal government and said to them 
your $195 million, you’ve met that kind of commitment, but 
why is it that you don’t grow the crop insurance numbers and 
match ours? Well I’ll tell you why they didn’t. Because they 
spent the money in the previous money that they had the 
commitment. They could have just as easily made that $118 
million and paid it out to C-SAP, kept the $20 million and 
pumped it into the program this year. That they didn’t do. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, why would the federal government 
assume that crop insurance is going to cost them less for 2002 
when all indications were that commodity prices were on the 
rise? Ag Canada does quarterly, if not more often, projections 
on prices. And I’m sure the record will show that they were 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2761 

 

projecting a slight increase in price and thereby they would 
know that the premiums . . . their share of the premiums would 
be more costly. So I would take issue with your statement that 
the federal government thought that crop insurance was going 
to cost them less money. 
 
I suggest to you, Mr. Minister, that your agreement was $585 
million of federal funding for a period of three years. And what 
happened is because your government didn’t have the $20 
million — they came up short, instead of having the 60 million, 
they only had 40 million to put in C-SAP II — you used some 
of the federal money, knowing full well that at the end of the 
three-year period you’re going to be $20 million short for the 
. . . in the areas of NISA, crop insurance, and the other areas 
that were covered by the agreement. So you had no alternative 
but to have . . . and you had less federal dollars to put into this 
year’s crop insurance program because you didn’t have your 
own dollars to put into C-SAP II, Mr. Minister. 
 
And therefore, we saw the loss of spot loss hail which is, by 
your own admission, is adding an additional $50 million to 
farmers’ costs this year. And I would suggest to you, Mr. 
Minister, that that is more . . . closer to the reality in this whole 
situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Chair, I just want to say to the 
member, when you have an opportunity to review the budget 
and the financial statements of the Department of Agriculture, 
you should demonstrate for me and for Saskatchewan producers 
where it is that this government has shorted producers on the 
crop insurance program or investment and our share in the 
60/40 in both the CFIP or the C-SAP or the NISA and the crop 
insurance program. Show me where it is. 
 
Because our numbers are these: they’re $130 million, they’re 
$130 million, and they’re $143 million. The national 
government’s contribution has been 195, 195, and 195. So there 
should be no mistake here. And Saskatchewan’s producers 
understand that this government, this year, enhanced its crop 
insurance program by an additional $14 million when, in fact, 
the national government should have matched that as well. 
 
There has been absolutely no determination here or, for that 
matter, has there been any agreement that either one of the 
C-SAP programs in the last two years have been 60/40 because 
they have not been 60/40. 
 
And so when you take a look at this particular scenario that 
we’ve put the dollars in, I say to you again, as the Premier said 
to your leader this afternoon, as I’ve said on other occasions to 
you, you just need to check the financial records of this 
government and you’ll see that not only have we met our 
commitments on the 60/40 cost share for crop insurance and 
NISA, we’ve exceeded them by an additional $14 million. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, I just heard you say that the federal 
contributions over the three-year period was 195 million, 195 
million, and 195. And your contributions were 130, and 130, 
and 130 or more in this last year. 
 
In your letter . . . you should really look at the letter that you 
sent me, Mr. Minister, because in fact in your letter you state 
very clearly that under the funding agreement that the federal 

contribution was 200 million in the first year, it was 205 in the 
last year, and this year it’s dropped to 181, which seems rather 
unusual except for the fact that in 2001-2002 the federal 
government contributed $20.1 million to C-SAP II. 
 
That’s the only unusual figure in this whole table that you 
provided me with. And I would suggest, Mr. Minister, that 
going back to my earlier explanation is that under the three-year 
agreement the federal government committed $585 million to 
this funding agreement. And because . . . so how do you explain 
the $20 million under C-SAP II? There is nothing under this 
program where the federal government contributed anything to 
C-SAP I. 
 
I understand that both those programs were funded outside of 
this agreement, that this agreement covered . . . on the 
provincial side of the agreement, it covered the province’s 
contributions to NISA, to crop insurance, and to some 
companion programming. 
 
And the federal obligations were to NISA, crop insurance, 
unseeded acreage in one year, and cash advance except for 
C-SAP II, Mr. Minister. And is it a mere coincidence that as I 
said, $20 million was your estimated cost for providing spot 
loss hail? And why would the federal government anticipate 
lower obligations under this year’s crop insurance when they 
knew full well that commodity prices were rising and that their 
share of the premiums would be higher, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I want to, Mr. Chair, say to the member 
that in my correspondence to you, what I did is I used the actual 
numbers over that three-year period. And this evening what I’ve 
been doing is I’ve been rounding it out to the $195 million 
because that’s exactly the amount of money that the national 
government has put in. 
 
But when I hear you and other members and your leader talking 
about the fact that we shorted crop insurance — and this is the 
position that you’ve taken again tonight and this is the position 
that you’ve been speaking from for the last couple of weeks or 
months — and when I take a look at the contributions that 
we’ve made to the crop insurance program and that the federal 
government has made to the crop insurance program over the 
three years, the federal government has contributed 195.8 
million on average and the Saskatchewan government has 
contributed on average over the three-year period 136.2 million 
over the three-year period. 
 
So when you stand up in your place, or other members or your 
leader stand up in their place, and you say that we’ve shorted 
the crop insurance program over the last, over this last year, you 
couldn’t be further from the truth. You couldn’t be further from 
the truth because when you take a look at the average that 
we’ve made over the three-year period, it’s $136 million. Our 
commitment to this program on a 60/40 cost share was 130 
million annually. 
 
And so you should stop telling Saskatchewan producers, which 
you’ve been doing, that somehow the crop insurance program 
this year has been underfunded by this government, because it’s 
not accurate. It’s not accurate for a minute. 
 
We’ve made an investment that exceeds the $130 million on 



2762 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

average over the last three years. And that’s why last fall when I 
was in Ottawa, and wrote Ottawa and said to them we need to 
grow the crop insurance program in Saskatchewan because 
we’re headed for another disaster in parts of Saskatchewan 
again — and we were right about that — and we never got one 
additional penny of new money over the 195, not last year from 
our request, and we haven’t got any in this budget year for our 
request. 
 
And so we made the kinds of adjustments that we made to the 
crop insurance program because we didn’t get the federal 
money that we needed to help us do that, to build the crop 
insurance program that will strengthen in the province. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, then can you explain to me why did 
the federal government put $20 million into C-SAP II under this 
funding envelope? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Because, Mr. Chair, and I’ve said this 
before, because they thought they had a surplus in the 195 and 
so they put the money into the C-SAP program. They could 
have just as easily put it into the 118. They could have just as 
easily given us 118. But they gave us 138. And this year they 
underfunded us on the crop insurance program. 
 
(23:30) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I guess, since the 
minister and obviously this side of the House can’t come to an 
agreement on this, I was quite pleased to see that the minister 
provided an answer to a written question that I submitted earlier 
and hadn’t got the answer to, which was the breakdown of the 
federal and the provincial contributions to the C-SAP I and II 
programs. Did he also bring the numbers for the breakdown of 
the federal and provincial contributions to the AIDA 
(Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) and CFIP programs 
for the last two to three years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I do have the 
numbers here, and the 2000-2001 program, AIDA/CFIP, that 
combination, the province’s share was 73 million, almost 74 
million, 73.8 million. And the share from the federal 
government was 114.4 million. For the year 2001-2002, 
AIDA/CFIP, the provincial share was 81.5 million, and the 
federal share was 126.4 million. And those are estimates. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer, and I 
would like to move on to the topic of the recent federal 
government announcement, and the announcement obviously 
had two components to it. One of it was a six-year component, 
and one was a two-year component. And there has been a lot of 
difficulty in understanding what the funds are allocated 
towards. 
 
Has the minister been able to acquire a breakdown of . . . let’s 
start with the six-year component of that announcement. Does 
he have a breakdown of how the federal government is going to 
allocate that money? And by allocation I mean, what is going 
towards safety net? What is going towards food safety? What is 
considered bridge funding, etc. It looks as though the federal 
government is rolling out some of their agriculture policy 
framework, and yet my understanding was that that has not 
been agreed upon or negotiated. 

I know the very week that the federal government made their 
announcement of this particular program, they had only that 
Monday met with producers in our province to discuss what the 
agriculture policy framework should look like and yet it looks 
like they’re unrolling it before that consultation process has 
been able to have any effect. 
 
So do we at this point have a breakdown of the six-year 
component of the federal government announcement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, to the member, I’d just like to 
provide some information because I think it would be helpful, 
and this is the only information that we have. Agriculture 
producers in Saskatchewan would have this same package of 
information because I shared this with them. And those who 
were at the briefing with Mr. Vanclief from the Canadian 
Federation of Agriculture would have the same numbers. And 
there has not been an update to the current numbers. Not only 
have we not received an update in Saskatchewan but my 
colleagues across the country haven’t received an update either. 
 
The federal government has announced a six-year package 
because they’ve taken the 1.2 billion and they’re making the 
$600 million payable in this year, and the second $600 million 
payable next year. 
 
So they’re including in their six-year package, the $600 million 
this year and then the five years of the agricultural policy 
framework which kicks in in March of next year. So they’re 
taking the five years of the agricultural policy framework over 
the next five years starting April 1, 2003, onwards for five 
years. And they’re counting this year as a contribution of which 
they’re going to roll out the $600 million of the trade injury. 
That’s how they get their six years of funding, that’s how they 
get their package. 
 
Of the $600 million, we’re not sure yet today whether or not 
we’re going to get the Fredericton formula applied to that or 
whether there will be a formula based on hurt of which hurt for 
Saskatchewan — the federal government tells us or told us, 
about two months ago, of which your leader was also a part of, 
that Saskatchewan hurt should be somewhere in the 
neighbourhood of 35 to 40 per cent. 
 
And that makes a huge difference in terms of what we would 
get of the 600 million. If we get the Fredericton formula we get 
about 22 per cent, which means that we’ll roll out about 135 to 
138 to 140 million, would be Saskatchewan’s share of the 600 
million. On a 40 per cent share we would get about 250 million 
which would be a larger share than we got even on a cost share 
in the past on C-SAP. 
 
This is an important piece of data that we need to learn because 
it will affect the agricultural policy framework. In the 
agricultural policy framework, as you can see, we got 1.1 
billion which will be 60/40 shared on the risk management file. 
 
And risk management today we think will be crop insurance 
and NISA only. CFIP will disappear from the face of the earth 
and we’ll have only two programs. What we don’t know is 
whether or not the CFIP money will be used to load and 
enhance NISA program or whether the CFIP money will be 
able to be used to enhance the crop insurance program. And we 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2763 

 

don’t have that detail today. 
 
And the federal government hasn’t released that detail right 
now because their intentions are to possibly increase the NISA 
program to a higher percentage contribution, and if that’s the 
case it may take the largest portion of what that CFIP money is 
available for. So that’s a very important piece of decision that 
we need to get from the national government. 
 
Finally on the four other envelopes which aren’t funded at all 
today — transition, life sciences, safe food, and environment — 
there’s $120 million that’s going to be attached to that . . . or 
$180 million of which $120 million will be matched 60/40 for 
those envelopes and $60 million the federal government is 
going to keep and then decide that it’s going to roll it out in 
whichever fashion it wishes to roll it out, into any one of those 
four programs. Of which we’re asking the question, where will 
that money go? 
 
And finally in the bridge funding, which is the $589 million, the 
federal government now has said they’re going to contribute 
$120 million a year for five years. And that money, they’re 
going to decide how it will flow on their own. And it will go to 
things like water development; it will go to things like equity 
capital; it will go to things like marketing support and 
environmental farm plans and co-op development. 
 
So that $100 million, none of us know yet how they’re going to 
roll it out: which provinces will get the largest share of that 
$589 million; what formula they’re going to use to dispense it; 
and what portion of that money will make its way actually to 
producers in Saskatchewan. So today we’re waiting, and I wrote 
the minister, as I’ve said to you, immediately after I got back 
last Tuesday, asked him how he is going to disburse this 
funding that he’s made available to us. 
 
And to date I can report to you and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that we don’t have a response from the national 
government yet on what that is. Not only don’t we have a 
response in Saskatchewan, nowhere in Canada has there been a 
response from the Agriculture minister to the provinces. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I noticed that the minister, when he spoke of 
the 600 million that would be available for two years and he 
called it a trade injury payment. However, there’s been no 
indication that that’s what it is. In fact the federal government 
has been very obvious in saying that’s not what it is. They are 
not going to address trade injury. 
 
They’re calling it bridge funding. My understanding is that the 
reason we need a bridge funding is to go from what we have 
now, which many of the programs are expiring such as CFIP 
and the 195 million per year agreement that we had that we 
were speaking about earlier. All of those programs are coming 
due so this is a bridge to get us from where we are now into the 
new agriculture policy framework. 
 
So if the province was to participate, if the province did choose 
to do that, what budget year would we be looking at having to 
find the funding to participate in the bridge funding? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, the . . . Mr. Chair, to the member, 
the 600 million is going to flow this year and the 600 million is 

going to flow next year. Now I know that the federal 
government isn’t calling this trade injury, but I’m calling it 
trade injury because it should be called what it is. 
 
As you know, last year when we asked the national government 
for additional assistance to bridge us, the national government 
said to us that there wasn’t one penny — not one penny of 
transitional money from November of last year when they did 
their budget to March of this year coming up in 2003. Eighteen 
months nearly that we’re going to have a national budget 
without any money. And they said to us, get lost. There is 
absolutely not one additional penny today that we’re providing 
for transition. Go away. 
 
And then we had a concerted effort where we brought about the 
notion that we have trade injury in Canada. And lo and behold, 
the national government then says to us, you know what, we do 
have a trade injury issue. And all of the provinces and 
opposition parties across the country were able to convince the 
national government that we have a trade injury issue, and 
they’ve been very successful in the last couple of months to 
convince us that they’re not going to fund it. 
 
They’re not going to fund it as trade injury, but they’re going to 
fund it as transition. And over the next several months we’re 
going to work out a deal about how they’re going to share with 
us on trade injury. And I can say to you, and I said to farm 
organizations and to my colleagues in Halifax when we met 
last, that when this window closes, when we sign the 
agreement, there will not be one red cent from Ottawa for trade 
injury for the next six years — not one penny. 
 
So when you sign this deal, ladies and gentlemen in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada, this is the package. This is your 
trade injury, this is your transition, this is your bridge funding, 
this is your new safety nets. This is the full meal deal for five 
years. And it don’t cut it from where I sit. This is a shortfall to 
Saskatchewan producers, in my view, of about $500 million a 
year for the next four years. 
 
And we can build a Saskatchewan economy and an agricultural 
industry, and I’ve heard other members from your Assembly 
. . . or your side of the House stand up and talk about what’s 
happened in Ireland. And I can tell you, you take a farm 
package and dump $1 billion a year into a farm economy like 
they did in Ireland, subsidized money, you’ll grow a 
Saskatchewan industry and agricultural community like you’ve 
never seen. 
 
And I’m sick and tired on this side of the House to be having 
my federal government jam down our throat a national policy 
where they don’t support the agricultural community, and every 
day we’re out there competing in the international marketplace 
in a subsidized community and getting beat up every day in the 
marketplace. I’m sick of it. 
 
And so I don’t sign this agreement today because my producers 
in Saskatchewan sent me to Halifax and said, don’t sign the 
agreement till we know what you get. And so I’m back home 
now. On Tuesday I wrote the federal minister. Didn’t sign the 
agreement on the direction and the wisdom of my farm 
organizations which I’ve been meeting for for 18 months. 
 



2764 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

And if we sign this agreement at the end of the day and take 
what’s in this package today, it’s not only the agricultural 
policy framework that we buy into, we buy into the funding 
agreement. And that, my friends, will hold us for five years in a 
situation that will be not unlike what we’ve just come out of 
with AIDA and CFIP and crop insurance. 
 
And this lets the national government off the hook in a major 
way, like it’s not going to have any more commitment for years. 
 
This is a very, very important question that you asked tonight, 
and this is a very important issue for our Saskatchewan 
producers, and we need to find a way to make our national 
government more accountable for what they have in here to 
date. 
 
(23:45) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Minister, I would like to say that I will 
not be championing the federal government our . . . their 
initiative for agriculture, because I feel that what they have 
done to agriculture in this entire country is appalling, and in 
particular to the Western provinces. 
 
The new APF I find quite concerning. A number of the 
envelopes in that framework is very concerning. Anything that 
I’ve read on it, it talks a great deal about, you know, making the 
industry more profitable, but in fact there is really nothing in 
the whole entire framework that’s going to make the consumer 
pay more for the commodity. So therefore with less money and 
the consumer not paying more for the product, how do you 
make the industry more profitable? 
 
And I believe it’s a program that will . . . is a conservative 
program. It will make the food safer and it’ll make the 
environment better. And I’m not saying that’s not all very good 
things, but unfortunately it’s to the detriment of the producers. 
The producers are being expected to pay the price for doing 
that, and yet the consumers is not willing to pay more for the 
product, nor is the country willing to compensate the producers 
for being outstanding stewards of the land. 
 
So therefore I will not be by any means championing, 
championing — whatever that word is — the federal 
government on their agriculture policies, but we do need to 
understand what their announcements will mean. And, for 
example, if we do remain, you know, firm, that we’re not 
signing this agreement, what happens to our NISA and crop 
insurance programs next year, because the 195 million per year 
agreement expires? 
 
So are we going to be giving those programs up? Are we going 
to be looking at having to run those programs entirely funded 
by the provincial government? Is that what we’re going to be 
facing? 
 
And I know the minister said that if we sign the trade injury 
now, there will be not one more penny towards trade injury. But 
I would suggest to him that in this announcement there is not 
one penny to trade injury. The federal government has totally 
ignored that plea. They have totally ignored that argument and 
there is not one penny to date, there hasn’t been in the past, 
there isn’t in this announcement. Nothing will have changed as 

far as trade injury. 
 
The federal government is choosing to totally ignore that 
difficulty. So what happens to our crop insurance and NISA 
programs if we choose not to sign any of this agreement? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I want to say, Mr. Chair, to the 
member, I very much appreciate your position as it relates to 
the agriculture policy framework and to the underfunding on the 
trade injury. I want to say as well that when I get the numbers, 
which I anticipate I’m going to get fairly soon — at least that’s 
my hope — I’ll be inviting my farm groups and my farm 
organizations back because that’s the commitment. 
 
And the member points to herself, to invite her to that meeting 
as well, and certainly I’m going to make the numbers available 
to the member as well. No question about that. And I want to 
say to you that I’ll be directed by the wisdom of my farm 
groups because they too, like I and you, will be expecting that 
we’ll want to have a new safety net program for next year. We 
need to have a new safety net program for the kick in of April 
of next year. 
 
And our job, in my view, will be to try to take that $1.1 billion 
and build it into the strongest safety net that we can build for 
the next five years for Saskatchewan producers. I’m hoping that 
there might be some flexibility in the $589 million that the 
federal government is going to be providing. 
 
Maybe there’ll be some flexibility in the agricultural policy 
framework in the other chapters because environmental 
stewardship, as much as it’s important to the broader 
agricultural policy, it doesn’t have the same kinds of application 
as it does in eastern Canada — in Ontario or Quebec. 
 
So we might get some flexibility in terms of what we might be 
able to use with those dollars. And I’m hoping then that we 
might be able to take some of that and build a stronger safety 
net program. 
 
So my commitment will be to make sure that for the new year, 
the new crop year of April 1 we’ll have a new safety net 
program for producers. 
 
Will it be as good as we’d like it to be? Will it be as strong as 
we’d like it to be? Well we’ll see how much resources we can 
commit to it in concert with what our responsibilities will be 
with the national government. And I will give the undertaking 
tonight to you, Madam Member, that when that information 
makes itself available that I’ll also provide it for your 
intelligence as well. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I listened 
with interest to both the questions and the answers dealing with 
the recent federal government announcement on the agricultural 
policy framework and funding and all those sorts of things. 
 
I have a couple of concerns and questions as a result of some of 
your answers, and I’d like to present to you. 
 
The ag policy framework has been under discussion and you’ve 
been part of that for I believe it’s well over a year. And I 
understand that part of that framework discussion is 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2765 

 

redesigning, as you’d indicated, perhaps redesigning crop 
insurance and NISA. And my concerns are that, if I heard you 
correctly, that you know very little about what these programs 
are going to look like. And it would seem to me, seeing that 
they are funded jointly by both levels of government, that it 
would be imperative that the provinces would be part of the 
discussion as to . . . when these programs are being redesigned. 
And I find that very concerning that you know very little about 
that. 
 
So are you telling us that the federal government is redesigning 
those two programs in isolation, without any provincial input? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well it certainly . . . the case is this, that 
we provided our document, as you’ve read, back last year where 
we said we wanted to have an enhanced crop insurance 
program. And enhanced meaning that we would take the 
percentages that we currently have at 80 per cent and try and 
grow that to 90 or 95 per cent in terms of coverage. But that 
requires additional dollars, additional funding. So that’s the 
position that we’ve taken to the federal government and said 
this is what we want in enhancements. 
 
The national government has said, well that’s a nice idea, but 
we think we should do an expansion. Not an enhancement of 
the program, but we should do an expansion — meaning that 
they want to cover more crops. 
 
In Saskatchewan we already cover a very broad range of crops 
and so an expansion of the crop insurance program is not of 
great value to us. An enhancement is what we’re looking for. 
And so we’re in that debate today. 
 
Now what the federal government is wanting to do of course is 
that they want us to sign the agricultural policy framework and 
then they are going to get into bilateral conversations with each 
of the provinces, of which we say, if this is about developing a 
national program, why wouldn’t we all be at the table 
developing a national program collectively instead of 
developing a bilateral with every one of the provinces which is 
different. We don’t do that in health care today. We have a 
national health care program. We don’t do it in Social Services. 
We have a national social services program. But in agriculture, 
where we share 60/40 on most fronts, we don’t have that same 
kind of opportunity. 
 
And so as much as it’s a joint-shared responsibility and 
delivery, the reality is is that they hold 60 per cent share of the 
dollars, and they’re catering to some degree, in my view, to 
what other expectations are from other provinces across the 
country, and that’s where I think part of our difficulties are 
today, and we’re going to develop our program. 
 
Now are we working for an enhanced crop insurance program? 
Darn right. Some provinces want to see an enhanced NISA 
program, so where the load isn’t 3 per cent contribution, it 
might be 6 or 7 or 8. If at the end of the day that becomes the 
consensus of the other departments or the other governments 
across Canada, we could find ourselves in a situation where the 
NISA program will require a contribution of higher than 3 per 
cent. And if that’s the case and if it were to go to 7 or 8 or 9 
which the national government is talking about, it would take 
all of our CFIP money that we have today in the program, and it 

would get loaded into a NISA program and would do very little 
for crop insurance enhancement which we’re looking for. 
 
So it’s that kind of debate we’re entering into today and partly 
why we don’t sign the agreement. I mean how is it that you sign 
an agreement today when you don’t know what the parameters 
of your expectations are going to be? And that’s the point I put 
to my colleagues when we were in Halifax. How is it that we’re 
signing an agriculture policy framework when you don’t know 
what the parameters are? 
 
And it sounds unusual that you’re involved in this kind of a 
process, and yet we don’t have the information. It’s an 
interesting question that you ask and one that we ask too. What 
kind of a partnership is this where we share 60/40 on most 
everything that we do, but at the end of the day we don’t have 
an opportunity to negotiate at a national table. How does this 
work? 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well certainly, Mr. Minister, I share with you the 
opinion that it is very disconcerting that you are involved in 
negotiations and being asked to sign an agreement that you 
really don’t know a whole lot about, yet it seems that a number 
of other provinces have done that, and perhaps they have more 
information or perhaps they have more trust in the federal 
government; I’m not sure which one. 
 
But I think there’s some realities that we in Saskatchewan, as a 
province, and particularly farm producers are grappling with 
and trying to come to terms with. And a couple of those . . . and 
one of the realities is that up until a couple of months ago, prior 
to the signing of this latest US farm Bill, I think there was a 
perception, in some farmers’ minds at least, that eventually the 
world is going to come to their senses and US and EEC 
(European Economic Community) and those countries that are 
subsidizing heavily are going to quit doing that, or at least bring 
their levels of subsidy down where we can thrive in that sort of 
an economy. 
 
Well as we all know it doesn’t look like that’s going to happen. 
So that’s reality number one that where the new reality we’re 
operating in as farm producers is that our main competitors are 
going to continue to subsidize for quite some time. And I guess 
the second reality that we’re staring at and looking at is that 
really when it boils down to it our government in Ottawa really 
doesn’t care a whole lot about the grain and oilseed sector, in 
particular, in western Canada and that impacts very heavily on 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And so therefore we’re faced with these two realities and this 
whole agricultural framework policy is part of that reality. So I 
guess at the end of the day the question that we have to ask 
ourselves is when we look at these two realities and stare them 
in the face we have to say where do we go from here? How do 
we deal with those sorts of things? 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I think . . . you are the Minister of 
Agriculture and it’s incumbent upon you to present, to develop 
and roll out a plan that will tell this province and particularly 
the producers of this province and will answer that question. 
Where do go from here faced with these two realities that we 
are looking at this year, Mr. Minister? 
 



2766 Saskatchewan Hansard July 9, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and you’re 
absolutely right, Mr. Member, that at the end of the day it will 
be our responsibility on this side of the House, it will be my 
responsibility to bring to my cabinet and to my colleagues and 
to producers in Saskatchewan the ultimate package that we’ll 
have to work with for the next five years or six years based on 
the $600 million that’s made available this year. 
 
And there will be some really tough choices. There’s no 
question about that. At the end of the day there’ll be some tough 
choices. But it will be through the same process that I’ve used 
to get me to where I am today, because I have taken this debate 
on a regular basis to my producers in Saskatchewan that 
represent grains and oilseed people, that represent specialized 
livestock, that represent the livestock industry in Saskatchewan, 
and I say to them this is what we have to work with. 
 
So that this time when we’re developing an agricultural policy 
long-term safety net for the next five years that nobody will 
accuse me of having done this in isolation, that nobody will 
accuse me of not having people involved in the process. 
Because at the end of the day people are wide open and they 
know full hand what they’re getting involved in today. 
 
Many of the people who sit at my table sit on the Canadian 
Federation of Agriculture. They’re at the very same table that I 
am, with Mr. Vanclief talking about what these numbers are. 
And so they know what the impact on Saskatchewan producers 
are going to be at the end of the day. 
 
And so in the next two or three weeks we’re going to get all of 
the detail. And I’ll be sitting down with my producers in 
Saskatchewan and we’re going to be developing what the 
long-term safety net’s going to be for Saskatchewan, how we’re 
going to invest in the other pillars or chapters of the agriculture 
policy framework. 
 
(24:00) 
 
And then we’re going to take up the cause again, I suggest to 
you, on the trade injury. Because if this is not trade injury, then 
trade injury is alive and well, is a concept. And then we need to 
try to find the additional dollars that we need to find over the 
next five years. 
 
But I can tell you that that will be a very difficult political 
debate because the federal government has stepped away from 
that responsibility already because they don’t understand the 
issues, as you’ve put them nicely, that happened in Western 
Canada on the grains and oilseed side. They don’t understand it. 
 
And for them to say to us that we should be diversifying our 
agricultural economy today to a greater degree than it is, is 
bafflegab, because today we’ve diversified our economy, today 
we grow 60 different crops or 65 different crops in our 
province, where 10 years ago we had about 25 or 28. 
 
We’ve diversified in Saskatchewan in a way in which we 
haven’t seen. This is a wonderful challenge for us and I expect 
that as we move ahead we’ll work together and try to find the 
result. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I want to thank 

the minister and his officials for their patience at this late hour. 
And there are no further questions. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Chair, and I too just want to take a 
moment to thank the member opposite for her questions, not 
only today but through the course of the session. We’ve been 
able to, in my view, come together on a number of issues that 
have been most difficult to address and I appreciate the level of 
debate that we’ve had in the House and also the opportunity for 
us to work together on a couple of other pieces that were 
important to advance the agricultural file; and to other members 
on your side of the House who’ve asked some questions, which 
always enhance the ability to develop new policy in 
Saskatchewan to enrich the agricultural community, the 
agricultural file in Saskatchewan. 
 
I too want to take a moment, Mr. Chair, to thank the members 
of my department. This is not an easy file, as you can 
appreciate. Not that many are in government, but there are 
tireless and long hours that my officials work in preparing 
ourselves for our negotiations at the national level, working 
with producer organizations and groups in Saskatchewan. And I 
very much value the relationships that they have with the very 
broad range of stakeholders that we have in Saskatchewan. 
 
And it takes special men and women in many instances to do 
the kind of work that they’re doing. So this evening and to the 
department officials who aren’t here, who’ve helped us through 
this very difficult time, and we’ve got some additional weeks 
and months ahead that we need to develop additional policy, to 
thank them for the good work that they do. 
 
Subvote (AG01) agreed to. 
 
Subvotes (AG02), (AG07), (AG03), (AG08), (AG05), (AG06), 
(AG09), (AG04), (AG12), (AG10) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 
Vote 146 

 
Subvotes (AG02), (AG03) agreed to. 
 
Vote 146 agreed to. 
 

Supplementary Estimates 
General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture and Food 

Vote 1 
 
Subvote (AG08) agreed to. 
 
Vote 1 agreed to. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Lending and Investing Activities 

Agricultural Credit Corporation of Saskatchewan 
Vote 147 

 
Subvote (AG01) — Statutory. 



July 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2767 

 

The committee reported progress. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, before I moving adjournment 
of the House, I think it’s appropriate for us to acknowledge that 
over the course of this day that we’ve just ended, the Minister 
of Health has not only gotten wiser; he’s also gotten older. And 
it would probably be appropriate that we finish off with a 
snappy little rendition of “Happy Birthday” to the Minister of 
Health. 
 
(Hon. members sang.) 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Now, Mr. Speaker, when we said to John, 
we meant to the Minister of Health, the hon. member for Regina 
Lakeview. And having said that, Mr. Speaker, I move this 
House do now adjourn. 
 
The Speaker: — Before I take the motion, I will just remind 
members that they are not to refer to other members except by 
their titles. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 00:10. 
 


