















































Hansard: June 10, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1935 
 June 10, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Industry and Resources 

Vote 23 
 
Subvote (IR12) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you. Mr. Chairman, I move 
that the committee report progress on the Department of 
Northern Affairs and move to the Committee of Finance. 
 
The Chair: — The Government House Leader has moved that 
the committee report progress and then move on to the 
Department of Finance. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (FI01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Finance to 
introduce his officials when he is ready. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’d like to introduce 
. . . to my immediate left is Mr. Ron Styles — he is the deputy 
minister of Finance. And to my right is Mr. Len Rog, who is the 
assistant deputy minister in the revenue division; and to the left 
of Mr. Styles, Mr. Arun Srinivas, who is the senior analyst of 
taxation and intergovernmental affairs. 
 
And behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of the treasury board branch; and to his right is Mr. 
Terry Paton, who is the Provincial Comptroller. And behind 
Mr. Styles is Ms. Joanne Brockman, who is the executive 
director of the economic and fiscal policy branch of the 
Department of Finance; and behind Mr. Srinivas is Mr. Scott 
Giroux, who is an analyst at taxation and intergovernmental 
affairs. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair; and good 
evening to you, Mr. Minister, and to all your officials. I 
understand that we’ll probably have about 55 minutes of time 
allocated this evening so I want to spend a little time in 
clarifying some of your different areas of the budget, Mr. 
Minister, especially those regarding funds. And we’ve had 
discussion in the Legislative Assembly about the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund, we’ve had discussion about the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund, and there are many other funds that the 
government works with in terms of supplying the services 
necessary. 
 
Mr. Minister, last fall when the mid-term report came out for 
last year’s budget you made the comment that the debt of the 
province was increasing slightly more than what you had 
expected because of problems with the crop insurance fund. 
And you had indicated that there needed to be a greater amount 
of money borrowed to supply the needs for the crop insurance 
fund. 

Could you explain to the people of Saskatchewan how the crop 
insurance fund monies that farmers pay in, the portion that of 
course comes from the federal government, the provincial 
government allocates certain monies, in light of the fact that 
while we know tonight and in the last three or four days there 
has been a significant rainfall . . . But one rain of course does 
not end the drought and farmers are very concerned about crop 
insurance, the fact that in a large portion of the province crops 
have not germinated and indeed we may be looking at a very 
large crop insurance claim come fall time. 
 
We don’t know that, but people are concerned about whether or 
not the finances of . . . as to how the finances will be met by the 
provincial government. So could you explain the fund that is 
provided by the government, both federal and provincial, as far 
as the crop insurance fund? 
 
The Chair: — Order. I just wanted to indicate that there are 
some competing conversations early on and just to advise 
members that if there are competing conversations, I’ll direct 
them to take it either outside or to the back of the . . . behind the 
bar. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And I’m very 
pleased to answer the question. I want to say to the member and 
also to the public that, although we can run into problems in any 
one year in the crop insurance fund, the amounts necessary to 
pay the farmers the insurance coverage that they are entitled to 
will be paid each and every year whether or not there’s enough 
money paid through premiums to pay for it in any one particular 
year. 
 
So what I mean to say is this — and this is nothing new, it 
always has operated this way as far as I know — the crop 
insurance system is funded by premiums that are paid by the 
federal government, the provincial government, and the 
producers, that is the farmers. And the amount of premium that 
each will pay will vary from year to year, depending upon what 
the federal government and the province are prepared to pick 
up, and the balance will be paid by the farmers. 
 
So that in this particular year, this crop year for example, the 
federal government will be putting in less of a percentage of the 
premium than they did last year. I don’t have the numbers in 
front of me but I believe last year they paid 33 per cent and this 
year they’re paying 28 per cent at the federal level. They last 
year paid 35 per cent, I’m corrected, and now it’s going down 
to 28 per cent, and whereas the province and the farmers are 
paying more for the premiums. 
 
Well last year, because of the drought, and it was one of the 
worst droughts we had in the history of the province — some 
say the worst drought, but certainly one of the worst — we had 
to pay a lot of money out to crop insurance of course because 
the crops don’t come up when there’s a drought. And so there 
wasn’t enough paid in premiums to actually pay what was paid 
out to the producers. And I believe it was well in excess of $100 
million more that we paid out than we took in in premiums. 
 
And essentially what happens is we will go out and borrow the 
money to pay the insurance that should be paid to the farmers, 
because it has to be paid and that’s what we do. That’s what we 



1936 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

did last year. It’s been done in other years. 
 
But then in some years the amount of the premiums will exceed 
the amount that has to be paid out in insurance. So you try to 
make it out . . . make it up in the next year or the subsequent 
years. And the fund is planned so that it . . . on an actuarial 
basis so that it will balance out evenly over a 25-year period. 
And during that period there may be years when the premiums 
will not be enough to pay out what the producers are entitled to, 
in which case you will borrow money and supplement it. In 
other years the amount of money paid out will be less than the 
premiums. 
 
But what needs to be understood clearly is that in any given 
year we will do what we need to do to pay the farmers what 
they’re entitled to under the crop insurance program, whether or 
not the premiums meet the cost. And that’s been done in the 
past. It was done last year and indeed it would be done this 
year. 
 
In the same way that I said in answer to another question the 
other day . . . in terms of the Forest Fire Contingency Fund 
another member from the opposition said, well what if there 
isn’t enough money in the program or the contingency fund to 
fight the forest fires? And my answer was, well that’s happened 
in many years before, actually. Some . . . most years we didn’t 
even have any contingency fund. And the answer is the 
government of the day will have to go out and get the money 
and put out the fires. I mean you can’t stop putting out the fires 
at a certain point. You have to get the money. 
 
And the same is true with the farmers and crop insurance. If you 
have a terrible year whether through drought, or disease, or 
insects, then if the farmers have a bad crop and the cost of 
paying them under the crop insurance program is more than 
what the federal government, the provincial government, and 
the farmers have put into the program in that year, it’s the job of 
the government to get the money and pay it to the farmers, and 
that’s what we would do. Nothing new about it. 
 
But the important thing to remember is there will always be 
money there to pay the farmers and there will be money to put 
out the forest fires. And no one in the public should be 
concerned by any talk that says, well there won’t be enough 
money for crop insurance or to put out the forest fires, because 
one of the jobs that we have in government is to make sure that 
we go out and get the money to pay for those two programs if 
that’s what needs to be done. That’s what we have done and 
that’s what we will do. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for that explanation, Mr. Minister. 
Mr. Minister, if I . . . I’m going to pose a situation that uses 
your current budget as well as last year’s, and I want to get an 
explanation for you . . . from you whether or not this is an 
accurate way of looking at both systems. 
 
In the Agriculture and Food budget, the vote no. 1, there is an 
expenditure for crop insurance for the current fiscal year’s 
budget of about $84 million. And you’ve indicated that there is 
a fund that both farmers contribute to and federal government 
contributes to, and that fund has a certain value. Could you 
indicate to the House what that fund would be for this current 
fiscal year, looking ahead of course to what might be potential 

payouts for this year? 
 
And in last year’s mid-term, as I was referring to it, you 
indicated that the debt at mid-term had to increase by some 250 
million because — and I’m reading from your document — it 
says that the current forecast shows an increase in the funds 
required by the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance Corporation of 
$100.3 million. And I heard your explanation as to . . . as you 
withdraw this money from the fund. So when the farmers pay in 
their premiums, when the federal government pays its money to 
you, when you have established a certain amount of money, 
you’ve indicated that for a 25-year period there will be a 
balancing in the long term. 
 
Now in the short term, if we required that extra debt or created 
that extra debt last year by the fact that you’ve indicated that we 
had to borrow $100 million more, is that going to be 
replenished in this year’s budget? Are farmers and the 
provincial government and the federal government contributing 
back into that fund to replace that additional monies that you 
required last year? Or is it just held in a fluctuating point out to 
the time when a year will actually produce a profit and thus 
balance the fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer, Mr. Chair, is that the money 
would be put back into the fund over the course of time. It 
wouldn’t be put back in any one year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
besides the crop insurance funds, are there . . . could you 
indicate what other funds operate in a similar fashion in that 
there is a balance in the fund for the given year — it may all be 
used up, or it may not be used up. Could you indicate how 
many funds the government operates similar to the 
Saskatchewan crop insurance fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that, you know, 
there are many funds that the government has jurisdiction over, 
but in terms of a fund like the crop insurance fund, I’m advised 
by the officials that the crop insurance fund is really the only 
fund that we control that operates in the fashion it operates in. 
There is some similarity in the Auto Fund I’m told, but the Auto 
Fund is actually a statutory fund not controlled through the 
General Revenue Fund. So in terms of the General Revenue 
Fund, the only fund that operates quite like the crop insurance 
fund is in fact the crop insurance fund. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, for 
my next question I need to have you explain how the 
government uses revolving funds to assist it in delivering 
services. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair. I’m looking at the 
document, well the Estimates book for the current fiscal year, 
page 158, there is an explanation of revolving funds which says, 
and I’ll read it: 
 

Revolving funds, which are established by statute, (so 
that’s important, they’re all set out in law that you will have 
this fund) are used to isolate certain items of related 
revenue and expenditures and are net budgeted in the 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1937 

 

Estimates. 
 
Revolving funds are used to account for specific 
government operations which recover all or a portion of the 
associated costs from the funds’ users. Revenue generated 
by a revolving fund’s activities is used to finance further 
operations which in turn generate further revenue, hence 
the terms “revolving”. 

 
So that’s the explanation that there is in the Estimates and the 
revolving funds themselves are listed on page 74 of the Public 
Accounts, Volume 1 of 2000-2001 which is of course the latest 
version of the Public Accounts. But I should point out that this 
list on page 74 is . . . has more than revolving funds on it but it 
does within it have the revolving funds and they are identified 
as such. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, last 
year a large increase took place in the full-time equivalents 
necessary to administer the Highways Revolving Fund. And if 
you recall — and I know you may not have that document, last 
year’s budget with you — but there was an increase of 18 
full-time equivalents, roughly 18 per cent because it went from 
99 full-time equivalents to 117. So there was an increase of 18 
per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, this year the Highways budget I think has been 
reduced by about $11 million, a very significant reduction in the 
Highways budget, yet I notice that in the revolving funds when 
you have indicated the funds that do exist, the full-time 
equivalent for the staff complement on page 131 of this year’s 
budget has not changed. In fact, it states that there is no 
decrease, no increase. It’s the same number of 117.2. 
 
Now I heard your explanation about how the revolving funds 
work and how the users will help to balance that fund. Could 
you explain why there was such a significant increase of 18 
people required last year to operate the revolving fund, and this 
year there is no increase even though the budget has decreased 
to a degree. Could you explain the full-time equivalent needs of 
the Highways Revolving Fund. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think, Mr. Chair, that the member’s . . . 
the premise of the member’s question is, I think, incorrect in the 
sense that when the member refers to last year, 18 more 
employees being referred to . . . related to the revolving fund, 
he’s thinking that this is to administer the revolving fund. 
 
But those employees would not be administering the revolving 
fund; those employees would be doing the work of the 
Department of Highways and Transportation. And if the 
number of people last year relative to the revolving fund went 
up by 18 — I don’t have that in front of me — then I would 
surmise that what it really meant was that we were employing 
18 more people paid for out of the revolving fund to do work in 
connection with the Department of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
And I take it from the reference to page 131, the 117.2 full-time 
equivalents, that last year the revolving fund was used to pay 
the salaries of 117.2 people, and as I understand it, this year the 
same number of people would be paid for out of the revolving 
fund. But those people wouldn’t be administering the fund, and 

the 18 new people wouldn’t be administering the fund. They 
would be doing the work of the Department of Highways and 
Transportation. 
 
Now in terms of the precise details of the work that those 18 
people do, or the 117.2, certainly we’d be happy to get that 
information, but it might be a question that you want to put to 
the Minister of Highways and Transportation. I should say to 
you, Mr. Chair, that the member might want to, in the estimates 
of that department. But that would be the explanation that these 
salaries are paid for out of the revolving fund as I understand it. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, when 
I was comparing both documents, last year’s page that showed 
the full-time equivalent staff complement of both the 
government departments and the revolving funds and this 
year’s, and I just wanted to make reference to the fact that last 
year’s staff complement for Highways and Transportation did 
change by 71.8 employees. It increased by that many. So did 
the number for the revolving fund, as I’ve indicated to you was 
18. 
 
Now I understand your explanation about, you know, paying for 
them, that they’re not necessarily people who are operating the 
revolving fund. It’s just that revolving fund dollars were used to 
pay for an additional 18 staff, and in fact 117 full-time 
equivalents were charged to the Highways Revolving Fund. 
 
If I’m looking at the same page as in last year’s budget, Mr. 
Minister, which I made reference to — page 131 — I note that 
for this year Highways has declined by 26 employees and the 
budget of Highways has declined, yet the revolving fund 
continues to pay the same 117 people. So when I’m looking at 
the total amount of employees . . . and I appreciate your 
comment about asking the Minister of Highways and I’m sure 
that our critic will indeed pose that question to Highways. 
When you were preparing your budget and looking at the 
Highways estimates, there is a reduction of $11 million in 
actual expenditure in Highways, there’s a reduction of 26 
people in the Highways department, yet the revolving fund 
continues to pay for the same 117 people as last year, which 
was 18 more. 
 
That’s the kind of explanation that I’m looking for, Mr. 
Minister, as to why was this necessary to stay at those levels 
rather than to accommodate the less amount of money and the 
fact that there are 26 less employees employed by the 
Department of Highways. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised, Mr. Chair, that with respect to 
the reduction of the number of positions within the Department 
of Highways that the Department of Highways and 
Transportation sought to find some administrative savings in 
order to slightly reduce their budget for the current fiscal year, 
and that those reductions took place in areas other than the areas 
where the employees in the revolving fund work. So it’s as 
simple as that. 
 
I do want to point out to anyone listening lest they think that 
Highways has been significantly reduced. In fact, last year we 
spent a record amount on highways and this year we’re 
spending just a little bit less than we did last year, but I believe 
it would still be the second highest expenditure ever on 



1938 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

highways at a time when the province this year was facing 
considerable financial challenges which everyone leading up to 
the budget knew about. In fact before the budget everyone was 
asking, well how on earth will the government put a budget 
together, because they knew that there was an economic 
slowdown across the country and that it would be very difficult. 
 
And in fact we’ve taken very little out of the Department of 
Highways but we have taken some out of the Department of 
Highways. But I want people to know that we’re still spending 
much more than we spent in the past and we’re adhering to a 
plan to spend $900 million over three years to fix the roads. 
And I believe, Mr. Chair, that that plan is working. It was a 
budget priority last year; it’s a budget priority this year. 
 
The reason I think it’s working is we haven’t had one question I 
believe in question period this year from the opposition about 
the state of the highways. They haven’t had the Minister of 
Highways on his feet very much in question period, the reason 
being that most people understand that we are fixing the roads. 
And there was money put into the budget this year to fix the 
roads, last year, and next year will be year three of our 
three-year plan to fix the roads. And that’s one of the things that 
I’m very proud of in terms of last year’s budget, was starting 
the three-year plan to fix our roads and highways. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
explanation. And we’re definitely glad to see the government 
involved in fixing roads and taking over the fact that . . . You 
know, every day people were out there fixing the highways last 
spring and we’re sure glad to see that finally you’ve recognized 
that the conditions of our roads have led to many problems in 
this province, both in the tourism industry and in transportation 
of agriculture products. So we want to ask you to continue that 
expenditure and we understand though, as I’ve indicated, Mr. 
Minister, that the highways budget was reduced from $311 
million to $300 million which is an $11 million reduction. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve mentioned the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund and we need to clarify for the people of Saskatchewan 
because there are a number of fires in the province that have 
been burning out of control. And while we hope that the 
conditions change and indeed the forest fire season, which has a 
long way to go, won’t have as many fires. But I believe a report 
was issued from SERM (Saskatchewan Environment and 
Resource Management) last week that indicated that the number 
of fires that we have in the province already to date far exceeds 
last year’s and there will be additional expenditures. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year you indicated in the House that the 
previous year there had been an omission in fact and that the 
legislature had not dealt with properly creating the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund. And last year you proposed, or your 
government proposed in the Assembly, a change to the 
legislation that would allow for the creation of the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund. This year in the budget we note that the 
expenditure for the Forest Fire Contingency Fund is zero. 
 
So could you explain how the legislation that was put in place 
last year that created the fund is now being overlooked, or is it 
in some way disappeared from your priority list as the result of 
the fact that you show zero dollars for the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund? 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. Well as I was saying a few minutes 
ago, this year putting the budget together was a very, very 
difficult exercise, as everyone in the province knows. 
 
And so we had set up the Forest Fire Contingency Fund as extra 
money to draw on in case you needed it to fight forest fires, and 
I believe last year — if my memory serves me correctly — we 
had taken out something like 6, $8 million, something like that, 
over and above the regular budget for fighting forest fires. And 
I believe there was something in the neighbourhood of 30 to 
$35 million remaining in the Forest Fire Contingency Fund this 
year. And so we had to make a decision: were we going to beef 
up the contingency fund, put a higher amount there, take it up to 
$50 million for example, or leave it where it was and have that 
much to draw down on. And we made the decision to leave it 
where it was because we didn’t have a lot of extra money sitting 
around to put into the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
But the important thing to remember is that three years ago we 
had no Forest Fire Contingency Fund at all, so we would 
budget, you know, 25 to $30 million, let’s say, to fight forest 
fires, but the costs might be 40 million or 50 million or in one 
year I believe they were 90 million. And we have to pay those 
costs to fight the forest fires. 
 
And so in one sense, it’s nice to have a large contingency fund 
for sure, but whatever the cost of fighting the forest fires is, in 
any given year including this year, the government will have to 
come up with the money to fight fires. It doesn’t really matter 
how much is in the contingency fund. If the cost is $100 
million, we will spend the $100 million fighting the forest fires 
because, as I said earlier, you can’t stop fighting the forest fires 
when the money goes out of the contingency fund or you’re 
over budget. You just have to keep fighting them in order to 
save lives and protect property, and that’s what we will do. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, for 
clarification purposes, if we assume that 6 million of that fund 
was used last year, whether it be 6 or 8 — let’s just assume it’s 
6 — and you had set aside in the contingency fund last year . . . 
By a vote taken in the Legislative Assembly, you had set aside a 
$40 million expenditure. So there’s $34 million that you said 
you have not accessed last year. 
 
My question, Mr. Minister, is does that 34 million, has it been 
set aside on deposit in a fund that you can access for this year? 
And I understand your explanation about not topping it up, that 
you didn’t have the $6 million to add into it. But the question 
that people of the province are asking for: is there $34 million 
sitting on deposit? Or will it be, as your explanation was, that 
regardless of what the cost of fighting fires are this year . . . no 
different than two or three or four years ago, when I noticed in 
the supplementary estimates that you have put forward in years 
past, that it included additional cost of forest fire fighting. 
Whatever they were, the province had to pick them up, and of 
course we dealt with them in a supplementary estimates 
fashion. 
 
Last year you created the fund to say we want the fund as a 
cushion. It used $6 million. Is there $34 million sitting on 
deposit to be available if this year’s forest fire season is so 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1939 

 

extensive that it uses more than . . . I believe you have budgeted 
for forest fire operations . . . In the regular budget of the 
Environment department you’ve budgeted $35 million. So is 
there 34 million, in addition to the regular budget of 35 million? 
Is there 34 million that will be made available that won’t put the 
province further into debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — With respect to the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund, we would apply the normal principles of 
cash management, the same principles that would be applied to 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — So, Mr. Minister, and I know we have a 
disagreement as far as whether or not this is an accounting 
principle or a bookkeeping principle, or whether in fact there is 
money on deposit in both the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and now 
of course the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
By your answer, and of course the response that you gave in 
your mid-year report last fall, any time monies will be accessed 
of the funds, either the Fiscal Stabilization Fund or the Forest 
Fire Contingency Fund, would it be correct in saying that the 
debt of the province will become larger? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I would put it a different way. I would say 
that if we didn’t use the principles of cash management that we 
use for the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and the Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund, the debt of the province would be larger. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you for clarifying that. 
 
Mr. Minister, a couple of questions on the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, and I know you have a piece of legislation before this 
House dealing with changes to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
And if I look at your backgrounder information that was 
provided to us on March 29, 2000, you stated the reasons for 
creating the Fiscal Stabilization Fund was to ensure that the 
province had a balance, a balance of about 5 per cent of 
revenues. 
 
Could you explain how you chose that 5 per cent guideline? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. We felt that the figure of 5 per cent 
was adequate in most years to cover the volatility that we might 
expect to have with respect to revenues coming into the 
province. But I have to say in retrospect, as I’ve indicated 
before, I think that the 5 per cent figure was too ambitious and I 
should say that . . . and so I have . . . we have, the government 
has legislation before the House to let the fund fall below 5 per 
cent. 
 
And I should say that in retrospect when we look at the 
stabilization fund we had before the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, 
because let’s remember that we’ve had a stabilization fund 
since 1925 — it used to be called the Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming Authority — and that was used as a stabilization fund 
until the last few years. And the history of that is that in some 
years the size of the fund would have been larger than 5 per 
cent of the province’s revenues, but in some years it would have 
been smaller. 
 
And in this particular year, I believe we could leave enough 
money in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund probably to meet the 5 

per cent target . . . or maybe we could. But I’m sure that we 
probably . . . I’m quite sure we won’t next year. And so it seems 
to me that we need to amend the legislation to reflect that 
because the only alternative to that is either to cut spending or 
to raise taxes. And essentially the question is this: we have 
some money sitting in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, and if you 
have a drought and if you need to fix the roads, should you use 
that money to meet some of the needs that the public wants you 
to meet without raising taxes? And I think essentially the public 
would want us to. They would not say, you must at all times 
have 5 per cent of your revenues in your savings in the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund regardless of the needs that we have. 
 
So that was the thinking that went into the 5 per cent rule. But 
in retrospect I think we were being a little bit too ambitious, and 
I’ve acknowledged that and the government has acknowledged 
that, and that’s why we’re changing the rule through a 
legislative change. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, in your explanation of why you 
were creating the Fiscal Stabilization Fund in 2000 — I’m 
quoting from the document from your department — you 
indicate that it says: 
 

On the expenditure side unanticipated events such as 
extreme forest fires create exceptional circumstances to 
which the government must respond. 

 
That was in the description of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. 
And this evening we’ve spent a little bit of time getting an 
understanding of why you created the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund. And in the explanation of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
you’ve used the same reason, and a year later then you created 
the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
In your budget document of this spring — I’m quoting from 
page 28 about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund — you say this: 
 

. . . Currently, it is expected that $410.7 million will be 
required to deliver a balanced budget in 2001-2002; $225.0 
million will be required to deliver a balanced budget in 
2002-03; and, the remaining $139.3 million will be 
required to deliver a balanced budget in 2003-2004. 

 
So when I look at that paragraph of where this bookkeeping 
entry — and you call it a fund and I refer to it as a line of credit 
on your debt — at one time you created this bookkeeping entry 
of 775 million and you said that you wanted to maintain a 5 per 
cent balance in that line of credit. You said that was too 
ambitious. By your explanation in the budget that you presented 
this spring, you were indicating that next year the fund or that 
line of credit will be totally used up and in fact it will be at zero. 
So obviously 5 per cent is not even close to what you’re looking 
at for next year. You’re looking at a zero line. 
 
Is the total usage of that line of credit a stabilizing factor or 
does it show that the plans that the government outlined only a 
short year and a half ago and in fact have been totally derailed 
and that now your balance will in fact be zero? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I don’t think our balance will be zero 
this year or next year. But it may go down to zero, or it may not 
because one has to wait and see what actually happens. But I 



1940 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

will say that this would not be anything new. 
 
There have been many times in the province’s history where the 
Liquor and Gaming Fund was drawn down well below 5 per 
cent. That wouldn’t be anything new. But I want to say, you 
know, the member refers to what we may have said a year and a 
half ago versus what we’re saying today. What we were saying 
a year and a half ago, and we’ve been quite consistent about 
this, was that we needed to keep some money in the 
stabilization fund and not spend everything we had. 
 
And I just want to point out that what the opposition was saying 
at the same time was that we should be spending all of the 
money. I’m referring, Mr. Chair, to a press release put out on 
November 20 of the year 2000. That’s about a year and a half 
ago. And it was actually the same member who is asking the 
questions that put this press release out. 
 
And it says: 
 

Saskatchewan Party Finance Critic Ken Krawetz said oil 
industry officials have told the Saskatchewan Party that the 
province’s oil and gas revenues may be as much as $1 
billion more than estimated in the 2000 spring budget. 

 
Of course that wasn’t correct. But in any event the member 
went on to say — and went around the province telling people 
— and it says in his release here: 
 

. . . the NDP may be hiding a surplus of hundreds of 
millions of dollars of windfall revenues . . . 

 
And then at the top it says, NDP sitting on billion dollar 
surplus. And of course that wasn’t true. Then about 10 days 
later the opposition put out a release that said, legislature should 
be recalled to debate $400 million surplus. 
 
And my point is that what that member was saying a year and a 
half ago — he talks about our plans a year and a half ago — 
was this: he was running around the province with his 
colleagues, Mr. Chair, and he was saying everything in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund should be spent because there’s all 
this money that the government has, and they should give it to 
you, because they wanted people to be mad at the government 
for not giving all this money to the people. And what I was 
saying a year and a half ago was well no, we shouldn’t spend 
those hundreds of millions of dollars more; we should hang on 
to them because we’ll need them. 
 
Now it’s very interesting because now what that member is 
saying, Mr. Chair, is oh your plans couldn’t have been that 
good because you don’t have that much money left. You don’t 
have as much left as you had planned to have left. 
 
My point is simply this, Mr. Chair. If we had listened . . . And 
I’ve got the documentation right in my hand. If we had listened 
to what that very member who’s asking the questions told us to 
do — in no uncertain terms he said I was sitting on all this 
money — we would today not have some hundreds of millions 
of dollars sitting in the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. We would 
have added hundreds of millions of dollars to the provincial 
debt which, of course, is what they also did, Mr. Chair, when 
they were in office in the 1980s. They added $1 billion to the 

debt each and every year. 
 
So yes, I say to the member that the drought and September 11 
and the economic turndown in Canada and the United States 
has taken its toll, to be sure, and we have not done as well as we 
projected. But when the member talks about what we said a 
year and a half ago and what they said, it’s a good thing, Mr. 
Chair, that we have followed the course of balanced budgets 
and not spending all of the money in the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund as that member called for because if we had done that, 
Mr. Chair, we would be in much, much worse position than we 
are now. 
 
And we’re going to get through the current financial situation. 
The economy, I think, is going to grow this year. I don’t think 
we should spend foolishly. We should try to keep a grip on 
growth and expenditure for sure, and this year that’s what we’re 
doing, but we should never panic. We should not spend all the 
money as the members called for last year, but nor should we 
believe those members when they say that somehow we’ve 
done something terribly wrong. 
 
I think that we’ve had careful management, and I suppose I 
would go on to say this: that nobody has to take my word for it 
or the government’s because since the budget, Moody’s 
financial services has looked at the books and at the budget and 
they have given us a credit rating upgrade — a credit rating 
upgrade, one of only three provinces to get an upgrade. And 
we’ve gone back to AA credit rating with Moody’s. The 
investment dealers have been out. They have said that the 
government is handling the finances of the province in a 
prudent fashion. 
 
(19:45) 
 
So I point that out to say to people listening that the opposition 
will always of course say that we’re doing something wrong 
with the finances. I don’t think we are, but nobody has to take 
my word for it because the credit rating agencies and the 
investment dealers have looked at the books. They say that 
we’re doing the . . . that we’re managing the finances of the 
province correctly. 
 
And I might add, Mr. Chair, while I’m on the subject, when 
those members were in office in the ’80s — and the member 
from Swift Current who’s chirping from his chair actually 
worked for Premier Devine — and advocated the privatization 
of the Crown corporations, as they do now, and I don’t know 
why they want to sell off SaskTel, Mr. Chair, but that’s one of 
the things they want to do, but I . . . But my point is this, that 
the outside observers say that we’re doing much better than we 
were in the ’80s when we went down to B credit ratings from 
AAA that we had before. We’re back into the A’s and in one 
case AA. And I think that’s proof positive that we’ve been 
moving in the right direction. 
 
So I know the member will appreciate that I wanted to 
supplement my answer by pointing those things out. And I think 
that looking back at what we said a year and a half ago and 
what they advocated a year and a half ago is very, very 
important to bear in mind, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, you are absolutely 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1941 

 

correct. It is very important to look back at what was said by 
government in terms of how it was creating the fund and why it 
was creating the fund. And I can honestly tell you, Mr. 
Minister, that I believed you. I believed you when you said that 
you were setting aside $750 million of money in an account. 
And I looked at how Alberta was running its Heritage Fund and 
I honestly thought that you were actually setting up a heritage 
fund — if you want to call it that — for Saskatchewan that 
would contain 775 million actual dollars. 
 
Now guess what? It doesn’t exist. And you’ve mentioned bond 
rating companies and the article from February 19, 2002 where 
we have a quote from the Dominion Bond Rating Service that 
says that, and she refers to the rate stabilization fund: 
 

“ . . . is not a consideration with us,” Lavallée said in a 
telephone interview from Toronto Tuesday morning. “What 
we look at is revenue and expenditures. Those are just a 
buffer.” 

 
So, Mr. Minister, last year when you stated to the people of 
Saskatchewan — well probably a little more than a year ago, 
two years ago — you stated that there was going to be $775 
million set aside. What you were really telling the people of 
Saskatchewan was that that line of credit that existed with the 
Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Fund in terms of an 
accumulation of their dividends which was a paper entry — it 
wasn’t real money that was setting aside — was now going to 
be somehow transferred into a fund. 
 
Mr. Minister, I also refer to the auditor’s report. And this is the 
report that led me to look very, very seriously at what you were 
stating when the Provincial Auditor stated that in fact there is 
no such thing as a fund sitting in a bank account. And I look at 
the Provincial Auditor’s report from 2001, Fall Report, which is 
the most recent report. And the auditor states that . . . and I 
quote from page 21. He says: 
 

The financial planning information now published by the 
Government focuses on an incomplete picture of its 
finances as set out in one government fund called the 
General Revenue Fund. 

 
So, Mr. Minister, when I took a look at the auditor’s report, and 
I took a look at what bond rating companies were saying about 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund of Saskatchewan versus the 
Heritage Fund of Alberta, a very distinct difference. We do not 
have the money set aside; Alberta does have the money set 
aside. And I believe now the latest report is somewhere around 
$12.1 billion sits in the Alberta fund. It’s managed 
professionally, it’s invested, and it produces large amounts of 
return that the government now uses to offset education costs, 
to offset health costs, to deliver tax cuts. In this province we 
seem to be working in an opposite direction. We seem to want 
to be able to confuse people by saying we have a fund, but it’s 
really a line of credit. No, we don’t have the money because 
when we have to access the fund like we did last year to the 
tune of $400 million, and this year accessing it again, means 
that the debt of the province is going up. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I looked at your documents that you 
provided to the taxpayers of the province and to the people of 
Saskatchewan that show very clearly that the debt of the 

province is in fact going up. You were down to about $11.1 
billion. You took credit for the fact that the debt had been 
reduced and, yes, it was reduced by things like the sale of 
Husky Oil Upgrader. It was reduced by things like sale of 
Cameco shares. But now all of a sudden, Mr. Minister, we’re 
now going to be up to about $11.4 billion. 
 
The people of Saskatchewan have to recognize that every time 
you say you’re going to access a fund what it really means is 
that we’re going further into debt. There is no pot of money 
that’s on deposit. It’s not earning an interest rate. The fund does 
not exist, Mr. Minister. 
 
And those are the comments that I would like to make to you 
because you did a great job of, I think, convincing the people of 
Saskatchewan, convincing me — and I won’t speak for the rest 
of the members on this side of the House — but I was under the 
impression that you had created a fund that actually had dollars 
in it and that in fact you could access it. 
 
The auditor says, no it does not exist; it’s a paper entry. 
Dominion Bond Rating company says, no it doesn’t exist. And 
in fact, Mr. Minister, in Public Accounts Committee I think 
members of your own government recognized that there is no 
fund of money and asked questions about what kind of a benefit 
would it be for the people of Saskatchewan because the debt is 
not increased by the amount of having that money on deposit. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I think that when you state to the people of 
Saskatchewan that your budget is balanced this year is not 
correct. The only way it has the mirage of being balanced is the 
fact that you are borrowing huge amounts of money. You are 
borrowing that money to show to the people of Saskatchewan 
that it’s balanced on paper. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Minister, you’re now relying on two other 
sources. You’re relying on the profits of Saskatchewan Liquor 
and Gaming Authority which you said was the reason for 
eliminating the transfer and creating this so-called fund; and the 
second thing that you’re relying on is a transfer from the CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) in the way 
of dividends — huge amounts of money that show that your 
revenue and expenditures by not counting those transfers in fact 
shows a deficit budget for this year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well you know, Mr. Chair, I could actually 
spend the rest of the evening just describing the inaccuracies in 
what that member just said. 
 
But the first one I want to deal with, Mr. Chair, and it’s 
important for the public to understand this, the member from 
the opposition just got up and said that the Provincial Auditor 
criticized the use of cash management relative to the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. Here’s what the Provincial Auditor actually 
says in contrast to what that member said, and I’m quoting, Mr. 
Chair, from the Leader-Post, February 19, 2002 where the 
Provincial Auditor said this, and I quote. It says: 
 

Acting Provincial Auditor Fred Wendel said the 
government is doing “a good job with its cash management 
practices” . . . 

 
That’s what the Provincial Auditor said, Mr. Chair. And so the 



1942 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

opposition can say all they like that we’re doing something 
wrong in respect to cash management and they can say what the 
Provincial Auditor might think, but what I want to say to the 
public watching this, Mr. Chair, is that that’s not what the 
Provincial Auditor said. The Provincial Auditor said that the 
method of cash management we use is correct. 
 
And then I don’t have to quote the Provincial Auditor because I 
can quote the member opposite who just spoke, Mr. Chair, 
because the problem that the member opposite has is he says 
one thing one day and something else another day, and he’ll say 
one thing in this House and then he’ll go outside and talk to the 
media and say something different. And he’s done that over and 
over again, Mr. Chair. But I demonstrated just now how what 
he said about the Provincial Auditor was clearly incorrect. 
 
He also said in the course of that last statement that there was 
something wrong with the fact that we don’t have 
government-wide budgeting and you couldn’t get a complete 
picture of the province’s finances. But when he was pressed on 
that . . . when he was pressed on that by the media, on CJME 
Radio, Mr. Chair, July 23, 2001, last summer, this is what he 
said. The reporter said, and I’m quoting: 
 

Mr. Krawetz, when we look at these accounts (meaning the 
government accounts) we see the summary or full picture 
that you’re talking about wanting to have in there. 
 

And then this is what he said in response, he said: 
 

I believe so, yes. When you look at the two together, I think 
you get a complete understanding of the province’s 
financial picture. 

 
So what he had to admit when he was challenged by the media 
was that the government puts out a summary statement, Mr. 
Chair, that has all of the finances revealed. The member himself 
has said so on CJME Radio . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well 
the member says that’s what he said a year and three months 
ago. 
 
But I want to quote . . . I want to quote now, Mr. Chair, what 
the member said in this House on May 15 because the member 
says one thing one day and another thing another day, and that 
is he was going along the same line as he’s going along tonight 
that he’s saying we’re mishandling the finances and misleading. 
So I questioned him about that, and every time you question 
him about something he eventually has to admit how things 
really are. 
 
And he said on May 15 at page 1464, and I’m quoting from 
Hansard, the record of this House. He said: 
 

I’m not suggesting that you’re trying to mislead the people 
of Saskatchewan. 

 
That’s what he said. And then later on at page 1465, he says this 
. . . he says this, Mr. Chair. He says: 
 

Mr. Minister, I am not suggesting that you are mishandling 
the finances of this province. 

 
Because when he was going on about all this before I, like the 

media, said to him, well what are you talking about? You look 
at the books. They’re audited by the Provincial Auditor. It’s all 
there. And when you really press him he’ll admit that what he 
says sometimes when he’s in full rhetorical flight is not quite 
right. 
 
So the Provincial Auditor doesn’t agree with what he says; he 
himself doesn’t agree with what he says. But if that wasn’t 
enough, he says we’re doing something wrong with the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund. Let me quote Michael Rushton, who’s an 
economics professor at the University of Regina. This is what 
Michael Rushton, the professor of economics, has to say. He 
says: 
 

To my mind there’s nothing hidden here. This is exactly 
what that Fiscal Stabilization Fund was for. 

 
So the Provincial Auditor doesn’t agree with him; he half the 
time doesn’t agree with himself; the economics professor 
doesn’t agree with him. The Canadian Taxpayers Foundation 
also doesn’t agree with him. They say this, they say: 
 

Saskatchewan has done what a number of other provinces 
have done to get the budget in balance. As for the no 
money in Fiscal Stabilization Fund argument, David Perry 
of the Canadian Taxpayers Foundation said, “Ideally you 
wouldn’t have that money just sitting in the bank.” 

 
He says you should use it for cash management to reduce 
your debt when you’re able to do so. 
 
I might add, Mr. Chair, that when Moody’s upgraded the credit 
rating of the province, notwithstanding what the opposition has 
to say, they referred to the fact that the government was using 
the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and drawing it down. And this is 
what Moody’s financial services of New York had to say, Mr. 
Chair. They said, “Such drawdowns are consistent with the 
fund’s purpose.” Such drawdowns are consistent with the 
fund’s purpose. 
 
So we have the Provincial Auditor saying that the cash 
management related to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is correct; 
we have the Canadian Taxpayers Foundation saying that what 
we’re doing is correct; we have the economics professor saying 
that what we’re doing is correct; we have Moody’s financial 
services of New York City saying what we’re doing is correct 
on the one hand, and on the other hand we have the Finance 
critic for the opposition saying it’s incorrect. And nobody has to 
believe me on any of this; only half the time does he say that he 
himself is correct. 
 
But my point is this, Mr. Chair. When anybody watching this 
debate or reading it in Hansard is deciding who is probably 
more credible when it comes to managing finances — and leave 
me out of it and leave the New Democratic Party and the 
Liberals out of it — on the one hand, we have the Saskatchewan 
Party and its Finance critic. On the other hand, we have the 
Provincial Auditor, the economics professor, Moody’s financial 
services, and the Canadian tax foundation. So who do we 
believe? Them or the member from Canora, the opposition 
critic? 
 
(20:00) 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1943 

 

I predict, Mr. Chair, that at the end of the day, when it comes to 
deciding who is properly going to handle the finances of this 
province — the successors of Grant Devine, or the coalition 
government with nine consecutive balanced budgets — my 
guess is, Mr. Chair, that people are going to conclude that we’re 
better financial managers than they are. And the record shows 
that, Mr. Chair, and it’s verified by every independent source, 
inside and outside the province, that has examined our books. 
And we will stand on that record, Mr. Chair. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
report progress. In fact, the committee may want to report 
considerable progress, and that we then move to Agriculture, 
Food and Rural Revitalization estimates. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization 

Vote 1 
 

Subvote (AG01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, with me tonight, seated 
next to me, is Mr. Gord Nystuen, who’s the deputy minister. 
Directly behind me is Mr. Hal Cushon, who’s the assistant 
deputy minister. Seating, sitted, seating, sitting, seated, sitting 
behind the bar is Mr. Doug Matthies, who’s the general 
manager of the Crop Insurance Corporation; and Maryellen 
Carlson, who’s the acting assistant deputy minister; along with 
Louise Greenberg, who’s the assistant deputy minister; Greg 
Haase, from lands, the director of lands branch; and Dave 
Boehm, who’s the acting director. And I have also Mr. Ross 
Johnson, who’s the budget officer, sitting just off to my right 
here. Those are my officials, Mr. Chair, Deputy Chair. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and I welcome the 
minister and his officials here this evening. 
 
I have a few questions back on issues to do with Crown land. 
And in particular, I have Hansard from May 27 which was the 
last evening when estimates for Agriculture were on the floor. 
And the member from Wood River brought to the minister’s 
attention a situation concerning a purchaser of deeded land for a 
ranch and there was also the transfer of leased land in the deal, 
and your department is telling the purchaser who moved from 
Alberta to Saskatchewan that he must divest of his property in 
Alberta in order to retain or to keep the leased land. And at one 
point you told the member from Wood River to send the 
information to you and you would get back to him within a 
week to 10 days. 
 
So the member has yet to get answers from your department to 
his questions, and it’s been two weeks so he asked me to ask 
you when those answers would be forthcoming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I provided the letter to 
the member from Wood River on the 10th day of when I said I 
would have it to him. So it’s my understanding that the member 
from Wood River now has the information. I know that I signed 

it and we made sure that it got to his office on that day. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The member has 
told me today that he hadn’t received such a letter but I will 
check with him yet again. And if he hasn’t I’m sure he will be 
notifying your department. 
 
The other question I have is Crown . . . when Crown land is 
leased and utilized for grazing or cropping, are there different 
types of leases to cover the different types of uses for the land 
in question? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Yes, Mr. Deputy Chair, there’s a variety of 
different uses for which the land is classified for and there are 
different rates for the different . . . the different things that it’s 
used for. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, if 
someone has a lease . . . I’ll just use the example of a grazing 
lease and they would like to change the use of the land for 
something such as tourism or perhaps cropping, would it be 
possible for him to apply to have the lease changed to some 
other purpose? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The answer, Mr. Deputy Chair, is that that 
could . . . that could in fact happen. The land would have to be 
inspected and then decisions would need to be made whether 
that would be an appropriate use of the parcel of land. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So if I’m understanding the minister 
correctly, the lessee would just need to notify your department 
and someone — perhaps with a proposal — and someone 
would come out and inspect it and see if it was feasible to 
change that lease? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, that’s correct. That’s 
the process that a leaseholder would have to go through. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I had a constituent 
phone me today about crop insurance with the reseeding. He 
wanted to talk about . . . he’d phoned Yorkton and also the local 
regional office and he’d kind of gotten two different answers. 
So he phoned up to my office and I said, well Ag estimates are 
up today so maybe I can get in and ask the man in charge. 
 
It has to do with the reseeding. The one official had told him 
that it would be just automatic $20, or I think for . . . this is on 
cereal and wheat I think, 20 or $25 an acre. 
 
The other office had said that possibly you would . . . there 
would be more coverage because it’s starting to get later in the 
year on it. That you would basically take . . . you would 
basically take your crop insurance, they would come out, they 
would look at the plant structure, stuff like that. Can you tell me 
exactly how that works and how do you determine when a crop 
is not viable any more, where basically it’s a write-off and what 
would they do about it from about June 1 on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I’m just, Mr. Deputy Chair, going to read 
the policy that we use here which I think would be helpful then 
as you go through your questions. We would take the 
establishment benefits which would be $20, $25, and $30 per 
acre and reseed it perhaps to the shorter season crops which are 



1944 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

barley. And crop insurance will be more flexible around 
seeding dates versus the fall frost dates in order to give farmers 
a better chance to get a crop. So we got the $20, $25, and the 
$30 per reseeded acre. 
 
Then we take the establishment benefit of those three levels and 
the summerfallow acreage and then I would say to you that the 
policy reads: 
 

No premium is charged on any acre paid an establishment 
benefit and not reseeded. 

 
And then the policy goes on to say that: 
 

Summerfallow coverage is generally greater than stubble so 
producers will be credited with the management decision 
through higher coverage in the next year. 

 
Full-yield loss coverage commences on June 21 of a given 
year. Crop insurance requires either viable plants or viable 
seed in the ground in order for full-yield loss coverage to 
apply. 

 
So it’s either the viable plants or the viable seed. 
 

When doing the establishment claims, adjusters try to 
determine which crop is most likely to allow farmers to put 
the most grain in the bin, (and) the crop in the field or the 
crop that might be reseeded. 

 
And then adjusters then can recommend accepting crops for full 
coverage even if they are below the establishment threshold, 
and if the crops are in the ground it’s considered to have the 
best potential in the circumstances. 
 
And then of course what they do is they review the number of 
viable plants that are established and then make the claim in 
accordance to that. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. On June 21 how 
would it work if you wanted to turn your cattle into it, if, you 
know, the producer feels that it’s not viable? Can you tell me 
the rules on that and what conditions on money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, what we would do first 
is we would do the appraisal on the crop to determine what its 
salvage value would be and then we would pay the difference, 
pay the difference between what the guaranteed coverage would 
be and the appraised level of the crop. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — That would be what it would be worth . . . the 
appraised value, what it would be worth in the fall, right? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — It would be, Mr. Deputy Chair, based on 
what the production value would be at the time at which it’s 
salvaged. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Minister, that would be . . . then we’re 
talking June 21 then. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — That’s correct, Mr. Deputy Chair. It would 
be as of June 21. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — And then they would be free after that to graze 
cattle on and to cut it for feed, and would it still be considered 
summerfallow for next year? 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, my officials tell me that 
if you paid full-yield loss coverage, you wouldn’t be allowed 
then to summerfallow. But if you grazed on July 21, then there 
would be a evaluation done and if it was established, the 
decision would be made if it would be paid. It would not be 
paid on establishment but could be paid on full loss yield . . . 
yield loss. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. Chairman. 
I’ll pass that on to my constituent and if he has any more 
questions I’ll approach you on it. 
 
I’ll just ask another question pertaining with the budget. In the 
spring you announced a farm family opportunity initiative 
program. I had a constituent phone me that wanted to get into 
organic farming. And what he had told me, the program 
officials have indicated this program does not provide for 
organic farming transitions. Is that true? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it does apply for people 
who want to transition into organic farming. It does apply to 
that. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. Can 
you just give me a brief outline then of how they could apply to 
that, and then I could pass that on to them. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We have, Mr. Deputy Chair, six business 
agrologists that are located across the province. In the area . . . 
if we knew which area of the province this individual was from 
. . . (inaudible interjection) . . . from Davidson. Then the nearest 
office of Davidson I expect would be . . . I’ll provide that for 
you in a couple of minutes. 
 
What the individual should do is they should make their way to 
the office of the business agrologist. The business agrologist 
would then sit down with the individual and look at their overall 
business plan, determine with them what their overall potential 
is in terms of developing the new direction that they wish to go, 
clearly do a full assessment on what their current assets are, and 
then proceed to assist them with making a decision on what 
their business plan that they put forward dictates in terms of 
their changing to a new, different kind of cropping environment 
that they wish to proceed on. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well thank you. I’ll pass it on. 
 
Just one other question there. When I was in Sask Water 
estimates they’d indicated that irrigation would be going back 
under Ag. Has that transition taken place yet, under 
Agriculture? Or is that coming up through the summer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, it would be coming this 
summer. The program would be shifted to us later this summer. 
 
And to your earlier question that you asked about the individual 
around the business agrologists, they should go either to Moose 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1945 

 

Jaw or to the Saskatoon office. Either one of those would 
accommodate the individual. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Under irrigation coming to you under this 
summer, do you have any plans dealing with the budget that 
you’re putting extra money to irrigation, that you plan to 
expand irrigation in this province considering the two-year 
drought we’ve had? 
 
I’m glad that it’s going under Ag because I’ve had some 
constituents in the Outlook area say that it should be under Ag, 
that it should always have been under Ag because it’s an 
agriculture issue. So I’m hoping now that it’s . . . that you going 
to plan to expand it. Can you give me any details on that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, I want to first 
of all, I want to say to the member that I appreciate very much a 
question about the future and the capabilities and the 
opportunities that exist within the . . . within agriculture with 
irrigation as being part of the industry. We think, like you do, 
that this is an important place for us to build the agricultural 
industry from, using irrigation as one of the key methods. 
 
There’s no question that we have the potential in Saskatchewan, 
particularly in the area of the province that you referred to — 
we have a lot of the infrastructure already in place — and that 
farmers in that area, particularly those who are already using 
some of the irrigation system, are quite anxious to grow and 
expand the opportunities around this area. 
 
It will be our interest to meet with — and I’ve had some 
conversations already — with the folks who were involved with 
the irrigation industry in that part of the world, to look at how 
we might be able to assist them in not only investing more into 
the industry but also to try and provide diversification 
opportunities that are available by using irrigation in 
Saskatchewan today. It’s my sense that we could do a lot more. 
 
For example in the vegetable area. There are lots of farmers in 
our province who would like to pursue that. There’s a number 
of forage crops that we think we could encourage producers to 
be a part of, particularly in a year like this where we had a very 
dry, dry year. And last year similarly where you might take 
some of that irrigated land and provide some high-quality 
forage that would be available for across various different parts 
of the province. 
 
So there’s lots and lots of opportunities here in my view, as I 
know that you would agree, to take the irrigation industry and 
tie it tighter, closer to the agricultural industry which has so 
much potential in our province. And we have a good water 
source, as I say, and the infrastructure is already in place. It’s 
now about taking the wishes in the direction of the producers 
and building on it. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Like I say, yes we do 
have the same goals, and I just hope that you do follow through 
because you . . . this government hasn’t for the last 10 years did 
anything in irrigation end of it. And it should have been the last 
10 years. It could have grew this province in agriculture and 
hugely at that. 
 
So like I say, action is more better than words so we’ll see next 

year or the year after if you’re still there on that then. I’ll be 
pulling them words out. And I hope to give you one piece of 
advice: don’t buy the farms and don’t try to grow it yourself. 
Just do the irrigation infrastructure. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I was very pleased to 
hear the minister comment that he feels that irrigation is 
extremely important and key to diversification and 
intensification in agriculture. Because I have a fellow who had 
phoned my office who has a great deal of ranch land and he 
wants to irrigate 2,000 acres of it. And he is not asking for 
money. He will totally pay for the irrigation project, all of it 
from end to end. He wants to irrigate for some forage acres and 
he wants to irrigate some grazing acres. And he’s in the drought 
area where it’s quite critical that the cattle get water and feed. 
 
However he applied for a permit to pump the water from Lake 
Kipabiskau and was told that it would be at least a year before 
he could obtain a permit. The minister has to understand that 
with the drought situation in that area, because it’s north of 
Highway 16 which kind of seems to be the cut-off across the 
middle of the province, a year is too long. The forage acres will 
be burnt; the cattle will have to be sold or moved out of the 
province for feed. 
 
So does the minister not . . . or does the minister understand that 
to wait a year for a permit in order to just pump water out of a 
lake the size of Lake Kipabiskau is rather a ridiculous and an 
extremely difficult barrier that we need to overcome? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member, we 
could try and help you with that particular file if you wish. The 
permits are really issued by Sask Water and not by Ag and 
Food, nor will they when we get the irrigation piece fully within 
our purview. So if there’s a particular issue here as you’ve 
related that we might be of some assistance, and you might just 
provide that to us, and we’ll try to get it to the right spot. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I was 
watching with great interest the answer to the question that was 
first posed about the request I had last week for an answer to the 
people that were on the Crown land. And I heard the minister 
explicitly explain that on the 10th day the letter was sent to me 
and I’m here to advise the minister I’ve not received the letter 
yet. I just went right through my mail again just before I walked 
in here and I’ve not received it. On day number 10 I phoned 
your office and at that time they suggested it might be in for 
signature. On day number 11 I phoned again and they said, well 
it’s still in there. So I’d like to ask the minister when I can 
expect an answer. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I will ensure that 
you get the copy of the letter. I have signed the letter on the 
10th day. I was advised that this letter was on its way to you. If 
you don’t have a copy of the . . . if you don’t have the originally 
signed letter that I sent to you, I will be sure that you get it in 
your office possibly before this evening is out here. We have 
another couple of hours before the House adjourns. I will go 
and find out what’s happened to our letter. If you don’t have it 
yet . . . I remember signing the letter, and I know that it was on 
its way to you. So if you’ve not received it, I’ll be sure that you 
receive it before the day’s out. 
 



1946 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Deputy Chair. I will purposely wait around for that because it 
sounds a lot better your answer now then it was when my 
colleague from Watrous asked the question. So I will wait this 
evening and I do look forward to receiving a copy of the letter 
because I have not received it. And again, I rechecked the mail 
and it’s not there. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. We’re going to 
return to crop insurance just for a brief moment. When you’re 
considering expanding the crop insurance program to include a 
new type of crop, do you initially conduct a pilot program in 
order to gather the data necessary for you to calculate the 
coverage rates that you can offer if the new crop is included in 
future crop insurance programs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — What we do is we do gather the 
information through the course of a pilot year and put the data 
together. In some occasions, the pilot may be over more than 
just one year. But where you have a particular year which it’s 
designated as a pilot, we would gather the information on those 
sites that would be designated as pilot sites, put that information 
together, and then try and build our programming which also 
includes the rate levels from the data that we collect from the 
pilots. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. What is the criteria that 
crop insurance looks at when they’re picking the producers who 
will be included in the pilot project, and what criteria do they 
use when they pick the area in which they will conduct a pilot 
project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I’ll just use the 
example maybe this year of the bean crop that we’re doing a 
pilot on. And in order to designate the sites from which we’d be 
working with, we would do two things. We would look at 
which areas of the province they’ve already been growing the 
crop so that we get some sense that we’ll have the appropriate 
numbers. And secondly we’d work with the growers themselves 
and the pulse growers in order to establish which areas of the 
province or which sites would be best used for pilot. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister for that answer. And 
actually I was working my way to understand . . . I’m assuming 
he’s talking about the pilot project that’s being run on pinto 
beans. And that’s where the question is coming from because 
there was a request made by a group of producers to be 
included in the pinto bean project and they were turned down. 
And all of these producers were in a 20-mile radius of one 
another. They were all within 30 miles of a crop insurance 
office at Raymore. They had a total of approximately 400 acres. 
Some of the eight producers in that area have experience 
because this will be their third year growing pinto beans, and 
their request was turned down on the day of the deadline which 
was April 19. 
 
So they would like to know if the pilot project is going to be run 
another year. If so, will they be included in this pilot project? 
And I guess they would like some explanation as to why they 
were rejected this year when it is a fair number of acres that’s 
been grown for a few years now in a relatively small area that 
could be easy to monitor. 
 

(20:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, my officials tell me that 
we would establish the targets that we have in place today from 
the pulse growers, and we took the advice from the current 
clusters that were there or that were identified, and that’s the 
way in which the decisions were made about who would 
participate in it. I’m also told that into the future now that we 
could and would include the folks whom you’re talking about 
into future pilot projects. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — So if I’m understanding the minister 
correctly, they took the advice of the pulse growers and the 
pulse growers recommended a different group over this group 
that we’re talking about in the Raymore area? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, my officials tell me that 
what’s happened here is that we would have looked at, with the 
pulse industry, where the most acres in the province were 
grown and those that had the largest and most historical acreage 
that were produced, where beans were produced on, and it 
would have been that criteria that would have been used to 
determine who would be in the pilot project. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — My question for the minister then would be, 
why did they wait until the day of the deadline before they let 
this group know that they would not be included in the pilot 
project? If it was predetermined by the crop insurance office on 
the advice of the pulse growers that the group in the Raymore 
area would not be included in the pilot project, why could they 
not have notified them prior to the deadline date? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m reading off a crop 
insurance . . . the endorsement instruction guide of 2002, which 
would have gone out to producers across the province. And on 
one of the areas or one of the pages that I’m reading from, it 
talks about the dry land . . . dry bean pilot area. 
 
And it reads this way: for the 2002 crop year Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance is piloting a dry bean program for producers in 
selected areas of the province. And then it’s designated by RMs 
(rural municipality) for the programs that are indicated. 
 
And then here on this sheet that I’m reading from, which I’d be 
happy to make a copy for you, it talks about the two different 
pilot areas — one that includes Rosthern and Saskatoon — 
there are six RMs on this page and the pilot project no. 1. And 
then in the pilot project no. 2, there are also . . . it looks like 
about seven RMs that are in the Redvers and in the Oxbow area. 
 
And then they would meet the criteria that I talked about earlier 
which are . . . these would be the areas of the province where 
you would have seen, likely, the largest production and also 
people who have been in the growing of the beans for some 
time. There’s a bit of a history that’s been developed here. And 
this would have been a discussion that our folks at Crop 
Insurance would have had with the producers in both of those 
two pilot areas. 
 
And I can make this, Mr. Deputy Chair, this pilot . . . these two 
pilot areas available for you if you’d like. 
 
I also want at this time, Mr. Deputy Chair, to provide for the 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1947 

 

member from Wood River a package of information that I had 
provided for him. This letter is dated July 4, 2002. I’ll just hand 
this letter across and it can make its way then to the appropriate 
member. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. What recommendations 
should I provide for the group in the Raymore area, if they 
would like to be included in the program next year, if the pilot 
project is continued for another year? Should I advise them to 
be in touch with the Crop Insurance office or should I advise 
them to talk to the Pulse Growers Association in order to be 
included in another year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I would advise the 
member to just have those producers contact the Crop Insurance 
office in Melville and we’ll be sure that we will be of assistance 
to them on this particular issue. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. 
 
One question that I have on a different topic is, when there are 
new farmers — which I realize that in Saskatchewan is 
unfortunately too rare — but if we do have a new farmer who is 
applying for crop insurance for the first time, my understanding 
is there is some delay on deciding whether or not they will be 
accepted into the crop insurance program. 
 
However, there has been a new farmer that has contacted me 
and to date said he has not been accepted and he doesn’t know 
if he is insured or not. The seeding is already completed. 
 
So my question would be: why is there a delay, such a drastic 
delay, in letting the new farmers who apply for crop insurance 
coverage, in order for them to know whether or not they’ve 
been accepted? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, this would be a very 
unusual circumstance, in our view, that there would be a 
producer that wouldn’t have been advised yet. I would ask the 
member to provide us with the name of the producer and we’ll 
follow up on the file to see what’s happened with it. As I say, 
this would be a very unusual sort of process, where a producer 
by today would not have known yet whether or not he has in 
fact become a registered member with the crop insurance. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister and I will be more than 
happy to provide him tomorrow with that file. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question is on 
crop insurance and on the spot loss hail, and I know we have 
discussed it many times in here. The member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood has brought it up and other people have 
brought it up. As a matter of fact, I don’t know what your office 
has received from the cards mailed by APAS (Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan), but it has been 
brought up about 2,000 times in our office, and I don’t know 
how many times it has been brought up in the Premier’s office. 
I know the cards would have been going there too. 
 
But my question is, over the last number of years, the last 
couple of years, how have we done in the crop insurance 
program? Has there been a net loss in the spot loss hail program 
through Crop Insurance? 

I have a couple of annual reports here showing that over the last 
couple years, not . . . excluding the year 2000 but 1999 and 
1998, it shows that premiums paid out compared to premiums 
brought in — I should say indemnity paid out compared to 
premiums brought in — it shows that the spot loss hail program 
was in a profitable position. There was certainly more 
premiums coming in than losses being paid out. 
 
Is that correct? Could you give me kind of an overview of the 
last two or three years, and I mean if 2000 was a net loss, how 
does that compare to 1999 and 1998? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I’m reading from the 
annual report of 2000 and 2001. And I look at what the total 
premiums were from the period 1994 to the year 2000 and I see 
that the total premiums that were paid were 247,018,401. And 
then when you look at what your total net hail indemnity is on 
the far right-hand side of that column, you see that the number 
is 260,859,112, which indicates that over that period of time on 
the two bottom numbers in the total show that the crop 
insurance hail statistics have in fact shown a loss of somewhere 
in the neighbourhood of about $13 million. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, I guess that when 
you’re looking at the long term . . . and that’s what you were 
looking at. I hadn’t leafed through the annual report and looked 
at that. I was looking at the 1998 . . . the year 1998 where there 
was a surplus of 20.1 million, I believe, and in 1999 a surplus of 
13.1 million. 
 
Are those figures correct? Is that a correct assumption that the 
crop insurance brought in, in 1998, 20.1 million more than it 
paid out in lost . . . in hail claims, and in 1999, 13.4 million 
more in premium than it paid out in losses through the hail 
insurance. Are those numbers correct for those two years? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I think, Mr. Deputy Chair, if you take a 
look at the report, and I’m not sure if you’re reading from this 
report or not — and this is the annual report as I said earlier, 
2000-2001 — which show the hail statistics from 1994 right on 
through to the year 2000. And the member is correct if you 
isolate a couple of years. If you take 1998 and you take 1999, in 
each of those two years you’ll see that the premiums are around 
42 million and the payouts in those two years in hail indemnity 
is around 22 million and 28 million, respectively ’98/99. But 
when you go to the year 2000, you see that the premiums are at 
43 million, but then the hail indemnity is at 56 million. And 
then you go to the years 1995, where you see that the hail 
premium is at 24 million and change, but the hail indemnity is 
at 52 million and considerable change. 
 
So if you take one isolated year and to do the comparisons only 
over one year, then you could reach the conclusion that you 
have, which you would have net hail indemnity being at a level 
which is certainly in the positive. But when you take a look at 
the period of time, which I’ve identified from ’94 to 2000, 
you’ll see that the hail statistics and the indemnity show a $13 
million loss over that period of time. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, and I realize that and that’s no 
doubt how insurance works as they look over a longer term and 
what is viable and what isn’t. I looked over the three years of 
the three annual reports that I had here and I do realize further 



1948 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

on that it goes through, I guess that would be about an eight or 
nine year period. As I said, for the two years prior to the year 
2000, it was 20.1 million, a surplus 13.4 for 1999. In the year 
2000, it was a loss of 12.8 million. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Chair, to the Minister, when you look 
at it, if you look over the eight or nine years that you’ve talked 
about — and 1995 was a very bad year by the looks of it, a loss 
of over $20 million — when you look over the long term 
though it’s a loss so far of about $13 million, if those numbers 
are . . . if I’m adding those numbers up correctly. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Well I guess you could say that we’ll drop the spot loss hail 
program completely, which you’ve done, or we could say that 
maybe the next year would be in a year like 1998-1999 where it 
would make that deficit up in one year. In 1998 there was a 
surplus of 20 million; the eight- or nine-year average is a loss of 
13 million. One year could bring that right back into a surplus 
position had the spot loss hail program still been in effect. 
 
One thing that I remember when you talked about the spot loss 
hail, dropping the spot loss hail, the minister had mentioned in 
his news conference — because I happened to be there — and 
they went into a forage program instead. He said . . . the 
statement was that in a year that is as dry as this, you know, 
what is the problem with dropping spot loss hail. It’s better to 
put our money in a grain forage program than in spot loss hail. 
He was more or less implying that hail was not going to be a 
problem in a dry year. Well unfortunately . . . fortunately I 
should say. Fortunately in southern Saskatchewan we’re well 
past that dry year. 
 
But what I guess I am saying is to drop the whole spot loss hail 
program out of crop insurance is a huge hit. You’ve heard it 
from many, many different people from this side of the House 
and I know you’ve got phone call after phone call regarding the 
dropping of spot loss hail. 
 
All I’m saying is that in an eight-year period if you’re in a $13 
million deficit, and the year prior to the year 2000 you’re at a 
$20 million surplus, all it would take was one year with little 
hail, which you are predicting this year, to be back into a 
positive position in the spot loss hail program, and does it 
justify knocking out the spot loss hail completely when it was 
really in a very minor position of loss and could be turned 
around within one year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well, Mr. Deputy Chair, I appreciate the 
member raising again the importance of the spot loss hail in 
Saskatchewan. I don’t think there’s any question about the 
importance of this program. And we deliberated long and hard 
around the decision about how we would be able to try and 
ensure that for producers in Saskatchewan today we would 
maintain our premium at 35 per cent, which is the 
Saskatchewan producers’ share. 
 
And so I too, like you, have had a number of calls and letters 
and as has the Premier’s office regarding this issue. But it was a 
decision about priority in terms of where in fact could we take 
our money that we have for a crop insurance program invested 
with producers across the province and try and ensure that they 

got the best benefits. 
 
And I’ve said on many occasions, and you’ve heard me on it, 
that had the federal government put their money in this year to 
the level of which we’d asked them to put their money in, we 
would have been able to sustain the spot loss hail program; we 
would have hoped that we would have been able to provide an 
enhanced crop insurance program for producers across 
Saskatchewan today. Because that’s what Saskatchewan 
producers want. They want an enhanced crop insurance 
program. 
 
And we didn’t do this without deliberations with other people, 
as you can appreciate. We had a conversation with the industry, 
the people who supply and sell hail insurance in Saskatchewan. 
And I believe in one of the previous periods doing question 
period in this House, I provided a letter to you or to the member 
from Watrous who was the critic for Agriculture, about the 
letter that I received from the industry saying that this was a 
wise decision on the part of government today to move the crop 
loss . . . the spot loss hail into the private sector which I know 
that the members opposite are strong proponents of the private 
sector, always talk about how the government is in the face of 
the private sector, and how important it is for the private sector 
to compete on a level playing field. 
 
Now that wasn’t the reason or the rationale for why we made 
the move. We made the move because we didn’t have the 
money in crop insurance this year in the way in which we’d like 
to have it. And really to a large degree followed the lead of 
Manitoba. Now today if you’re a Manitoba producer you don’t 
have the spot loss hail of which is subsidized the provincial 
taxpayer. They still offer the program of course and it’s 
delivered from their offices in Manitoba but producers are 
expected to pay the full spot loss coverage. 
 
So I want to say to the member opposite that if in fact we would 
have had the resources available in Saskatchewan today for 
crop insurance, a spot loss would still be very much a part of 
our program in my view. And not only that but if we had the 
appropriate resources we would have built the crop insurance 
program to reflect some of the issues and needs that 
Saskatchewan producers have been talking about, which is to 
grow the program not only to a 70 and 80 percentile but to 90 
and 95. 
 
And I don’t know what your position is regarding crop 
insurance. Mine is very clear. We provided a proposal to the 
federal government in February of this year. In that package we 
talked about leading with crop insurance, and we talked about a 
crop sector program, and we talked about a gross revenue 
program of which we have all had a chance to examine to 
witness and review. 
 
You’ve had a chance to see out package and policy and what we 
think safety nets should be. But I have not seen yours. I’ve not 
seen your package and what you think we should do with safety 
nets. I haven’t seen what you think crop insurance should look 
like. I don’t know what you believe should be the future of the 
NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) program or for that 
matter the CFIP (Canadian Farm Income Program). 
 
So in Saskatchewan today you know what our position is in 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1949 

 

enhancing crop insurance and you know the reasons why we 
haven’t been able to grow it to where it is. 
 
What I don’t know, is I don’t know what your position is 
regarding the crop insurance program because you have not yet 
shared that. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, it’s interesting 
that he would quote the private industry, private insurance 
companies, to say that, yeah, we think it’s okay if you get out of 
the crop insurance business. Mr. Chair, there is a whole lot of 
private business owners that would wish SaskTel would get out 
of their business also, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — You could certainly use the example, and 
no doubt the private insurers are going to say get out of our 
business because it’s going to improve our business. That’s all 
fine and dandy, Mr. Chair, that the minister would try and 
justify dropping spot loss hail because the private insurers said 
that was okay, that that would be a good thing to do. It really is 
quite a stretch in logic to think that that would justify the 
dropping of spot loss hail. 
 
But I think the bigger issue is that there is a responsibility with 
the provincial government and a responsibility with the federal 
government to put appropriate safety net in place in agriculture, 
something that this minister has talked about in every Throne 
Speech that I have been in this House and haven’t seen anything 
at all. The only thing that I have seen is a reduction in the crop 
insurance program, as I knew it when I came into this House. 
That’s not enhancement. 
 
I also know that the whole safety net issue has been one that has 
been talked about for 10 years and that simply all that has been 
done in the last 10 years is talking about it. There has been very 
little movement on a full based safety net program that would 
take into consideration not only production, but commodity 
prices also — revenue side of it — and there has been no 
movement. And there has been talk on it and there has been talk 
on it, but there has been no movement. 
 
And I guess I would really question in a year that we are 
suffering . . . we’re suffering especially in all of the province, 
not so much in the southern part now, with a drought situation. 
Agriculture was going through a bit of a tough time with the 
drought situation, and people . . . I was just on the phone before 
I came up into the House with a farmer from Montmartre that 
was saying he couldn’t understand why they would be dropping 
the spot loss hail, why they would be dropping the property tax 
refund that they have taken out of, really, the farmers’ pockets, I 
guess, in a year when it looked to be very, very bleak. 
 
Now we have been getting some rain and things look a little bit 
better. But it just seems like the direction that this government 
is going in agriculture, when it is supposed to be hopefully in 
place there with a longer-term safety net program, that they’d 
be going the opposite direction. 
 
And I guess the issue that I wanted to just ask a couple 
questions on, I’ve taken my time now, is the whole spot loss 
hail issue. To think that you’d drop the spot loss hail issue, 

because over the last eight years they’re in a $13 million deficit, 
I think is hardly a good enough reason. Now you are saying that 
you needed the money to take from that to put into other parts 
of the program. 
 
Well I guess the question is, is how much did it cost the 
government? It really hasn’t cost them . . . it’s cost them very, 
very little in payment on top of the premium, and that was the 
whole issue and one year could’ve turned that around. So I 
guess perhaps it’s too late for this government to reverse its 
decision on spot loss hail. 
 
Maybe if we keep hammering as long as we did on health care, 
long-term health care — and they finally decided to reverse 
their decision on long-term health care — I would ask the 
minister if he’d consider reversing his decision on reducing the 
. . . taking the spot loss hail out of crop insurance because it is a 
huge hit to people throughout the province. Would he 
reconsider re-changing his mind on that spot loss hail issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well I appreciate very much the member 
providing me with a whole number of openings to have a 
conversation with him about the importance of the agricultural 
policy framework that we have, that we’re developing in 
Canada today. 
 
I can say to the member opposite that when you speak about 
there not being a safety net program in Saskatchewan or in 
Canada over the last five years or four years, it would be an 
absolutely inaccurate comment. Because we have in Canada 
today — it’s been developed by all the provinces in Canada and 
the federal government — a package that includes three 
different programs: a crop insurance program, a CFIP program, 
and a NISA program, of which all Canadian farmers have had 
at their disposal now for the better part of three years. 
 
That’s our Canadian safety net, of which all of the Canadian Ag 
ministers and the federal government and your Leader of the 
Opposition was a part of helping build and design and 
improving when he was a Member of Parliament, when he was 
a Member of Parliament in the federal, in the federal . . . when 
he was a federal MP (Member of Parliament). He supported, he 
supported the safety nets that we have in Canada today. 
 
Now you may not like it. I mean you don’t like the programs. I 
don’t particularly, I don’t particularly like the programs either. I 
don’t like CFIP and NISA, or CFIP either, but that’s what we 
had to work with for the last three years. 
 
Now what have we been doing? I can tell you what we’ve been 
doing when our side of the House we put forward a safety net 
package to the federal government, which by the way the 
federal government is now leading with, an enhanced crop 
insurance program which we’ll see in the year 2002. We’re 
going to see an enhanced crop insurance program I expect in 
Saskatchewan and in Canada. I expect that we’re going to see a 
brand new expanded NISA program in Canada for producers 
across the piece, and the other three envelopes or four 
envelopes or pillars that we talked about. 
 
What I have not seen from anybody on that side of the House, 



1950 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

including the Leader of the Opposition, a position about what 
you think safety nets in Canada should look like. And I can tell 
you, Mr. Chair — I can tell you, Mr. Chair — that I’ve written 
to the previous minister, or the previous agriculture critic on 
your side of the House, I wrote to him in last year, in the fall of 
last year, and again to him again in February. Because he was 
on the airwaves in Saskatchewan saying, you know what, we 
have an agricultural policy that we’re going to be prepared to 
share with Saskatchewan producers. 
 
I have a copy of his Hansard . . . radio broadcast, if the member 
opposite would like to take a look at it, I have a copy of it. And 
it was on the GX radio in Yorkton and I have a copy of it. And 
it’s now seven months later. It’s seven months since we first 
heard them and you’ve had two different agricultural ministers 
and a group of rural members today who say that they know 
what should happen in rural Saskatchewan. I’ve got seven 
months, I haven’t seen one page from the opposite . . . members 
opposite about what a safety net program in Saskatchewan 
should look like. 
 
So it’s interesting that you’re critical of what we have today as 
a developing agricultural policy. But to date you haven’t put 
one — one word — on a page, Mr. Chair, about what 
Saskatchewan agriculture or farm policy should look like. 
 
I want to say to the member opposite that the crop loss spot . . . 
the spot loss hail change had nothing to do with the fact that it 
was going to be delivered by the private sector. It had nothing 
to do with that. It had to do with the fact that we didn’t get the 
sufficient kind of dollars that we wanted from the federal 
government this year. And we put our 14 million additional 
dollars into the program this year to try to make sure that the 
producer premiums are sustained from Saskatchewan’s 
position. We did that. 
 
And from time to time, I mean I hear the member from Estevan 
chirping from her chair but the reality is, is that the member 
from Estevan, she has people who live and work in her 
constituency today who sell the product of the hail insurance 
and they’re pleased with the fact that we took the spot loss hail. 
They are. 
 
Now am I happy with the fact that producers are having to pay 
more? I’m not happy that producers are having to pay more 
today. But the reality is, is that our crop insurance program 
today — our crop insurance program today, Mr. Chair — is got 
the kind of dollars in it in a year which was very difficult for us 
this year, Mr. Speaker, or Mr. Chair. And I say to the members 
opposite, we’ll work on the new policy, on a new program for 
Saskatchewan producers. And in my view at the end of the day 
it will be the kind of product that Saskatchewan and Canadian 
producers will want to see. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. It’s always 
interesting, and through the estimates that we’ve seen today and 
starting at, I think, 3 o’clock or 3:30 when we started estimates 
today, whether it’s going to be in Health or whether it’s 
whatever it might be, every time it comes up, the ministers are 
standing and they want to know our plan. They just can’t wait 
to see our plan and hear our plan. 

Well I would just ask the members opposite to screw up the 
nerve and call an election and you’ll see our full platform laid 
out for you. We’ve talked about a number of different things, 
and the former member from Kindersley had laid out many 
different options that you could look at for agriculture. And his 
excuse all the time is that . . . the minister, is that in the last 
seven months . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order, order, order. I would ask the members on 
both sides of the House to come to order. I recognize the 
member for Indian Head . . . Indian Head-Milestone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — It could be Wolseley in the future; you 
don’t know. But you know it’s interesting the minister was 
saying that, you know, you’ve waited seven months and we’ve 
gone through a change in critic and we haven’t heard anything 
from us in seven months. Well seven months may seem like a 
long time to you not hearing anything from us, but believe me 
10 years from the agriculture community is an awful long time 
to have heard nothing from that government opposite. 
 
The one thing that we did hear shortly after they took power 
was the ripping sound of a GRIP (gross revenue insurance 
program) program that was ripped up and said would be 
replaced in the real near future and there has been nothing 
replacing it since. 
 
The minister said that I am denying that there is a safety net 
program in place. And he used the examples of crop insurance, 
he talked about CFIP, and he talked about the AIDA program 
and the NISA program — those programs. 
 
I guess my question is to you then: if he’s saying that those are 
the safety net programs, are they satisfactory? If they’re not 
satisfactory what has been done about them in the last five 
years? We have been saying that they’re not satisfactory and 
you’ve just stood in your place and said those are the programs. 
What are you saying, we don’t have safety nets? We do have 
safety nets. Are those the safety nets that are satisfactory to this 
government? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Of course, Mr. Chair, those programs are 
not satisfactory to the government and that’s why in the last two 
years this government has put into the safety net package 80 
additional million dollars, along with the federal government’s 
$120 million, to add another $200 million in each of the last 
two years for safety net money. 
 
If safety nets in Canada were working we wouldn’t have these 
provinces to put in . . . and Saskatchewan in particular have to 
put in the additional money that we did last year for farmers. Of 
which by the way, when the member raises the point, we were 
in Ottawa, we were in Ottawa negotiating a deal with the 
federal government, talking to them about not being involved in 
the AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster Assistance) program. 
And there were representatives from your side of the House 
who were at those meetings. In fact the member from Saltcoats 
was front and centre on this piece. 
 
And he stood in front of the representatives of the Senate and of 
representatives of the Liberal caucus and we talked to them 
about how important it was to scrap the AIDA program and to 
provide additional money for farmers. And we were unified on 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1951 

 

that when we left Ottawa. And we weren’t back in 
Saskatchewan, as I’ve said for you in the past — I’ve said to 
you in the past — for more than 10 minutes and the member 
from Saltcoats was going sideways on us saying you know what 
we need to put money into the AIDA program. It wasn’t 10 
minutes that he was back here. 
 
And so the member opposite stands in his place today and he 
says you know that we have programs that aren’t working. Of 
course we have programs that aren’t working. And that’s why 
today we’re building a brand new safety net because the ones 
that we had weren’t working in the past. And so an enhanced 
crop insurance is what we’re looking at. We want to see an 
enhanced NISA program in Saskatchewan today. 
 
And for an opposition party to be critical of what programs 
we’re doing in Saskatchewan today, Mr. Speaker . . . You’ve 
been the opposition for almost three years you’ve been the 
opposition . . . you’ve been the official opposition in 
Saskatchewan. And I haven’t seen anywhere . . . I haven’t seen 
anywhere, not one line anywhere, about what you think, in the 
entire three years what your opposition party thinks we should 
be doing on farm programming for Saskatchewan. 
 
And you boast on a regular basis that you’re rural members, 
that you represent rural Saskatchewan, that you know what the 
farm economy is all about. And in the period of three years I’ve 
not seen one idea or one concept come forward from your party 
and not on one occasion. 
 
And you say to me well you should just wait for an election and 
then we’re going to roll out our election platform. We saw what 
your election platform was in 1999. I mean where you froze 
education, where you froze health care, where you’re going to 
do an audit on programs. I mean that’s . . . and what would you 
do for Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers? It would be of the 
same nature. 
 
Finally we’ve had your leader of your party say to us that he’s 
now prepared to participate in a joint approach to Ottawa where 
we’re now going to see them hopefully subsidizing 
Saskatchewan farmers. I mean that was a 180 for the Leader of 
the Opposition and we appreciate that in a great way. 
 
And so I say to the members opposite, we’re building a new 
Saskatchewan agricultural policy framework. We appreciate the 
support that you’ve given us to date and that you’ll be 
supportive as we build the agricultural policy framework into 
the future and a stronger crop insurance program which will be 
federally funded to the level of which it needs to be in order to 
survive. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. I move 
that we report progress on the Department of Agriculture, Food 
and Rural Revitalization, and that we move to Sask Water. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce his officials. 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
To my immediate left is Stuart Kramer. He is the president of 
Sask Water. Directly behind me is Wayne Dybvig, who is the 
vice-president of water resource and infrastructure 
management. Next to Wayne, to my left back is Tom Gehlen 
who is the vice-president of utility and engineering operations. 
And further to the left of Mr. Kramer is Terry Hymers who is 
the corporate comptroller. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Chair, I would 
like to also welcome the minister and his officials here this 
evening. 
 
The area that I would like to ask about is the area of irrigation. 
And I think there is a realization on both sides of the House 
how important it is to rural Saskatchewan for economic 
development and also to you know to meet our diversification 
potential. However we also recognize that it’s extremely costly 
to put in irrigation systems and although we hope to expand that 
in the province, we understand that there is some restrictions as 
far as dollars go. 
 
However in the Naicam area which is still experiencing drought 
conditions, there is a rancher who wishes to irrigate 2,000 acres 
of land, some of it for cutting for forage, and some of it for 
grazing land for his cattle, both of which are extremely 
important. This is not an area that is receiving the rains that the 
southern part of the province was so grateful to see, so feed and 
water is of the utmost importance. 
 
The interesting thing about this rancher is he’s willing to pay 
for the entire system. He is not coming to the government 
requesting money. All that he would like is for a permit in order 
to pump water from Kipabiskau Lake which is quite a sizable 
lake in that area. He was told by the Sask Water office that the 
permit would take at least a year in order to obtain. And I’m 
sure the minister can understand that’s absolutely ludicrous. 
This is a year of a drought, and the drought is still happening in 
that area. This man is willing to finance the entire operation. All 
he needs is a permit. 
 
So could the minister please address why it would take a year in 
order to get a permit to pump water from a lake for an irrigation 
project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. I 
think I would first of all want to sympathize with the producer 
in question and I’ll ask the member to forward to us the name of 
the rancher that certainly willing to do his part or her part. And 
I think a year is certainly a long time and we’ll certainly check 
into why it has taken a year to get that done. 
 
Normally it takes weeks to get these things into play. It should 
not take a year. There are issues like land control issues — if he 
controls the land then, you know, access across the land to put 
the pipes and all that it would not of course be a problem. But if 
other people were to own the land then that would create more 
of a challenge of course. There’s also the soil water suitability 
certificate, I guess, that would be needed to see if the soil itself 
is able to benefit from irrigation. And again those two processes 
should not take a year. 
 
But what I would ask that member to do is to forward the name 



1952 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

to me. Because there’s no question that the drought, while in the 
Saskatoon/Rosetown area is certainly one of the areas that are 
hardest hit, we do have some sensitivity to that challenge and 
we’re doing our very best to try and meet as many of the 
irrigation needs that are out there. And Sask Water is working 
very closely with the producer groups and the farm groups to 
make sure that we’re able to respond. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — I thank the minister. The fellow’s name is 
Dave Detavich. And I believe, I stand to be . . . I could be 
corrected here, but I believe that the land that he owns goes 
right up to the lake so that there shouldn’t be an issue of other 
land that he would have to cross with pipes. However, I could 
be corrected on that because I am not first-hand knowledgeable 
in that. 
 
So I will pass this answer on to him and he can contact your 
office and deal with it in that manner. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. My question to the 
minister is, in my area which is southeast of Regina here, I’ve 
been getting more and more phone calls regarding issues with 
Oceans and Fisheries. I had a number of phone calls on that. 
And I know when I talk to members on this side, as we 
represent pretty much all of rural Saskatchewan, there seems to 
be more and more issues with Oceans and Fisheries coming in 
and, you know, telling, asking, and telling what can be done and 
what can’t be done. 
 
I guess I’d like to know, from the minister, what type of 
relationship, how much communication back and forth is there 
with Oceans and Fisheries? Do you talk to them as to what they 
are doing in the province and the jurisdiction they have in this 
province? I guess first of all just a bit of a general comment 
from the minister on their relationship with Oceans and 
Fisheries. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. One of the 
things that, as you probably are aware, is that DFO (Department 
of Fisheries and Oceans) has put in about . . . has 30 people 
throughout the province. This process has been under way for 
the last two years. And what DFO is trying to do in the province 
is to try and find out . . . or to try and find their role. 
 
Typically DFO would take care of the fish habitat. And for 
example, SERM would take care of course of the fish. 
 
So it’s very important that we build a relationship with DFO to 
make sure that there is a good collaboration and certainly 
coordination from the different levels of government to ensure 
that there is a smooth transition, to ensure that there is no 
disruption to some of the activities that we have traditionally 
undertaken in Saskatchewan with SERM being the only 
government agency involved. 
 
There is no question that DFO wants to put a plan together. We 
have met with them. In fact DFO has also met with SARM 
(Saskatchewan Association of Rural Municipalities) and to 
begin to carve out a relationship. And so that is what has been 
happening with DFO so far. 
 

And as a minister, we have expressed in many ways and on 
several occasions our dissatisfaction with having DFO’s 
presence in Saskatchewan. We felt that the confidence and the 
professionalism and the ethics and the work displayed by 
officials in SERM and certainly Sask Water, that there was no 
wide-scale disruption of fish habitat, that there’s good 
collaboration with commerce. There was some really strong 
links with the environmental movement. 
 
So certainly from the perspective of the provincial government, 
we felt that we were adequately doing what should be done in 
DFO’s absence at the time and that people of Saskatchewan did 
not want to see DFO here. However, you know, the reality is 
DFO decides to have a presence, they bring 30 officers in, and 
we can’t simply close the borders and say no, you’re not 
welcome. 
 
We are now in the process of accepting that they’re looking for 
their new role and carving out a relationship, but we are 
keeping them in check. And certainly in part of their processes, 
we’re continuing to meet with them and to make sure that they 
don’t hamper that balance that we’ve achieved over the years. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the 
Chair, it’s interesting that you would say . . . it’s amazing, 
actually really amazing to me that in the last two years they 
have gone really from no presence in this province to 
employing 30 people to look after fish habitat in our province. I 
was glad to hear you say that . . . I mean, you wish you could 
say get out, because frankly, that’s what I would like to tell 
them — out. 
 
We have a situation in my constituency, right where I farm . . . 
we’re in the Souris C&D (conservation and development). The 
Souris C&D takes water from our area and sends it down the 
Souris through the Rafferty-Alameda and all that whole 
process. I’m not going to get into that. But last year there was 
some, a little bit more ditching that was planned to feed this 
process and Oceans and Fisheries put a block on it until there 
was a study done because they felt that we may be affecting 
some fish habitat. 
 
And after $45,000 later, paid by, by the farmers in our area in 
order to get these few ditches done, it was found that they found 
six fish carcass in one ditch that could have come out of a 
dugout, could of swum upstream and as the water dissipated 
were caught in pools, they found six fish carcass in I forget how 
many square miles of ditch. Well that six fish carcasses 
constituted fish habitat. 
 
You go 35 miles southeast of Regina and drive along, whether 
it’s the 306 Highway, the No. 6 Highway, or the 33 Highway, 
and tell me if you see fish habitat out there. There is absolutely 
no fish habitat out there. But because six fish carcasses were 
found, now they’ve put a ban on any sort of water drainage at 
all. You can’t clean out a natural run. You can’t do a thing on 
your own property because two years ago Oceans and Fisheries 
have put 30 people in here that have to justify their job now. 
And justifying their job costs us $45,000, a ban on all ditching 
in our area. 
 
So if you could say something to Oceans and Fisheries for me, 
we don’t want them in this province. The fish habitat, at least in 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1953 

 

southern Saskatchewan in the Regina Plains, was handled quite 
nicely for 2,000, 3,000 years before Oceans and Fisheries got 
here. And if you could relay a message from our area and from 
our C&D, thanks for the $45,000 bill but we didn’t need it. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes, I certainly hear your message. 
And you know, I think we’d like them to be gone too. And I 
think we’d like you to be gone too. But the reality is we have to 
deal with you and that’s the kind of relationship that we 
certainly have to set up with, Sask Water has to set up with 
DFO. 
 
So as much as we appreciate the banter back and forth, in all 
seriousness, we wish you were not here as well. But the reality 
is we have to work with DFO and I would point out that you 
know the message for people out there is to be very careful 
what we ask for; because one of the things that your associate 
from Last Mountain Lake area of course was making reference 
to Last Mountain Lake, and of course DFO was intimately 
involved and their presence was there and perhaps there will be 
more restrictions and more challenges to us trying to put 
forward a Saskatchewan solution. 
 
And all of a sudden you have the Ottawa presence, and of 
course these folks are having a very direct impact on what’s 
happening not only for the fish habitat but for the agricultural 
community, as you mentioned. But equally with the industry 
and with business they’re having a dramatic negative effect on, 
for example, the BC (British Columbia) economy. There are 
things that they can do but they won’t do to try and make those 
little adjustments. And yet we’re seeing the, you know, the 
negative impact. 
 
So I think the message is very clear, but the reality is — as I 
mentioned in being a statesman — they do have jurisdiction 
over the fish habitat. They are here. They have a funny way of 
trying to carve out a relationship with Saskatchewan’s interests, 
but that’s the manner in which they operate. And I would point 
out that we will continue trying to define a relationship where 
we’re able to continue building on the past success. And as we 
always say, be careful what you ask for because you might just 
get it. 
 
When we have a challenge on Last Mountain Lake from your 
associate, the DFO becomes involved, then there’s more 
interference there. And I think in the long run what you want to 
do, as you mentioned, is to make sure we protect 
Saskatchewan’s interests and not have DFO here. But they’re 
here so we’ll work out a relationship with them to the best of 
our ability, protecting Saskatchewan’s interests. So we hear 
your message. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the minister then, and it’s, as I 
said, it’s good to hear the minister say that, you know, we don’t 
want them here; be, you know, careful what you ask for, that 
type of thing. 
 
What have you done to talk to the federal ministry? How far 
have you gone up the chain of command? You’ve said they’re 
here and we’re trying to work with them. What have you done 
further up the chain of command to say, frankly, we don’t need 
you? 
 

Or have you just said, well they’re here and we’ll try and work 
with you and we’ll try and get along and I’m sure there’s all 
enough room in this province for SERM and water, Sask Water, 
and the DFO. I’m sure that we can all kind of carve out a niche 
in this province to justify why we’re here — especially the 
DFO. What have you done to say to the federal ministry, or 
whoever it may be up the chain of command, that frankly we 
don’t need you here? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well I would point out that one of the 
things I think that’s very important is that . . . Let me state that 
we have not said, come forth to Saskatchewan and carve out a 
niche spot for you to play a role in. We were very, very direct. 
We were very, very forthright. And in fact we were in a 
demanding mode when we told the regional director at Jackfish 
Lake Lodge near North Battleford, that no, we don’t want DFO 
in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve also written correspondence, and in fact personally at a 
meeting in BC where we met with the minister at the time, the 
hon. Herb Dhaliwal, where we told him directly that we didn’t 
want . . . and didn’t see the DFO’s role in Saskatchewan being 
of any value. So I would say to the member that Saskatchewan 
certainly didn’t roll over at all. We got up and we’ve said on 
numerous occasions and many venues that we do not see a role 
for DFO. We are adequately being represented in the sense of 
trying to protect fish habitat. So right from the face-to-face 
point with the Minister Dhaliwal during the CCME (Council of 
Canadian Ministers of Environment) meetings in BC, where I 
had of course access to the minister, I told him we did not want 
DFO. And by way of advising the regional directors verbally 
again, at Jackfish Lake lodge, we were very direct. And 
correspondence would also suggest that we were very direct. 
 
So this is not a role of Saskatchewan saying well you’re here, 
let’s accept you. We have fought this from day one and as much 
as we want to put a lot of effort in fighting, sooner or later you 
accept that it’s going to happen and you move forward. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Mr. Chair, to the minister. You’ve talked to 
the minister, I guess Herb Dhaliwal you had mentioned, and 
you talked to a number of the regional directors. Do you have 
anything in writing requesting the minister to extract this 
department out of the province? 
 
I would like to see something in writing. You may have talked 
to him at a coffee break in British Columbia at some conference 
that may have been. But frankly, Mr. Minister, it would do me a 
lot of good to see that you’ve put it in writing and you’ve 
requested the Oceans and Fisheries, or Fisheries and Oceans, to 
have . . . do they really need to be in the province. Is there 
anything in writing that you can show me that you’ve been hard 
over and saying that their presence is not needed in the 
province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well as much as we would like to 
spend some time on this particular file, I would point out that 
perhaps SERM’s avenue when we have the opportunity to go 
through SERM’s estimates, that would be the more appropriate 
place to present some of these questions. Because that’s 
certainly the role that I previously played to try and make sure 
that the ministers were available and the ministers were notified 
of our challenge. 



1954 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

And we will get the information when SERM is here to make 
sure we have the correspondence that was sent from either the 
deputy minister at the time or myself as the minister to the 
appropriate people talking about DFO’s role. 
 
But I can tell you while the written correspondence may not be 
many letters over a period of many weeks, there was a direct 
mention of DFO to the Minister of the Environment in BC, and 
there was a direct challenge to the regional directors at Jackfish 
Lake lodge saying no. 
 
But it’s interesting that the question should come because while 
I am right here in Saskatchewan defending what 
Saskatchewan’s needs are, I can’t comment on what the federal 
government is doing. The federal government should be held 
accountable of course but that’s not my role. 
 
As your provincial minister for Sask Water we have said, we 
are quite adept at handling our own problems; thank you very 
much for DFO; but we can’t make rules and regulations and 
processes and announcements for the federal government, so we 
are now standing here saying, from a Saskatchewan 
perspective, we don’t feel that DFO is needed, but you know 
the reality is DFO is here, so we have to accept and we have to 
move on and spend some time in how we can keep them in 
check as opposed to trying to keep them out of here. And that I 
think is probably the wiser move to protect Saskatchewan’s 
interests. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Quickly on the question from the member from 
Indian-Milestone. Have you contacted SERM, and together the 
both of you, because this affects both Sask Water and both 
SERM, and requested to the minister — the federal minister — 
that the jurisdiction of fisheries be put in . . . any contained 
watersheds that are in this province . . . contained watersheds 
that are in this province come back under the Environment here, 
under the province? Have you had them discussions and is an 
ongoing discussion between your two departments to have that 
done? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes, what I would point out is that we 
did have the opportunity to meet with the Minister of the 
Environment previous to the acting capacity, and I’m certainly 
aware that the Minister of the Environment at the time was 
certainly acutely aware of the fact that DFO was here, and that 
they weren’t needed but we had to accept. So rehashing that 
point would be fruitless in the sense of trying to be productive 
here. 
 
But I would point out that DFO’s presence into western Canada 
affects all western provinces and, quite frankly, legislatively 
they have the authority to look and to administer and to care for, 
you know, the habitat of fish. And as much as we don’t like it, 
technically, legally, constitutionally, legislatively, they have the 
authority to do this. 
 
So as a result of that, again western Canada doesn’t like it, but 
we have to accept their role. And we, as you mention, 
constantly keep them in check by way of sitting down with 
them and continuing to talk with them. But we certainly have 
had correspondence and discussions, as I mentioned, indicating 
our displeasure with the presence of DFO, not only in 
Saskatchewan but in Western Canada, and all the provinces 

have agreed in Western Canada that this was contrary to the 
better interests of all Canadians. But nonetheless I can’t speak 
for Ottawa. They decided to do this, and from Saskatchewan’s 
point we don’t like it but they have the mandate and the 
authority to do that. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And that’s the 
trouble. You don’t know what they’re going to be doing in 
Ottawa and you won’t know a lot of the rules and regulations 
that could be coming down the road to affect us, could be 
affecting us hugely. Some of the instances that have been 
brought up here from the member from Indian Milestone. And 
it’s gone on to other constituencies and they feel that it’s going 
to be a bigger problem as time goes on, when it comes to 
drainage. 
 
But one other question with that. Are you sharing any studies 
with Oceans and Fisheries right now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for that question. 
No, Sask Water does not have any joint studies to my 
knowledge with DFO on any particular project. But you know 
obviously if we do find in the future that those activities was a 
option, then we would certainly have to study the merits and 
make sure, as we mentioned before, that Saskatchewan’s 
interests are maintained. 
 
As I mentioned, one of the things that we have to do now at 
Sask Water is DFO requires us to do a study on some of Sask 
Water’s structures. So in order for us to operate a structure, we 
have — we, Sask Water — have to do a study for DFO. So 
when we mention the fact that it has an impact on producers, it 
certainly has an impact on Sask Water as well. And they have 
the mandate to do so. So when we have structures, we have to 
provide a study to the DFO folks for their approval processes. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. You brought up the 
Last Mountain Lake there. When you were out there you were 
encouraging I think local politicians to form kind of a 
committee to monitor the lake. How is that coming along? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much. What I’d like to 
report, I think the fundamental message of the meeting was that 
there was some concern and we appreciate the concern. We 
appreciate the awareness level that was attached to the whole 
Last Mountain Lake issue. 
 
And we of course went out there and we explained to the people 
that based on recreational use that the water was quite safe to 
use for those purposes. So the first order of business was to 
alleviate the concerns that were raised and to tell people that 
based on all the results that we had, and that included testing of 
the water, that for recreational use, contact recreational use, that 
the water was quite safe. 
 
So that was the first order of business was to make sure that 
people knew the water was safe. And the second order of 
business is to employ them to become part of the process to 
ensure that that safe water continued. And this was the result of 
us establishing the committee that will involve people to look at 
all the different information that we have and for them to be 
activated in a role. So (a) protect and make sure the water is 
safe; and (b) find a role for the people, a process for the people 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1955 

 

to fit in, to ensure that water continues to remain safe. 
 
And I can report that we will be inviting communities to name 
representatives to a committee. There is a letter going out and 
we hope to have our first meeting this month and we hope that 
that committee will continue remaining very active. 
 
And of course as you know there’s a lot of interest that are 
being associated with property values, with it being an 
economic community, and of course the environmental 
movement. There’s so much at stake here and that’s one of the 
reasons why we wanted to alleviate the concerns and to also 
employ people in the process so that they are subjected to as 
much of the information as possible so they themselves know 
that whether it’s their property value or whether it’s public 
health or whether it’s their economic planning, that they do 
have access to good quality water for recreational purposes. 
 
And we’ve always maintained, and I made a statement there 
that night, whether I am in the Far North or whether I am in 
Last Mountain Lake, that it is only fair enough that we treat the 
water before we drink it. And I think that’s clearly understood 
as a result of that meeting. 
 
So I would point out the meeting was very valuable, very 
proactive. I think the concerns have been alleviated. The 
amount of awareness has gone up and that’s exactly what we 
want to see. And we are now engaging people in the process so 
they themselves can make decisions, so they themselves are 
aware of some of the rules and regulations, so they themselves 
are able to be proactive in protecting their water so that they 
will continue to use it for many years. So, no question about it, 
there’s been good progress. Greater progress will be made. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I think you received a 
letter — I don’t know if you did — from the village of Buena 
Vista and I think that kind of shares the results . . . concerns of a 
lot of the people along the lake there. Maybe I’ll read parts of it 
there. 
 

Our council strongly feels the suggestion that the local 
mayors put together, lake stewardship committee, will not 
work to protect our lake. This would seem to be an attempt 
to download a provincial responsibility. Our lake has 40 
communities, at least five RMs, one provincial park and 
three recreational sites on the shoreline. Trying to get all 
these groups plus a huge number of environmental groups 
involved requires the leadership of the provincial 
government. 
 
As a village council, we have done and continue to do our 
job. We have adopted bylaws to handle our drinking water 
and sewage in an effort to protect our citizens and the lake. 
We feel that the ability to monitor the lake already exists 
within the provincial government departments. The 
government also has the power to create and enforce laws 
that can protect the lake. What is needed is a more direct 
input and information to the user groups of the lake. 
 
We are requesting the Minister of Environment to show the 
leadership that is expected of his position by creating a Last 
Mountain Lake stewardship committee that is so needed. 

 

Our committee basically would jump at the chance to have a rep 
on it, but I think what they want is the province leading it 
because I think, Mr. Chairman, that that’s a minister’s job to be 
that, not to unload the responsibilities of the leadership onto the 
local committees. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — First of all what I wanted to do is, I 
think Buena Vista may have got the impression that we wanted 
them to do all the work. And what I would concur with you, sir, 
is that the fact that as a minister the responsibility clearly lies 
with the province in terms of trying to make sure we organize 
groups and we get them into processes that would engage their 
knowledge, their expertise, and certainly their experience. And 
that’s exactly what we want to do is to make sure that we have 
the sum of all our efforts and our abilities to protect that lake. 
And that’s the whole process behind this lake stewardship 
concept that we have been building. 
 
And I would point out to the communities in and around Last 
Mountain Lake is the fact that there’s many, many committees 
that are in place that are doing exactly that. There are many 
committees that skirt many of these lakes and rivers and 
streams in the province that really take, in a sense, a 
stewardship approach to making sure that their water and their 
watershed is protected. 
 
Right now we have about six committees in place. They include 
Jackfish, Fishing Lakes, Good Spirit Lake. These are some of 
the examples of some of the committees that are in place. We’re 
working with three other committees to try and establish that. 
And now we’re working with Last Mountain Lake and that’s 
always good progress. 
 
So I guess my message to the mayor of Buena Vista and the 
other people that may be watching tonight or may have 
information about this exchange of this evening, I would point 
out that we appreciate their concerns. This is no effort to 
download onto their RM or down onto their village council. We 
understand that they do have some challenges as every 
community does. We are going to take the lead; we’re going to 
work with as many communities as possible. 
 
And what I would say to the mayor of Buena Vista and all the 
mayors in the small communities and the RM in the area, is that 
we would want to establish a working relationship with you so 
we’re able to provide maximum benefits to the stewardship 
concept that we’re working towards. 
 
Again the principle here is that we want to engage the local 
people as they have a pivotal role to play in the protection and 
stewardship of that lake. And I would suggest that we would . . . 
that would be the best option and the best avenue to undertake 
to ensure, as I mentioned, the second primary focus of this, and 
that is to ensure that the lake level and quality of water in Last 
Mountain Lake stays just as good or gets better. And you do 
that by engaging local people. 
 
So as I mentioned, we are taking a lead. We have sent letters 
out. The first meeting is in June. We’re quite excited about this 
partnership. And this is by no ways or means an effort to try 
and download the responsibilities onto the RMs or onto the 
communities. I think they understand that and I appreciate the 
member’s concerns. I wish to alleviate those concerns by saying 



1956 Saskatchewan Hansard June 10, 2002 

 

we are taking the lead and we will work with all the affected 
parties. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. I’ll say time will tell — like it 
usually does with this government — to see what happens with 
it. 
 
On Bill No. 68, the Saskatchewan Water Corporation . . . or no, 
I’ll deal with Bill No. 67 first. How is that going to affect the 
upcoming budget of Sask Water? Will it affect it any? Can you 
tell me some of the rule changes with what this Bill is or some 
of the provisions in it? Can you go into some of the detail with 
it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I can tell you that some of the efforts 
that were undertaken with our water strategy, in particular Bill 
No. 67, will have no impact on the budget. The new 
organizations will deliver their programs within the existing 
budgets. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s not going to 
affect the C&D makeup at all under the Watershed Authority 
Acts? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Okay, I think the . . . one of the things 
that when he’s talking about the Conservation and Development 
Association, the legislation doesn’t affect this year’s budget, so 
I think basically we were given the allocation of 7.74, $7 
million to operate Sask Water and basically, I think all the 
planning and all the design of our water strategy, we have that 
amount, and basically, the budget doesn’t impact the current 
relationship that we have with the CDA’s (conservation and 
development area authority) that are out there. 
 
Obviously, as things . . . as time goes on, you know, 
consultation is always important to undertake, and we don’t 
have anything planned, but what we would do is we want to 
make sure that if there’s any stakeholders that could have 
potential impact in the future that we’d give them full notice 
and we’d be able to work with them in the event that there is a 
change, but there’s, again there’s no change to my knowledge. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. So then Bill No. 67, 
what’s the intent then of presenting this bill? What changes are 
you doing with the legislation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
One of the things that we want to make sure is that we tie the 
strategy all together, and Bill 67 is part of that strategy, and one 
of the Bills that we’re dealing with is able to separate Sask 
Water into two categories: one that Sask Water would be a 
solutions — a water solutions provider— and this, of course, is 
which I’m minister of; and the other half, which is the 
watershed activity, would be transferred over to SERM, and 
they would become part of the Watershed Authority. And of 
course a third part of this work is of course the rules and 
regulations. So it’s really a three-part strategy. 
 
One is to deal with providing solutions to the many 
communities which Sask Water will be primarily focused on. 
And the other aspect of Watershed Authority would be under 
SERM, that would be working under a different minister to 
ensure that watershed protection, to protect the water and 

sources, is a duty that will be undertaken. And of course you 
couple that with some good rules and regulations, some fair and 
strong and firm rules and regulations, that we feel that this will 
certainly be a solid base to begin to employ the water strategy. 
 
But for your information, just to clarify the role of Sask Water 
and the role of this Saskatchewan Watershed Authority, I can 
send to you if you’d like the direct, what the direct role of these 
entities will be if you’d like, and just advise me if you want that 
and I could send them over today. And clearly I think the whole 
process here is being open, accountable, and transparent. And I 
think so far we’ve had some good progress on a number of 
radio stations and newspapers and interviews, talking to people 
about the Watershed Authority, and talking to the people about 
the separation of providing solutions and rules and regulations. 
So that work has been going on quite well and I’ll certainly 
forward these to you if you’d like. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Yes, I’d like them, 
you can forward them on. 
 
Am I reading you right, are the C&Ds going to be, and the 
Watershed Authority, are going to be sent over under SERM 
now? Are they going to be under SERM’s jurisdiction? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The answer’s yes, the C&D 
associations would be transferred over to the Watershed 
Authorities, which will be under SERM. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you. When I asked you if this Bill 
affected them, to begin with you had said no. Well that’s quite a 
bit . . . I would say affects them quite a bit, because that could 
change their whole direction. Because SERM is more for the 
environment. C&Ds I understand are for more set up to drain 
land, to move water. I mean they do work very good within the 
environment, they’re very protect the environment. But I know 
C&Ds have had trouble with the arm of SERM, in that we can 
go into Langenburg into little different pockets throughout the 
province. 
 
So I think that they could . . . Have you consulted with them 
and told them directly that they’re going to be under SERM? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I apologize if I may have provided a 
confusing answer because I think you did directly ask me if this 
affected this year’s budget, and the answer was no, it does not 
affect this year’s budget. And we certainly again concur . . . or 
would advise you of the budget amount that we have here. And 
the C&D associations certainly are part and parcel of our 
picture and we continue working with them. 
 
As you will know, the Saskatchewan Watershed Authority will 
represent all the watershed interests, whether it’s a resort 
community, whether it’s the agricultural producers. There’ll be 
a lot of different interests associated with the role that that 
Watershed Authority would want to establish and coordinate to 
achieve their objectives. 
 
And from what I can gather that the C&D associations are very 
supportive of stewardship. I concur with you that they take a 
very active role. They are quite concerned with the 
environment. And what you want to do is build on that 
particular stewardship, build on that success, and build a greater 



June 10, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1957 

 

model so we have more people doing what the C&D 
associations are trying to do. 
 
And I think that in the long run if we can engage everybody 
with this whole process — as I mentioned, very important to 
keep talking about process — if you engage the people in this 
process then I think you’re going to have a very fine example of 
how Saskatchewan people are able to work together to protect 
that water at source. And if you have a cleaner water to begin 
with, that lessens the amount of treatment and the cost of 
treatment which will serve Saskatchewan residents well into the 
future. 
 
So not only is it a important ecosystem exercise but it’s 
environmentally sound in terms of engaging people. It also . . . 
there’s economic benefits. So we can certainly go on right till 
midnight here talking about the merits of stewardship. But I 
think it’s also very important to understand that there is some 
growth attached to this whole process and I would just 
encourage people to continue being engaged. It is certainly a 
good, sound strategy to try and build on. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 22:01. 
 


