















































Hansard: April 08, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 513 
 April 8, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

Motions for Interim Supply 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Finance to introduce his 
officials and make any opening comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me to my left 
is Mr. Ron Styles, who is the deputy minister of Finance. And 
to my right is Kirk McGregor, who is the assistant deputy 
minister of taxation and intergovernmental affairs. And right 
behind me is Glen Veikle, who is the assistant deputy minister 
of the Treasury Board branch. And behind Mr. Styles is Mr. 
Dennis Polowyk, who is the assistant deputy minister in charge 
of treasury and debt management division. All of these officials 
work for the Department of Finance. 
 
And, Mr. Chair, I would like to move resolution no. 1: 
 

That a sum not exceeding $924.416 million be granted to 
Her Majesty on account for the 12 months ending March 
31, 2003. 

 
And I so move. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. Welcome 
this evening, Mr. Minister, and all of your officials. This 
evening the opposition would like to ask a few very general 
questions regarding the budget and regarding how the interim 
supply fits into that. We’ll also be looking at some specific 
questions from some of the critics, Mr. Minister. 
 
We had the opportunity to review the budget in the last two 
weeks, Mr. Minister, and we note that, you know, maybe even 
the budget had many changes in it from what we assumed to be 
sort of the normal pattern of accounting and reporting. And we 
note, Mr. Minister, that your first request for an interim supply 
is in fact two-twelfths of an interim supply. That seems to be a 
bit of a deviation from the normal one-twelfth. 
 
Could you explain to the Assembly why that process of 
two-twelfths is required rather than a one-twelfth so that we 
would have the opportunity to look at the kind of spending that 
this government does in a short period of time? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, requesting two-twelfths is 
consistent with what this Assembly has been doing. This will be 
the third year that we’ve requested two-twelfths, and the 
opposition agreed to that two years ago and also last year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
appreciate the fact that you’ve sent over a copy of each 
department, and I haven’t had a chance to study it. So I’d ask 
you, Mr. Minister, are all departments listed on your form, and 
is the two-twelfths allocation exact for all departments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer is yes, after the statutory 
amounts are deducted first. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we 

see economic projections for the country and for the province of 
Saskatchewan, and we note that interest rates have some effect 
on the budget and of course the interim supply. 
 
Could you indicate what the projection for interest rates over 
the next few months is, as far as the projection for your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, the budget is based upon 3 
per cent short and 6 per cent long term. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
listening to economists from the Bank of Montreal who were in 
Saskatchewan not too long ago, and I believe Royal Bank 
economists are indicating this as well, that the current 
short-term rate, or overnight rate I believe is how some 
financial institutions refer to it, will rise by as much as 2 per 
cent by the fall. So that would mean that that short-term rate 
that you have put forward of 3 per cent could be in fact 5 per 
cent by your three-quarter financial statement that you would 
have. 
 
Mr. Minister, if we do see a 2 per cent rise in interest rates on 
those short term, and I guess on the long term as well, will that 
have any very serious effect on your budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, a 1 percentage point 
increase in interest rates for a full year from levels assumed in 
the budget, which are 3 per cent short term, 6.5 per cent long 
term — I should correct myself — would increase the estimated 
costs of servicing government gross debt in this fiscal year by 
approximately $6.3 million. So I take it that if interest rates 
went up two per cent, then our debt servicing costs would go up 
approximately $12.6 million. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for that 
explanation. Mr. Minister, while we look at the interim supply 
as being nearly a billion dollars, being one-sixth of the total 
budget, we also have to take a look at the revenue side. Mr. 
Minister, for those people who don’t understand the interim 
supply and the payments of government, could you explain the 
revenue projections and whether or not you see revenue coming 
in or does Finance base their cost of operating on the fact that 
they also receive, over the course of the next two months, 
approximately two-twelfths of their revenue or will there be a 
position where you . . . the Treasury will actually have to 
borrow money? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Generally speaking, Mr. Chair, I’m advised 
that we get about one-twelfth of our estimated revenue each 
month. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in the 
revenue columns for non-renewable resources, we’ve seen a 
significant change in a couple of the areas — most specifically 
in natural gas — and while you indicate that one-twelfth of that 
revenue should be available this month, it is noted in the budget 
document, Mr. Minister, that last year’s estimate for natural gas 
revenues was $167 million and now you’re projecting about 87 
million, a significant difference. 
 
Is the difference based on the price per gigajoule in that it’s 
changed that dramatically? Is it based on consumption? What 



514 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

calculations did you use, or did your department use, to arrive at 
an $87 million projection for revenue in natural gas? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, the estimate of a lowered 
amount of revenue from natural gas is based upon lower prices 
being projected. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — For purposes of Hansard, Mr. Minister, could 
you indicate what your document has used as far as the price for 
natural gas and the price for a barrel of oil as well? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The budget assumes, Mr. Chair, a world 
price of oil, West Texas of $20.50, and natural gas an average 
field gate price of $2.98. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in light of the Middle East crisis as we see it now 
and the announcement by various leaders in the Mid East, 
especially the ruler of Iraq, indicating that there may be some 
limiting of oil resources as far as the amount sold, we’ve seen a 
tremendous change. I believe today’s price changed by as much 
as 70-some cents per barrel. We see now the West Texas price 
in excess of $26. 
 
Have you built in anything into the budget to indicate that, as 
we move along, if the price indeed continues to skyrocket and it 
may be doing that as well, will we see a change in your budget 
as far as a mid-term, or will we be waiting for your mid-term 
report to indicate that we in fact may be, you know, the 
beneficiary of windfall oil and gas royalties? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the projection is as I stated. But of 
course if the projection changes because the price changes, 
bearing in mind that it’s very volatile, then as we release the 
quarterly statement for the first quarter of the year, which would 
be some time this summer, and then the mid-year financial 
statement in the fall, if the price remains high then we would 
revise our projections for oil and natural gas upwards, 
presumably, and other things may be revised downwards. 
 
I think what we’ve seen in the last year or so is that prices are 
very volatile and they can go up rapidly. They can come down 
rapidly as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Besides relying on 
of course non-renewable resources, there are a number of tax 
revenues. One of them of course is tobacco and the changes that 
were listed there. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated in documents that were made 
available to the opposition — and I want to thank you first of all 
for making those documents available, indicating the various 
components of tax —you indicate that the liquor consumption 
tax for the province which was changed from 7 to 10 per cent 
was going to produce a revenue of approximately $52 million, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
And last year your forecast — which is not an estimate, it’s 
pretty accurate — is under $35 million which would suggest 
that for each point of liquor consumption tax there is a revenue 
generator of about $7 million. You’re now looking at in excess 
of $52 million, Mr. Minister. Are you suggesting that there will 

be more consumption and more tax arrived at or is it as your 
projection for tobacco in that we’re going to see less revenue 
for government even though the sales tax has been increased a 
proportionate amount? So, Mr. Minister, the 52 million seems 
to suggest that we’re going to expect more revenue at the same 
amount of tax. 
 
I wonder what your comments are. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We expect approximately $1 million in 
additional revenue due to increased consumption and the rest is 
due to the tax increase. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, one other explanation is 
necessary and that’s in the provincial sales tax area, the 6 per 
cent. You’ve indicated that last year’s forecast is going to be at 
about 767 million and you’re now projecting 799. Could you 
indicate the breakdown of that additional 33 million and where 
the treasury expects to receive 33 million from additional sales 
tax when the sales tax base has not been expanded and of 
course the PST (provincial sales tax) was not increased. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We believe there will be approximately 
$3.7 million from increased tobacco tax because the sales tax is 
on top of the increased price of tobacco, $3.6 million due to 
better compliance measures, and the other growth because of 
growth in the PST base we project will result from higher retail 
sales in a growing economy. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, am I right in looking at your 
document that suggests that your department is projecting a 1.2 
per cent retail sales growth? Is that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We project growth in retail trade of about 
1.6 per cent. The sales tax base is also affected by business 
expenditures and a 9.3 per cent increase in private investment in 
Saskatchewan is projected for the fiscal year; so that also would 
increase sales tax revenue. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. Mr. 
Minister, your revenue projections for the upcoming budget of 
course are based on significant transfer of dollars from Crown 
corporations. You look at . . . I believe you’re declaring a $300 
million dividend for CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan). 
 
Could you indicate to the Assembly and to the people watching 
as to what you expect the profits for CIC to be in the coming 
year, and more importantly especially the large corporations? 
What do you expect the profit to be in those larger corporations 
for the current fiscal year that we’re in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The Department of Finance, Mr. Chair, 
does not have that information. Those detailed questions would 
be more appropriately addressed to the minister in charge of the 
Crown corporations. 
 
But I will say to the member that the dividend we project 
includes $100 million of deferred dividend which we didn’t 
take for the year 2000 and which we intend to take this year 
along with a more regular dividend of $200 million. 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 515 

 

Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, while I do understand that, you 
know, the Minister of CIC would be responsible for that 
department, there must have been discussion between your 
officials and CIC. 
 
Are you expecting that the CIC corporation for this fiscal year 
will generate at least a 200 million — or 300 million I guess if 
we’re not talking about that deferred 100 million from a couple 
years ago — will their profits of CIC corporations be at least 
300 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well those . . . There of course have been 
preliminary discussions between the Department of Finance and 
the Crown Investments Corporation. But we’re only into the 
new fiscal year and we’re only into the third month — the 
fourth month actually just beginning of the Crown corporation 
calendar year — so the . . . But in any event, we think to take a 
regular dividend of $200 million is warranted. 
 
And we think now is the appropriate time to take $100 million 
of deferred dividends that we didn’t take in the year 2000 
because we didn’t need the money. But we believe that we 
should take the money this year as an alternative to increasing, 
for example, the PST, which you’d have to do if we didn’t have 
successful Crown corporations that assisted the people of the 
province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I’m sure your officials have 
also taken a look at what might be options as you’ve indicated. 
We’re just into the new year and we have no way of looking 
ahead to March 31 of 2003. But, Mr. Minister, has your 
department looked at the possibility that Crowns may not 
generate $300 million worth of profit for this year? 
 
What would your backup plan be if in fact $300 million was not 
available in profits? Would you be changing the amount of 
dividend that you would be requesting from CIC? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We’re quite confident, Mr. Chair, that the 
$200 million regular dividend, as well as $100 million in the 
deferred dividend that can be paid to the people of the province 
this year, is within the reasonable range of what we can expect 
the Crown corporations to achieve. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, when you are relying on a 
dividend as large as 200 or $300 million, could you indicate 
how that affects CIC’s ability to pay down its own debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We believe, Mr. Chair, that the Crown 
corporations will stay within the debt-equity ratio that’s 
appropriate for corporations of the type that they operate in. 
What that means is every business will have a certain amount of 
debt in order to pay for the infrastructure it needs to serve its 
customers. SaskTel in that regard will be the same as Bell 
Telephone. It would be normal business practice for Bell 
Telephone to have a certain amount of debt, and the other 
telephone companies too, and that would be considered the sort 
of industrial average of what debt should be. And we have the 
Crown corporations today in the appropriate range of what 
companies of that type should have as debt. 
 
And as I’ve stated many times in the Legislative Assembly and 
also in the budget speech, our goal is to keep the Crown 

corporations within a reasonable range for corporate debt. And 
they are there now, and we intend to continue to operate them 
on that basis. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, could 
you clarify the amount of transfer and when it occurs. You 
indicate that you’re relying on 300 million of which 100 million 
is from a past dividend that was there. Could you indicate 
whether that $100 million of deferred dividend is on deposit as 
a credit somewhere and indeed you’re going to be withdrawing 
that money from an account at CIC? And the second part, Mr. 
Minister, does that $300 million get transferred over 12 equal 
payments, or do you make the payment, that transfer of dollars, 
at the end of the fiscal year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The normal practice is that the dividend 
would be declared at the end of the calendar year. And it would 
be paid by March 31, that is, the end of the fiscal year. So 
normally that money would be paid into the General Revenue 
Fund next March 31 or thereabouts. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, the other part of the question 
was, the $100 million of dividend that’s been retained in CIC, 
will CIC be borrowing that money to indeed make that transfer 
to the General Revenue Fund at the end of the year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. That money, as has been stated many 
times, is in the retained earnings of the Crown Investments 
Corporation, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, the gross debt of Crown 
corporations has risen over the last number of years and we now 
look at a projected Crown debt of $3.656 billion, which is up 
from last year. When a Crown . . . the debt of Crown 
corporations is increasing and they are transferring dividends to 
the General Revenue Fund, is that on a straight cash basis or in 
fact are you as the General Revenue Fund, or is the government 
through its General Revenue Fund, going to have to pay that 
back, since obviously the debt of the Crown corporations 
continues to grow? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the Crown corporations don’t borrow 
money to make dividend payments to the people of the 
province. The Crown corporations borrow money to build their 
infrastructure. And so, for example, SaskPower’s debt went up 
this year to build I think the cogeneration facility at the Cory 
potash mine and also to expand the Queen Elizabeth power 
station. Infrastructure improvements like that should not be 
financed on a cash basis, Mr. Chair. They should be financed 
over time and they should be paid for by user fees. And that is 
the way any normal business would operate; it’s the way the 
Crown corporations operate, and it’s the way that they should 
operate. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, the debt of Crowns has changed 
slightly this year even though you, in an article . . . and I believe 
you reported on it. You were quoted in the article back last fall 
that indicated that Cameco was in fact selling . . . that you were 
selling the remainder of Cameco shares. 
 
And I note that last year the General Revenue Fund debt 
changed for the period March 31, and it seems like there was an 
adjustment of debt to the General Revenue Fund of the amount 



516 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

of transfer of revenue from the sale of Cameco shares, yet that 
didn’t occur within Crowns and it seems like it’s occurring in 
this fiscal year. Could you explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan why you seem to have two sets of books dealing 
with the revenue from Cameco shares? In fact, that you applied 
a portion of the net profit to the General Revenue Fund in the 
last fiscal year, and you seem to be applying a portion of the 
revenue fund to the Crown debt side in this fiscal year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, we’re transferring $180 million 
from the sale of Cameco shares from the Crown Investments 
Corporation to the General Revenue Fund, and that will be 
applied to debt — $120 million was received prior to March 31, 
2002 that has been applied to debt. And $60 million was 
received early in this month and that also will be applied toward 
the debt of the province. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — So, Mr. Minister, on page 17 of your 
schedule of debt, your Crown Investments Corporation’s debt 
forecast for this last year was at 175 million and it’s dropping to 
40 million, a change of 135 million. Your numbers that you just 
explained don’t show 135 million. Could you indicate where 
. . . is this where the profit from the sale of Cameco shares, is 
this where it is being applied as far as CIC is concerned? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The CIC proceeds are going to pay general 
government debt. With respect to Crown corporation debt itself, 
they have sinking funds from which they will access monies to 
pay down their debt. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I’d like to look at your 
documents, actually not only this year’s but last year’s, because 
there seems to be a bit of deviation from what’s normal. 
 
Mr. Minister, in last year’s document . . . on page 52 of last 
year’s document there were five years of financial outlook — 
the previous year, the year that we were in, plus the next three 
years. This year, Mr. Minister, I notice that you’ve changed that 
system of reporting, and I refer to page 28 of your financial . . . 
of your Meeting the Challenge for Saskatchewan People 
document. On page 28, in fact, you’ve still included the year 
before so now we really have two past years, 2000-2001, 
2001-2002, and the current year, and only one year of 
projections for the future. 
 
That’s a marked deviation from the projections that your 
officials used to supply to this House. Could you explain why 
you have now decided not to show projections for two or three 
years in the future and have only changed that to one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, mainly, Mr. Chair, because of 
uncertainties arising out of Ottawa. There has been a lot of 
fluctuation and volatility in terms of Ottawa telling us in 
Saskatchewan how much money to expect for corporate income 
tax and the like, and it has made it more difficult for us to 
project further into the future. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, thank you for that explanation. 
It’s interesting that when we look at plans and we look at 
building this province, to now you’re only looking one year into 
the future whereas the numbers that you supplied before used to 
be at least three years. 
 

Mr. Minister, I want your comments about certain numbers 
provided on page 28. Mr. Minister, I note that your expenditure 
for this current year, the operating expenditure, is listed at 
$5.686 billion as far as the expenditures before interest. And I 
note, Mr. Minister, that for next year, your projection is $5.686 
billion, the exact same number. 
 
Mr. Minister, that would suggest that your expenditures for next 
year are in fact frozen. You are indicating that there will be no 
change to expenditures, and I recall, Mr. Minister, you were 
critical of policy that stated that there should be no freeze, that 
we should make sure that we allow for changes. Mr. Minister, if 
you are suggesting that all departments for next year, that their 
spending is frozen, that we recognize that we have a number of 
negotiations under way — negotiations with some professionals 
in the health care area, negotiations with teachers — I’m sure 
that that will have significant impact on contracts. Yet you state 
that the expenditure line is frozen, Mr. Minister. 
 
I think you’re sending mixed messages to third parties. Could 
you explain why your government is budgeting that or 
estimating that next year’s line items for all departments are 
frozen? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well actually nothing could be further 
from the truth. The level of expenditure next year will be held 
to this year’s level, Mr. Chair, if that is what is required. But 
frozen would imply that all of the departments would remain 
the same. In fact, some of them will have to go up in that event, 
and some of them will have to go down. This is what we’ve 
done this year. 
 
This year the amount of money we’re spending compared to 
last year actually goes down, but we’re spending more on health 
care and education, and this is the crucial difference. We have 
made a choice, Mr. Chair to spend more on health care and 
education at a time when we’re spending less overall, but that’s 
meant in some departments we have to spend even less. We will 
spend more in some areas, less in others, and we’ll make those 
choices with emphasis on health care and education. 
 
(19:30) 
 
And yes, I have been critical of the opposition and its policy in 
the last election which was to basically freeze health care and 
education spending. This government does not agree with a 
freeze on health care or a freeze on education spending. 
 
So my answer to the member opposite, Mr. Chair, is that we 
will make the appropriate changes, as we did this year. We 
actually reduced spending this year, but put more money into 
health care and more money into education, but in some areas 
we’re putting less. 
 
And next year, if the global sum is the same, if we hold the line 
on spending as we’re doing, there will be some areas where we 
will spend more. I anticipate every year we’ll probably spend 
more on health care and probably more on education, but some 
areas we’ll have to spend less. 
 
And those are the choices that we’ll make, those are the 
priorities of our government — health care, education, fixing 
the roads, some of the other things — but we’ll have to allocate 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 517 

 

the money that’s available between different departments. Our 
policy is not a freeze, as has been advocated by others. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, very clearly the Saskatchewan 
Party was not advocating a freeze in health and education, and 
we were looking at the normal costs of operation. We’re 
looking at the changes that occur in the consumer price index. 
 
Mr. Minister, while I understand your commitment to health 
and education, and I agree with you, Mr. Minister, but when 
you start to look at the potential for the kinds of contracts that 
are coming down in health, which is 100 per cent financed by 
the government through the taxpayers of this province, and then 
you look at education, which is not entirely financed through 
grants from governments, in fact, it’s very far from that and 
we’re now looking at a ratio of about 60 to 40 per cent. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you look towards next year and you suggest 
that there will be branches and departments that will get 
significant cuts, that will be reduced in cuts, are you looking at 
further downloading onto municipalities and education as one 
way of balancing that additional revenue that you see necessary 
for one of the departments like Health? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well actually, Mr. Chair, I think the 
opposition could see this year we’re holding spending level, but 
we’re actually putting more money into education and 
municipalities. So the policy of freezing municipalities or 
freezing health care or freezing education has not been 
advocated by this side of the House. I think from time to time 
it’s been brought up by the other side, but that is not our policy. 
 
Our policy is, as I’ve explained it, to hold the line on spending 
but to choose those things which are most important to 
Saskatchewan people. We think that includes health care, 
education, fixing the roads. And certainly this year we also 
recognize that it includes a little more money for municipalities, 
and we actually increased municipal revenue sharing grants by 
18 per cent at a time when we’re holding the line on spending. 
 
So again, no, we’re not the advocates of freezing spending to 
these sectors. Others may advocate that but this government 
does not. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, through you, Mr. Chair, one of 
the departments that you’ve changed dramatically is the 
Department of Agriculture. And I look at your numbers, Mr. 
Minister, when you talk about commitments to a department, 
you’ve looked at a fact that agriculture’s been reduced from last 
year’s estimated numbers of 333 million down to $291 million, 
Mr. Minister. 
 
That’s a reduction of $42 million to the expenditures in 
agriculture. At the same time we see so dramatic changes in the 
removal of the $25 million property tax assistance. Mr. 
Minister, while you may have thrown a few pennies towards 
municipalities and expect people to be happy with that small 
amount of money in education and in municipalities, you have 
affected one of the areas of the province that is hurting right 
now. 
 
You have affected the agriculture community by taking away 
$42 million. How do you explain those numbers? 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think the member should 
know that the Canada-Saskatchewan agriculture program, 
which is a one-time program of $25 million, was funded last 
year. That’s $25 million of the 42 million. Also the education 
property tax rebate program was a two-year program which was 
$25 million per year. That came to its natural end as of the end 
of the fiscal year. 
 
So that’s $50 million of spending that, you know, fell out of 
agriculture without any decisions being taken by government 
because those decisions had been taken to end those programs 
before. 
 
So actually when you consider that, the agriculture budget has 
$8 million extra. And of course we are funding crop insurance 
to a larger degree. Also the adaptation program is being funded 
with this budget. 
 
But that’s the explanation. Those programs were coming to an 
end in any event. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, I 
guess we’ll allow some of my other colleagues the opportunity 
to question the Minister of Agriculture at the appropriate time 
because, very clearly, I think your government has abandoned 
agriculture this . . . for a long period of time and most 
significantly this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, let’s turn to another area that has been a dramatic 
change. And, Mr. Minister, I’d like your explanation as to why 
you have decided to take capital projects for education — both 
K to 12 education and for post-secondary — off the books as 
we see it in the General Revenue Fund and moved them out into 
Crown corporations. Could you explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan what prompted you to make that move? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well we certainly don’t intend to move it 
out to Crown corporations, as the member suggests, if he’s 
suggesting the Crown Investments Corporation. We would 
certainly keep any kind of financing of schools and universities 
under the auspices of the Department of Finance, perhaps 
through a Treasury Board Crown corporation like the Municipal 
Financing Corporation. 
 
But the explanation is, Mr. Chair, as I’ve stated in the budget 
speech and many times, that we see a need on this side of the 
House to give more support to the school boards and the 
universities to build schools and build university buildings, and 
we don’t have $90 million cash to put into the construction of 
schools and university buildings this year. 
 
Therefore, rather than cut back the school boards and 
universities to probably one-third or less of that amount for 
capital, we are substantially increasing the amount of 
construction we’re doing this year for schools and universities. 
We believe that when interest rates are low, as they are, and 
when people need work, as they do, and when there is schools 
that are needed and university buildings that are in need of 
repair, as a society we should be moving forward to do some of 
those things. So we’re doing a lot of extra work this year. 
 
As I’ve stated many times, when you’re building something, it 
can be appropriate to finance that building over time just as 



518 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

people would if they bought a house. I would say to the member 
that if he and his colleagues are opposed to this method of 
financing university capital and school board capital — which I 
might add is supported by the universities and supported by the 
school boards — it also means that they are opposed to building 
the schools and building the buildings at the university because 
the province does not have the ability right now to fund all of 
that construction on a cash basis. 
 
So they can oppose it, as I understand they do, but they also 
should be prepared to say to the school boards and the 
universities that they cannot build these needed buildings 
because that’s what the question amounts to. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chair, the 
question that I posed has nothing to do with opposing 
construction, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, your document clearly 
shows that you spent $54 million last year building those 
schools and building those capital buildings on various colleges 
and university campuses, Mr. Minister. So 54 million was a line 
item in this budget for debate here in this Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, my question is this. You have now taken all of 
that 54 million and added another 36 million to that number and 
now moved it out of the control of this Assembly to a Crown 
corporation. Mr. Minister, that is a different way of accounting. 
And my question to you, Mr. Minister, is this: if that $90 
million was still in this budget document, how would you 
account for that expenditure in this budget document? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, this is a bit curious. The 
member is suggesting that what we’re doing somehow would 
not be the subject of debate in the Legislative Assembly. Well 
obviously that’s not true because we’re debating it right now. 
Everybody watching on TV can see that the member is entitled 
to ask questions about it; we will debate the matter. Nothing is 
removed from the auspices of the Legislative Assembly. 
Nothing could be further from the truth as the member’s own 
question indicates. 
 
In answer to the member’s question, just because we spent $54 
million last year on a cash basis doesn’t mean we would have 
$54 million to spend this year. In fact, we don’t. But we want to 
work with the school boards and the universities to build 
schools and build university buildings. The only way we can 
spend $90 million this year is to allow the school boards and the 
universities to finance that. 
 
And you know, I have to say, Mr. Chair, I have spoken to 
hundreds of people from all over the province since the budget 
came down including, on two occasions, groups of accounting 
professionals — the chartered accountants, the certified general 
accountants, and the certified management accountants — and 
we have specifically discussed this matter of financing 
buildings over time. And I have to say, Mr. Chair, that aside 
from some aspects of the media, the opposition, and one or two 
retired politicians, when I talked to the general public, Mr. 
Chair, the general public says look, that’s just like if I need a 
house and I can’t pay cash for it I take out a mortgage, but I 
have the value in the house. It’s a reasonable thing to do. 
 
That is how most people who are reasonable and fair-minded 
think about the idea of mortgage financing some buildings. 

They understand the concept. Business people understand the 
concept. Accountants understand the concept. The opposition 
has difficulty with the concept, Mr. Chair, but I go with the 
wisdom of the ordinary people of the province who think that 
we need to build the schools, we need to build the universities, 
the interests rates are low, people need work. Let’s get on with 
the job and let’s not quibble about it as the member says. 
 
But if the member wants to quibble about it and doesn’t support 
it, that’s fine. I guess the only thing I would say is we shouldn’t 
say that it’s not the subject of debate in the Legislative 
Assembly at the same time as we’re debating it, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, there is a need to clarify what 
your government is doing for the people of Saskatchewan so 
that they understand. And, Mr. Minister, what I’d like to ask 
you to explain . . . because you seem to suggest that the funding 
of schools in the K to 12 system has received such a dramatic 
change that if you didn’t do this type of funding it would not be 
possible. 
 
Mr. Minister, could you explain to the people of Saskatchewan 
that indeed school division boards right now do fund their 
portion of the cost of building schools over a period of time but 
that they have the responsibility to budget on an annual basis 
for the length of debentures that they choose — something that 
you haven’t put forward in this Legislative Assembly, Mr. 
Minister. 
 
We need to see the kind of changes that you’re suggesting 
because, Mr. Minister, if you have moved $90 million worth of 
cost into a Crown corporation and next year if you’re speaking 
that the continued construction must occur, you’re going to put 
another $90 million worth of debt into the future. And you’ll do 
that the following year, and maybe you’ll grow that to $100 
million worth of capital projects. 
 
Mr. Minister, there will a very short period of time when the 
debt of your children and my children is going to be huge. So, 
Mr. Minister, you need to explain to the people of 
Saskatchewan the fact that school boards currently for numbers 
of years have been following a debenture process where they 
allocate their debt over a period of years because you’re right. 
At the school board level when a school division is responsible 
for 60 per cent of the construction of a school, they don’t have 
60 per cent of that money available to them right at the moment. 
So they have that process in place, and you’ve only made 
reference to municipal funding as if sort of the school board 
type of funding didn’t exist. Mr. Minister, it does exist, and in 
fact school divisions use that to ensure that their debt is paid off 
and they do not deficit budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, on this other side, your government is deficit 
budgeting. You’re projecting expenses for school boards and 
universities for this year, next year, and you’re putting that into 
the future. You haven’t brought into this Assembly a plan for 
how this debt is going to be repaid. So are we just waiting for 
some magical year when there’ll be windfall oil and gas 
royalties and now we’ll have $200 million to repay the two or 
three years of capital debt? Is that your plan? I would suspect 
that we should hear that plan, Mr. Minister. 
 
(19:45) 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 519 

 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think the public should carefully 
note the words that the member is saying in the legislature, Mr. 
Chair, because first he says a few minutes ago, well you’re 
doing something we can’t debate in the legislature and here we 
are debating it. So the public can see that what he’s saying isn’t 
true. 
 
Then he gets up, Mr. Chair, and he says, there’s something 
wrong with what we’re doing. And then he says, but this is the 
way school boards have been financing schools for a long time, 
through debentures . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . and now he 
says, that’s correct. And, Mr. Chair, the . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . no, it is correct. My point, Mr. Chair — the 
member keeps interjecting and I’ll give the member his chance 
to get up again — but my point is the member says we’re doing 
something wrong in one breath and the next breath he gets up 
and he says, well schools have been financing school buildings 
over time for a long time. Well we’re not . . . this is what I’ve 
been saying, Mr. Chair, and the member is now supporting my 
argument. 
 
We’re not doing anything differently, in so far as school 
construction goes, than has been done for a long time at 
different times and in different circumstances or is done by 
municipalities. Most reasonable and fair-minded people, Mr. 
Chair, understand that to build a house you take out a mortgage, 
you pay for it over time. They understand that there’s a 
difference between borrowing money to build . . . you know, to 
buy hot tubs or fix your rec room or whatever, as some have 
done in the past, and the idea of borrowing money to build 
something that has value and which will help the young people 
of today and tomorrow get an education. 
 
But I want to say also in answer to the member’s suggestion 
about debt, that it’s true that this involves going into $90 
million of debt. But I want to point out, because it’s important 
for the public to understand, that debt of the province this year 
will go down, not up. That’s what we’re projecting for this 
fiscal year is it will reduce our debt, but we’re not near 
bankruptcy as we once were. I want to point out that we used to 
be the worst province in the country, or very close to the worst 
— maybe tied with Newfoundland — in terms of the size of our 
debt. Now we’re the third best province in the country. 
 
And this government supports . . . When interest rates are low 
and people are in need of work and we need to build some of 
these school buildings, our government is supportive of 
building more schools and helping the universities, working 
with our partners in education. Those that are opposed to this 
kind of capital investment have got to answer the question, why 
they are opposed to doing this kind of work that is much needed 
at a time when interest rates are low and people are in need of 
work, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister . . . 
and I apologize for interjecting and not allowing you to finish. 
But, Mr. Minister, I do want to make a couple points. 
 
Under Crown corporation debt, Mr. Minister, you have placed 
the corporation, this newly created corporation called Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation . . . and the debt of that 
particular company plus all of the others, Mr. Minister, is going 
to have a higher debt at the end of this fiscal year than the past 

fiscal year. So, in fact, Mr. Minister, debt is up. 
 
And you must also recognize, Mr. Minister, and I’m sure the 
people of Saskatchewan do, that Cameco . . . Cameco shares, as 
you just responded in a question a few moments ago. In your 
answer, you indicated that there was a significant transfer of 
revenue from the sale of Cameco shares to the gross debt or 
against the gross debt of CIC. And as a result of that very 
significant transfer of revenue, Mr. Minister, your debt . . . the 
gross debt of Crown corporations is higher this year than last 
year. Would you clarify that for the record, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, but I’d like to point out in the . . . first 
of all in the schedule of debt under Crown corporation debt, the 
list of corporations includes CIC Crown corporations like 
SaskPower and also Treasury Board Crown corporations like 
the Municipal Financing Corporation. And with respect to the 
Municipal Financing Corporation and the Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation, those are not CIC Crown 
corporations. Those are Crown corporations that are counted 
under the General Revenue Fund, so that if CIC debt is going 
up — this is very important for the opposition to understand — 
that isn’t because of the Municipal Financing Corporation or the 
Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation. Their debt is 
part of the GRF (General Revenue Fund) debt. It has nothing to 
do with the CIC debt. Any CIC debt that is going up is going up 
because they’re building, you know, high-speed Internet or 
power lines or whatever. 
 
Yes, there will be debt through the Municipal Financing 
Corporation and the Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation, but that will be part of the General Revenue Fund 
or tax-supported debt, not part of the CIC Crown corporation 
debt, and that’s a very important distinction that should be 
understood. In other words, it’s part of the government debt, if I 
can put it that way, and that debt is going down this year, not 
up. Some of the Crown corporation debt may go up slightly this 
year, but that will not be because of school financing. Those 
two items have nothing to do with one another. And I hope I’ve 
clarified that for the member, Mr. Chair, but if I haven’t, I’d be 
happy to, you know, to go into it again, but it has nothing to do 
with the CIC Crown corporation debt. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, and I would like to 
add that if people take a look at page number 17 of your 
document, Mr. Minister, they’ll clearly see that last year you 
estimated the combined debt, and, Mr. Minister, you have to 
look at it as a combined debt. It’s General Revenue Fund debt; 
it’s Crown debt, and you refer to it as Treasury Board and 
non-Treasury Board. As you indicated, it is the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . it is the Government of Saskatchewan’s 
responsibility. And who are we responsible to, Mr. Minister, or 
who is the government responsible to? Taxpayer. There is only 
one taxpayer in the province of Saskatchewan who . . . Last 
year we were supposed to have a debt of $11.188 billion. I look 
at the bottom of page 17. That debt which we were estimating 
for the year 2002, just year-end just passed, grew to 11.449 and 
you’re expecting it to hold very nearly the same. There is a 
slight reduction which you’ve indicated to $11.413 billion. 
 
Mr. Minister, that is also at the time, as you’ve indicated in this 
Assembly just a few minutes ago, that your government has 
received over $200 million worth of revenue from the sale of a 



520 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

Crown asset, in this case Cameco shares. Had that sale not 
taken place, Mr. Minister, the debt of this province would be in 
excess of $11.6 billion, the debt of the taxpayers of the province 
of Saskatchewan. So, Mr. Minister, there’s no question that the 
debt of this province is rising. 
 
Mr. Minister, we’ve been talking about the municipal . . . or the 
Education Financing Corporation, but . . . and this is the first 
time that you’ve indicated that monies weren’t available for the 
54 million that you had as an expenditure last year, so you’ve 
decided to go ahead and you’ve moved that out. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at your budget document, we see 
that under the sections, capital, there’s still a projection of $280 
million worth of capital in various things like the Saskatchewan 
Property Management Corporation, highways, the environment, 
etc. Mr. Minister, do you foresee for next year, if the revenue 
projections that you’ve looked at are indeed going to be far 
worse than what you anticipate in your projections, do you 
expect that your government will indeed move additional 
capital expenditures from the General Revenue Fund out into a 
Crown corporation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well if the implication of the earlier part of 
the question, Mr. Chair, is that the province can’t afford to build 
these schools and university buildings because of increased 
debt, I just want to point out to the public, as I think is 
well-known, that actually we’ve made considerable progress in 
reducing the size of the debt, especially relative to our 
economy. We’ve gone from being about the worst province in 
the country in terms of per capita debt to being the third-best in 
the country. 
 
So I’m not an advocate that we should go into debt in a crazy 
way, but yes, I’m an advocate, and I don’t apologize for it, that 
it’s okay to borrow some money to build schools and to build 
university buildings when you don’t have the money to finance 
it on a cash basis. I will defend that, Mr. Chair. If I’m asked, am 
I doing that — absolutely. I’m proud that we’re doing it. I think 
it’s the right thing to do. 
 
In terms of the member’s other question, we are doing this debt 
financing in co- operation with third parties such as the school 
boards and the universities. I think that the fact that we’re doing 
that does not imply that that should be done in every area. 
Things should be done in a balanced, reasonable way, and that’s 
what we propose to do. 
 
Because it’s part of the hallmark of our government for the last 
10 years that we’ve been reducing the amount of government 
debt in absolute terms and relative to the size of the economy. 
In fact interest payments have gone from a high of $862 
million, I think, down to about $621 million in the last fiscal 
year. 
 
So we’re making some progress and we want to keep doing 
that. But it’s not going to prevent us from building the schools 
and building the university buildings, if those things need to be 
done, when interest rates are low, and people need work, and 
the economy needs a boost, and people need to get an 
education. We’re not going to stop. 
 
But in answer to the member’s question, we’re not necessarily 

going to adopt an approach that would see borrowing of money 
in every area. We believe it’s appropriate with respect to the 
school boards and the universities where those parties have 
asked us to work with them to allow them to access that money 
so that we can build some schools at a time that it’s actually 
quite difficult, Mr. Chair, to do a lot of building. Because we’ve 
had a drought; the economy’s been slow. 
 
But we say we want to give the people some hope. We want to 
move forward on several fronts, like fixing the roads, and we 
want to build more schools as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, you made reference to school 
boards and their abilities to continue with construction. And 
I’ve indicated to you, as you’ve agreed with me, that there has 
been a plan in place to deal with debentures. 
 
But, Mr. Minister, one of the main differences between school 
divisions and how your government is operating, by creating 
this $90 million education fund, is that a school board must 
each and every year indicate within its budget the expenditure 
for debentures that come due that year plus the interest costs. 
 
Those are, I guess, Mr. Minister, if I could compare a school 
board’s budget, it’s like your General Revenue Fund. Indeed 
that we would see in the General Revenue Fund the amount of 
money that has come due at the bank if you like in the way of a 
debenture. And it is a repayment of debt that the school board 
has allocated over a period of years — whether it be a five-year 
debenture, an eight-year, or a ten-year debenture, Mr. Minister. 
 
Mr. Minister, in announcing the Education Financing 
Corporation you indicated that this was a debt for the future, 
that it might continue year after year, and that debt is going to 
continue to grow. When will you introduce to the legislature a 
repayment plan that is going to address how the current General 
Revenue Fund is going to deal with paying back that debt of the 
future? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I think, Mr. Chair, while none of these 
financing scenarios have been done yet with the school boards 
and universities, but I think, generally speaking, what we need 
to do is to match the length of a loan with the useful life of an 
asset so that you don’t end up owing money longer than the 
asset can be used. And we would want to make sure that any 
loan that is made is made to actually build something that has 
value and that will outlast the term of the loan. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, will we then see in next year’s 
General Revenue Fund expenditures for the Department of 
Learning a repayment plan to indeed pay back — and as I 
indicated I think the maximum for school boards is ten year 
debentures — are you looking at that type of repayment system 
to be introduced within the Legislative Assembly here for the 
General Revenue Fund line items for the Department of 
Learning? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, the plan to repay would be a plan to 
repay by the school board or the university, and a plan would be 
arrived at when the financing was approved. And of course the 
school boards and universities would look at the cost of 
repaying those loans, and they would want those costs probably 
to be included in a global way in their global funding from the 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 521 

 

provincial government. And we would continue to fund the 
school boards and the universities as we do now. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, your answer has changed my 
understanding very significantly. I understood in comments by 
the Minister of Learning — not the current person sitting in the 
Chair, but the Minister of Learning — when he indicated that 
the facilities department was still going to handle the 
expenditures for schools, and currently schools are funded on 
various cost breakdowns and various ratios in that one school 
board may be required to put up 40 per cent of the cost and the 
government would put up 60. And in fact it’s the opposite in 
some instances where a school division is required to put up 80 
per cent of the cost and the government only 20. 
 
Mr. Minister, as I understood your creation of this financing 
account, you indicated that $40 million is now being set aside in 
this special fund for school board use in constructing new and 
obviously renovation of schools — that is the government 
portion, Mr. Minister. 
 
(20:00) 
 
So my understanding is that school boards are still going to 
continue with their own financing of their own portions. This 
portion is strictly the government’s portion that you have 
committed to over the last years through a direct line item 
within the General Revenue Fund. Now you’ve moved that into 
the future and no accountability here in the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Mr. Minister, can you clarify for the people of school divisions, 
especially, whether or not this is a change and now you’re 
expecting 100 per cent of the cost of constructing a school to be 
borne by each school division board? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, it is listed as a subvote under 
Department of Learning in the Estimates, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, are you expecting that 100 per 
cent of the cost of a school to be constructed in a school 
division will be financed through the new department, and that 
the school board will be responsible for paying back 100 per 
cent of that debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, not necessarily. That would depend 
upon the arrangement arrived at with the school board or the 
university. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, are you suggesting that current 
arrangements that exist with school board and the Department 
of Education, the K to 12 branch, which has a formula in place 
for determining the amount of capital costs that is paid for by 
the school board and that is paid for by the government, are you 
suggesting that that formula and that those types of agreements, 
as you called it, are changing? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, that is not changing. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, could you then explain your 
remarks of a few minutes ago that said that the school division 
will be required to pay back all the costs to the municipal . . . or 
to the Education Financing Corporation? 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, because they will be financing the 
portion that they have been doing up until now as they always 
have, as the member said, and they also will be financing the 
other portion, but they’ll be doing that with the support of the 
Education Infrastructure Corporation. That money will be a 
debt which will have to be paid back by the school boards, but 
they will expect that the government will be assisting them with 
respect to the annual principal and interest costs, and I imagine 
the universities will have the same expectation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — So Mr. Minister, just for simplicity sake and 
to make sure that we understand and everybody understands 
you, I’ll use a situation where a school this coming year is 
going to be constructed for $10 million of which both the 
school board and the government have equal shares of 
responsibility, in other words, 50 per cent of the cost. That $10 
million will now be borrowed from the Education Financing 
Corporation, but that the school board will still only be 
responsible for its $5 million share and that your government, 
through taxpayers’ dollars, is going to continue to fund the 
remaining $5 million worth of capital over a period of time. Is 
that accurate? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well in dealing with the universities and 
the school boards, we will commit with them that, with respect 
to the part of the capital that is being funded through the 
Education Infrastructure Corporation over and above what was 
formerly funded through debt financing by the school boards, 
we would work with the school boards and the universities to 
make sure that they had sufficient resources to pay the principal 
and interest on an ongoing basis. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, I would suggest that school 
boards especially have to call your department very quickly to 
get a clear understanding about whether or not they’re going to 
be responsible for the entire debt of a newly approved project 
because your answers are different from one question to the 
next, Mr. Minister, and I think that your officials and maybe the 
Department of Learning maybe need to clarify that for school 
boards. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we take a look at the kind of funding that 
has occurred — and you’ve said that there wasn’t monies 
available so therefore you’ve put that expenditure for schools 
and university construction into the future — some might 
suggest that that’s a way of getting around your balanced 
budget legislation, and indeed that is a violation of your very 
own Act, the balanced budget legislation. 
 
In your opinion, does this type of funding, by allocating a 
current expense that people would . . . that you did have in your 
Estimates last year, now spreading it out over the future, is this 
type of debt financing meet with the requirements of your 
Balanced Budget Act? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we believe it does, Mr. Chair. We 
don’t think there’s any problem with that at all. We’re not 
changing accounting procedures. We’re changing the method of 
financing so that we can build more schools and universities. 
 
But I want to say also, in answer to the member’s suggestion 
that the school boards should be talking to the Department of 
Finance, I want to make it clear to the public I’ve met with the 



522 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

president and the executive director of the Saskatchewan 
School Trustees Association, and I’ve met with and talked to 
the presidents of the universities of Saskatchewan and Regina 
on more than one occasion, and they are quite pleased with the 
arrangements that we’ve arrived at to build more schools and 
university buildings. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I wasn’t 
suggesting they contact the Minister of Finance, I was 
suggesting they contact the Minister of Learning, since that is 
where the two departments are controlled. 
 
Mr. Minister, one of the items of discussion over the course of 
this afternoon was Municipal Financing Corporation and the 
creation of a new water corporation, a new water authority, a 
watershed authority. 
 
Mr. Minister, do you see the watershed authority being very 
similar to the Education Financing Corporation in that it will be 
allowed to borrow large amounts of money to proceed with 
infrastructure changes in this province? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, I don’t foresee that. Mr. Chair, I 
wonder if the member isn’t confusing the watershed corporation 
with the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. The watershed 
corporation, as I understand it, will be responsible for 
overseeing the watersheds in the province; also some 
infrastructure like dams and so on. If the member is talking 
about the infrastructure that a community might need for its 
water system, I’m not . . . I don’t believe that would be within 
the purview of the watershed corporation, I think that would be 
in the purview of the Saskatchewan Water Corporation. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, there 
has been a lot of discussion and a lot of questions being asked 
since the release of the document on Friday in North Battleford. 
And we heard a number of members on the government side of 
the House making reference to Municipal Financing 
Corporation and the fact that funds are available to the people 
of Saskatchewan, the various municipalities to apply for. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve been looking at the last three years of your 
budget documents to try to get an understanding of Municipal 
Financing Corporation and the amount of debt. Mr. Minister, in 
looking at those documents, I look at the Municipal Financing 
Corporation. And I know Minister of Learning made reference 
today; I think member of . . . Municipal Affairs minister made 
reference to that. 
 
In the 2000-2001 document the debt of the Municipal Financing 
Corporation was just under $60 million, 59.575. In 2001-2002, 
that debt was 24.575 — significantly reduced, approximately 
$35 million. And I note that in the revenues, under receipts, that 
in fact that’s payments that the government receives from 
municipalities that are making that payment. 
 
I note also in this document that we’re dealing with this year, 
Mr. Minister, that the Municipal Financing Corporation debt is 
now down to $13.391 million. So it has dropped dramatically 
from $60 million about a year and a half, two years ago down to 
13. 
 
Your ministers, Mr. Minister — your colleagues I should say — 

made reference to the fact that municipalities have this ability to 
apply for huge amounts of monies to meet their needs. Mr. 
Minister, I don’t see anywhere in the documents that indeed you 
have made available huge amounts of money. I do see that on 
page no. 16 that $4 million is the amount that’s set aside for the 
borrowing for Crown corporations. Amount of money set aside 
last year, zero. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, could you explain to municipalities and to 
people who are experiencing difficulty with actually hauling 
water while they wait for this government to move, could you 
explain to them how the combined debt of Municipal Financing 
Corporation has dropped from 60 million down to 13? And you 
in fact are projecting revenues this year of $15 million. So that 
will automatically wipe out that entire debt. No spending last 
year and this year only $4 million, Mr. Minister. 
 
Explain to the people exactly how much money is available 
through the Municipal Financing Corporation that they can start 
applying tomorrow. Like the community in my constituency, 
the village of Arran, is in serious difficulty and they need to get 
in place an infrastructure that meets their needs. Is there a fund 
of money that is somewhere within this document? I’d ask for 
your explanation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, I think the member needs 
to have a better understanding of the Municipal Financing 
Corporation and how it works. And the member says he wants 
me to give it to him. I will. Because the member does not 
understand the way the corporation works. So I’ll try to explain 
it very carefully. 
 
The amount of money that municipalities can access through 
the Municipal Financing Corporation, Mr. Chair, is not 
determined by the government per se; it is determined by the 
municipalities themselves coming to the Municipal Financing 
Corporation and asking to borrow the money. The reason the 
amount of indebtedness at the Municipal Financing 
Corporation, and debt that is thereby listed, has gone down is 
simply because municipalities have not been coming forward to 
finance projects in that way to a large extent in the last number 
of years. 
 
However some have. And the point is this, Mr. Chair, and I 
want the member to understand this, municipalities can come to 
the Municipal Financing Corporation — this is nothing new, 
this has been in place for decades — and they can apply for 
funds to build sewer and water systems and those will be 
funded 100 per cent through the Municipal Financing 
Corporation. In other words the money is borrowed at 
government rates, which are fairly good; the money is then 
given to the municipality; they do the project; and then they 
charge probably user fees but in some cases it could be taxes for 
people to pay it off. 
 
In answer to the member’s question, there’s no budgeted 
amount that we would borrow on behalf of municipalities. We 
would borrow the amount that municipalities applied for and 
that were then approved by the Municipal Financing authority. 
So if municipalities want to fix their water and sewer systems 
and finance it through the Municipal Financing Corporation, 
they can make application to the authority. If we get a lot of 
applications for indebtedness, beyond what is stated in the 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 523 

 

budget documents — because it’s not a budgetary item, it’s a 
debt item — if people want to finance more projects, we will 
borrow the money, make that money available to the 
municipalities. 
 
And I want to stress, Mr. Chair, this is nothing new. This is 
something that has gone on for decades. The money is 
available. I think normally projects are funded . . . 50 per cent 
of the cost can be funded through the corporation. In terms of 
sewer and water I think it’s a long-standing policy that 100 per 
cent of the costs can be funded. 
 
And if municipalities want to do tens of millions of dollars of 
work, or even 100 million dollars of work, through the 
Municipal Financing Corporation, fix the water system, the 
Municipal Financing Corporation will accommodate those 
requests, Mr. Chair. It’s quite clear, it’s a long-standing policy. 
Nothing new. The money’s available. I hope that clarifies the 
matter for the member opposite. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It does. And I’ve 
just one more question. As far as the borrowing, over the past 
and into the future, is it cost shared? You indicate that the 
project is only like 50 per cent available. If the money is 
borrowed, is there any cost sharing between the taxpayers at the 
municipal level and the Government of Saskatchewan? 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Under the Municipal Financing 
Corporation, no, not really. Although, sometimes the 
government ends up in effect subsidizing the interest rate 
because the interest rate will be kept low for the municipality, 
but it may be that interest rates rise and sometimes the 
circumstances are such that the government may be paying 
some of the interest on behalf of the municipality. Or in other 
circumstances, as is happening now, interest rates are coming 
down and the municipalities have borrowed at a higher rate. 
And one of the reasons the debt is coming down is they are 
paying off their indebtedness at the higher rate because interest 
rates have come down. But the Municipal Financing 
Corporation is left to continue paying the long-term debt at the 
higher rate, and therefore the corporation sometimes will 
operate at a loss because in effect it will subsidize the cost of 
interest for the municipal governments. So that is how financing 
is available for sewer and water. 
 
But I want to add that, through the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program, some of the cost of some of the projects 
for sewer and water are being met and will be met in that way 
so that a municipality may not have to borrow all the money 
because they can apply to the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program to fix their sewer and water systems. 
 
And I might say that dozens of communities in the last few 
years . . . We didn’t just start trying to fix the water system this 
year or even since North Battleford. For the last few years, 
we’ve been fixing water systems through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. 
 
And in addition, we’ve added 11.5 positions to SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) — 
that’s the Environment department — to increase inspection. 

We’ve added 4.5 positions to the provincial lab to monitor the 
water. So we’re monitoring the water, inspecting the water 
more than we did in the past. That’s been going on for the last 
few years. 
 
We’re building some projects through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. Last year $12 
million was approved for 42 projects for water supply and 15 
waste water projects; 2002, 3. This upcoming year, we believe 
there will be 73 water supply contracts and 31 waste water 
projects recommended for approval so . . . well that’s a total of 
over 100 water supply systems that had been funded through 
the Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program this year and 
the upcoming year, and another 46 waste water projects, so 
there’s a lot being done in water and sewer. 
 
But the program probably doesn’t get to every community that 
needs it because they prioritize. But those communities can 
certainly go to the Municipal Financing Corporation and we 
will work with them to finance a water project and have people 
pay a user fee which we do in communities around the 
province. And in addition, the system will be better monitored 
because we’ve added the positions to do that. So we’ll certainly 
be moving forward, and are moving forward, to fix the water 
systems; but it can’t be done all overnight or at one time. And 
sometimes it does involve the community fixing their water 
system, as many communities have done. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — One more short little question on this topic, 
Mr. Minister. Last year, as I indicated, you had no money as far 
as a Crown corporation loan for the Municipal Financing 
Corporation. This year there’s 4 million. Could you indicate 
why you expect that difference from last year to this year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I’m advised that the corporation is 
refinancing a debt that is coming due in the current year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, to a different area, and that is 
the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. Last year you introduced 
legislation in this House to create the Forest Fire Contingency 
Fund, and we understand that $40 million was set aside. Mr. 
Minister, based on the fact that your document says that no 
monies will be set aside in this fund, not even two-twelfths as 
we’re debating today, could you indicate why there is no 
expenditure on that line item? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — I believe for the current year there will be 
about $29.5 million in the Forest Fire Contingency Fund. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Are you . . . Mr. Minister, your number of 29 
million, is that the balance that’s in the fund and that you’re not 
going to replenish it back to the $40 million level? Is that your 
answer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, we’re not replenishing the fund this 
year. We’re going to see what happens in this fiscal year. And 
the reason for that is because we have tight financial 
circumstances. But if indeed the forest fire season is bad and all 
29 million of the fund are used for escaped fires, which is what 
it’s for, then they’ll still have to put out other fires. So we’ll do 
what we’ve done in past years, when we’ve had no Forest Fire 
Contingency Fund, and that will be to allow the fires to be 
fought, and at the end of the year sometimes a special warrant 



524 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

for that money. So we have a cushion of some $29.5 million. In 
past years we’ve had no cushion. Last year we started out with a 
cushion of $40 million, I believe. And that will be our cushion 
for this fiscal year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, that 
$29 million, is it on deposit, or is it very similar to the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It will be managed with normal cash 
management as the Fiscal Stabilization Fund is, as all 
governments and every prudent corporation would do as well. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, a 
very specific question about one of the government’s 
announcements in the last little while regarding the 
establishment of a safe house here in Regina, and your 
government is committed to $300,000. 
 
Mr. Minister, as we debate interim supply and we look at 
two-twelfths expenditures — you’ve indicated that 300,000 is 
available for that type of project — will that kind of money be 
available in a lump sum to the people that are working on 
creating this safe house, or will it be allocated in shares over the 
course of 12 months? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — It will be allocated as it’s needed, and the 
money would be accessed through the Department of Social 
Services. So they would have one-twelfth of their budget, and 
they would allocate it to the safe house as is appropriate. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, in my remarks on the budget I 
made reference to a letter that was sent to me from the mayor of 
Preeceville, Saskatchewan, regarding the facility that they’re 
planning. And he made reference to the fact that the Minister of 
Health has indicated that no decision has been made, and we 
don’t know what’s going to be happening regarding capital 
funding. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I understand as Finance minister you may 
not be aware of this, but this is one of the capital projects that’s 
been on the go for a number of years. The community of 
Preeceville was told to ensure that it had its portion of the 
revenue necessary to do this capital project in place, and they do 
by the commitment of many individuals in Preeceville and area. 
And now they’re waiting for the government’s commitment. 
And, Mr. Minister, you’ve made reference tonight a number of 
times to the fact that you want, your government wants, 
construction to continue on schools and the post-secondary 
areas. 
 
Mr. Minister, also in your health budget you have set aside a 
fair amount of money for capital construction. When will 
communities like Preeceville . . . and I know my colleague from 
Moosomin is looking at the same situation. There are many 
communities in this province, Mr. Minister, that are waiting for 
approvals. They are waiting to go ahead. When will you be 
authorizing the Minister of Health to go ahead and allocate 
those capital dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, it does not depend on any 
authorization from me. The Minister of Health will proceed in 
whatever way the Minister of Health and his department and the 

committee of health people that advise him on health capital 
issues, you know, want to proceed. There’s nothing that I have 
to approve for them to proceed. 
 
In terms of the timing of approval of capital projects, that is the 
question that should properly be addressed to the Minister of 
Health in his estimates. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chair, thank you to the minister. Thank 
you very much for your responses this afternoon or this 
evening. I look forward to reviewing them in Hansard 
tomorrow to ensure that your responses are as I understood 
them by listening to them. I want to thank you for answering 
my questions this evening. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I listened 
with a great deal of interest as you explained or attempted to 
explain how this new Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation is going to work. I just wonder if you could 
indicate whether my understanding of the operation is correct. 
 
I understand you to say that, in the past when school boards 
were building a new school they would have to, of course, put 
up some of their own money that they raised through their 
various means and the Department of Education would also put 
some money into the project. Now under this new arrangement, 
the school boards will have to put their own money up as they 
always have in the past. And then instead of getting money 
from the new Department of Learning, they will be actually 
borrowing the money from this new Crown corporation. Is that 
correct, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you for your short answer. So now, Mr. 
Minister, how are the school boards to come up with the money 
to make these repayments on these new loans that they . . . Now 
they’re not only borrowing money for their own portion of the 
expenditure, but they’re also having to borrow from this new 
corporation. Where are they going to get the money to make 
those additional payments on these capital projects? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — From the government. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, that’s quite an interesting answer. I 
recall being on RM (rural municipality) council a number of 
years ago when the policing costs were picked up by the 
government. They were paid entirely by the government. Then 
your government made a change and said, look, you’re going to 
have to pay the policing costs, but we’re going to give you a 
grant so you don’t have to worry about it; you’re going to get a 
grant to cover those costs. And for the first year, they did get 
the grant. After that, there was no more grant. The RMs are 
entirely responsible to pick up the entire costs of policing. 
 
Is this how this new funding of schools is going to work too, 
that you’re going to perhaps give these school boards a grant for 
one or two years and after that they get to pick up 100 per cent 
of the costs? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, what guarantees do school boards 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 525 

 

have, or matter of fact universities have, that you in fact will 
make money available to them to make the loan payments? 
 
There’s nothing . . . we see nothing in anything that you’ve 
said, that there’s any guarantee. In fact some of these new 
arrangements are just coming to light here this evening, Mr. 
Minister. And why should the . . . given the past experience of 
other local governments, why should they believe you? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I think what the member has to 
understand, Mr. Chair, is that the universities and the school 
boards have themselves asked the province repeatedly over a 
number of years to enter into these kinds of financing 
arrangements with them so that they can access more capital. 
And they are willing to work with the province in partnership to 
build the schools and build the university buildings. We’re 
willing to work with them in partnership. 
 
And the answer is, we’re proceeding in good faith. And the fact 
is, Mr. Chair, that operating grants to the school boards have 
increased by, I believe, 24 per cent in the last four years. So 
we’re doing more to work with our partners in education to 
build schools and to operate schools. And we hope to continue 
to do our level best to do so, as we have been doing the last 
number of years. 
 
And we’re all proceeding in good faith. We’re proceeding to 
build more schools because we have faith in the future of the 
province. And it’s the future of the province that is the 
guarantee that schools we build today will be paid for in the 
future. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Minister, is your government prepared to 
enter into a written contract with the school boards and the 
universities, those people who will be borrowing from this new 
corporation, that in fact those monies that are required for 
payments to repay these loans, that in fact you will guarantee in 
writing that those various municipal and local governments and 
universities will have that money year after year until those 
loans are paid? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — We will be working with our partners in 
education as I have described, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, does working with your 
partners, does that mean you’re actually downloading more 
responsibility to boards of educations and downloading more 
costs to the universities, and those downloaded costs will be 
picked up by property owners in the form of additional taxes, 
and also the students at our universities will be picking up those 
additional costs in the form of increased tuition fees? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Mr. Hart: — A very short answer, Mr. Minister, but it’s 
certainly . . . I would fear, if I was in a position of responsibility 
at either the universities or the boards of educations, to take 
these answers as simply no. When I asked you whether you’d 
be prepared to put your commitment in writing, you said you’re 
going to be working with them. That’s not a yes answer. You’re 
very quick to give a no answer, but a simple question — are 

you prepared to put it in writing? — a yes answer would 
certainly alleviate a lot of concerns, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well this proceeding is transcribed in 
writing, Mr. Chair, and I’ve said to the member and I’ll say to 
the public — as I’ve agreed with the school boards and the 
universities — we will be working with our partners in 
education to build these schools and university buildings. And 
we will be working with them, as we have for the past several 
years, to provide them with the finances to cover the cost. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Will the minister make the commitment to 
provide the funding? Will he put that in writing or does he 
mean by working with our partners in education, we’re working 
so that they pay more and we pay less as a government? Is that 
what you mean, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, that is not what I meant, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Well, Mr. Minister, you certainly didn’t answer 
the question and again that gives no assurances to those people 
who are making these decisions. 
 
In this budget you made no provision to help with repayment of 
these loans. We, I think, we on this side of the House and the 
general public felt that this was a . . . that the borrowings would 
be the responsibility of the government. Now we’re finding out 
it’s the responsibility of the universities and the school boards 
who will be actually taking on more debt, Mr. Minister. 
 
So what you’ve effectively done . . . In the past year you had 
$54 million in capital funding. This year you virtually have 
nothing and you barely managed to balance your budget. In 
fact, as I said earlier today, if you just remove some zeros and 
bring this budget down into a context that families can 
understand, a $63,000 household budget at the end of the year 
has a 45-cent surplus. That should give the school boards and 
universities a lot of confidence that there will be money there, 
I’m sure, Mr. Minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well I’m glad that the members opposite 
and in particular the member who just asked the question, Mr. 
Chair, finally acknowledges that it is a tight financial situation. 
And the reality is that in that situation, Mr. Chair, it is a good 
thing that we have found a way to fund the schools and fund the 
universities to a much higher degree. That’s what we’re doing. 
 
And what I would say to the member is that he should sit down 
with the University of Saskatchewan and the University of 
Regina as I have. And he should sit down with the school 
boards as I have. And they would tell him, Mr. Chair, that they 
wish to work with the government to build the schools and 
build the university buildings in the way that we have 
described. In fact, they have been asking us to do this for a 
number of years, Mr. Chair, to allow them to access the capital. 
 
If the members opposite do not support this method of 
financing under the tight financial situation that the member just 
alluded to, it means that we cannot build the schools, and we 
cannot build the university buildings. And that is what the 
public, I think, understands, Mr. Chair, because I’ve been out 
talking to a lot of people. 
 



526 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

Most reasonable people understand that when times are tight — 
and they are — that if we can do something to finance the 
building of more schools or university buildings and continue to 
fix the roads, as we’re doing, and put more money into health 
care and not raise the PST and not raise income taxes, those are 
good things to do when times are tight. And we’ve had a very 
positive budget because we’re prepared to move forward to 
finance the schools in this way. 
 
And if the opposition does not support that, I want to make it 
very clear it means the schools will not be built; the university 
buildings will not be fixed. And if that was funded on a cash 
basis, it also means probably another point on the PST. 
 
I don’t think the people accept that, Mr. Chair. I think that they 
understand the concept of mortgage financing, and that’s what 
we’re proposing to do, and we’re going to build those schools 
in that way. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Chair. I want to thank 
the opposition for their questions and their co-operation this 
evening. And I also want to thank the officials from the 
Department of Finance for their assistance. 
 
And I’d like to move resolution no. 2: 
 

That towards making good the supply granted to Her 
Majesty on account of certain expenses of the public 
service for the fiscal year ending March 31, 2003, the sum 
of $924.416 million be granted out of the General Revenue 
Fund. 

 
And I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 

FIRST AND SECOND READING OF RESOLUTIONS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, I move that the resolutions be 
now read the first and second time. 
 
Motion agreed to and the resolutions read a first and second 
time. 
 

APPROPRIATION BILL 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
move: 
 

That Bill No. 22, An Act for granting to Her Majesty 
certain sums of Money for the Public Service for the Fiscal 
Year ending on March 31, 2003, be now introduced and 
read the first time. 

 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
first time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly and 
under rule 55(2), I move that the Bill be now read a second and 

third time. 
 
Motion agreed to and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
second and third time and passed under its title. 
 

ROYAL ASSENT 
 
At 20:42 His Honour the Administrator entered the Chamber, 
took his seat upon the throne, and gave Royal Assent to the 
following Bill: 
 
Bill No. 22 - An Act for granting to Her Majesty certain 

sums of Money for the Public Service for the 
Fiscal Year ending on March 31, 2003 

 
His Honour: — In Her Majesty’s name, I thank the Legislative 
Assembly, accept their benevolence, and assent to this Bill. 
 
His Honour retired from the Chamber at 20:44. 

 
SECOND READINGS 

 
Bill No. 3 — The Correctional Services 

Amendment Act, 2002 
 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
evening to move second reading of The Correctional Services 
Amendment Act, 2002. The Correctional Services Act provides 
authority to operate correctional facilities and administer 
correctional programs. Changes are proposed to make our 
corrections system more responsive to the needs of victims. 
 
We are adding a new provision that requires corrections 
officials to consult the victims of an offence when the inmate 
who has been incarcerated for that offence is being considered 
for an authorized absence from the correctional facility for 
humanitarian or rehabilitative reasons. A corrections official 
must also advise the victim of the offence after an authorized 
absence has been granted. 
 
(20:45) 
 
An amendment provides that rather than automatically being 
credited with remission of a sentence, inmates will now be able 
to earn this reduction in their sentence by the conduct in the 
facility. Inmates must obey the rules of the correctional facility 
and participate in appropriately rehabilitative programs. 
 
I know the members opposite will be particularly interested to 
know that these programs are designed to reintegrate inmates 
into the community, and in order to return to the community 
before the end of their sentences, they will have to actively 
participate in these programs. 
 
Another amendment updates the probation provisions to reflect 
the roles and responsibilities of probation staff in relation to 
offenders serving conditional sentences. 
 
Amendments also ensure that provisions respecting probation 
orders are consistent with changes to the Criminal Code within 
the past five years and will continue to be consistent with future 
changes to the code. 
 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 527 

 

The search and seizure provision is updated to allow urine 
analysis to be used to monitor an inmate’s progress with respect 
to correctional services programming where this is relevant. For 
instance, where the inmate is participating in a substance abuse 
treatment program, urine analysis can be used to ensure that the 
inmate is not using these substances. 
 
The Act also makes several minor amendments to streamline 
and update the legislation. For example, terminology is changed 
so that it’s consistent with changes respecting young persons in 
the Youth Criminal Justice Act which was passed by the federal 
government on February 4 of this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am indeed pleased to move second reading of An 
Act to amend The Correctional Services Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I can tell 
already that the members opposite are enthusiastic and waiting 
breathlessly for my comments on this particular Bill. And I’m 
glad that they have stayed, Mr. Speaker, to listen to this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are parts of this Bill that we believe are good 
and appropriate. There’s also other parts of the Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, that we have some questions dealing with. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I believe those questions the minister has not answered 
in his speech about the Bill. It’s a fairly comprehensive Bill, 
Mr. Speaker, at least more comprehensive than a lot of the 
legislation the government has put before us already. In fact it 
even runs, I believe, to page 6. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, some of the issues that we believe the minister 
needs to clarify further on this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, deal 
with statements by victims and how they are going to be dealt 
with by the correctional system. It talks about allowing victims 
to have some input into the release of clients of the correctional 
services. And what impact, though, are those statements going 
to have, Mr. Speaker? Will they have an impact on early release 
or will they not have an impact? Those sorts of questions, Mr. 
Speaker, need to be clarified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s one interesting piece of this legislation — 
I’m not exactly sure why it fits in this particular Bill — but it 
deals with Boxing Day, Mr. Speaker. And it’s kind of a violent 
sounding name for a day, Mr. Speaker, but it talks about the 
statutory holiday known as Boxing Day and that the . . . this Act 
changes the allowances for having Boxing Day for a statutory 
holiday to having Boxing Day and any other day as established 
by the chairperson of Public Service Commission. 
 
So I’m not exactly sure why this particular piece of legislation 
is changing in that context, Mr. Speaker. Perhaps, for the 
correctional services, Mr. Speaker, they’re planning on 
declaring a lot more holidays. It would certainly be of benefit to 
the people who are employed in that area because you get paid 
often time and a half, double time on stat holidays. So perhaps 
this is some sort of a revenue generationing, improve the 
economy type of thing by the minister of correctional services. 
Simply, Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure why that particular piece of 
. . . this clause is in this particular piece of legislation. 
 
So perhaps, Mr. Speaker, to give the minister a chance to 

consider those types of questions so that he can come back to 
the House with an explanation as to why Boxing Day or any 
other statutory holiday are included in this legislation, to give 
him that time, Mr. Speaker, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 10 — The Tax Enforcement 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move the second reading of The Tax Enforcement Amendment 
Act, 2002. 
 
The Tax Enforcement Act provides the framework through 
which municipalities seek remedies for unpaid property taxes. 
Currently the Act specifies that municipalities seeking remedies 
for unpaid taxes for properties with a value of less than $2,000 
do not require permission from the Provincial Mediation Board 
prior to proceeding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, amendments to this Act will give the Lieutenant 
Governor in Council the authority to set the property value I 
just mentioned in regulation. With the province moving to a 
four-year cycle for reassessment, it is beneficial to set the 
amount under which Provincial Mediation Board approval is 
not required in regulation rather than in the Act. 
 
Following each reassessment there is the potential that the 
amount will be inappropriate because properties values have 
either risen or fallen. Setting the amount in regulation will 
provide the provincial government with the flexibility to meet 
the changing needs of municipalities promptly if such a change 
proves necessary. Our initial consultations with various 
municipal organizations determine that the appropriate amount 
should be reviewed and determined after each reassessment. 
Therefore following the amendments to the Act my officials 
will consult further with municipal organizations to arrive at an 
amount before amendments are made to the regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our actions on this issue once again illustrate the 
government’s commitment to meeting the needs of municipal 
administrations while balancing the interests of Saskatchewan’s 
property owners. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 10, The Tax 
Enforcement Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a privilege to 
talk about this tax enforcement Act, Bill No. 10, that was just 
mentioned by the minister. 
 
And when he starts talking about unpaid property taxes, which 
is becoming I believe a greater and greater issue in many of the 
small communities and even in some of the RMs around the 
province . . . a lot of the small towns are struggling. The 
services aren’t there, and some of the properties are left vacant. 
And whether the taxes are being paid or not is a bigger and 
bigger issue. 
 



528 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

Along with the fact — coupled with the fact, I guess — that 
when you start seeing the increased responsibilities put on 
school divisions for funding education and so much of that 
education is funded through the property base that there are 
probably more and more properties throughout the province, not 
just urban but rural properties, that there are unpaid taxes on, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now this talks about the assessment process also and when 
properties go through reassessment and how that’s going to 
vary the threshold of these properties at the tax rate in which 
they can be . . . pre-proclaimed I guess. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that with the reassessment process in itself 
there are so many questions on that. So many people after 
reassessment the last time are questioning how they ever came 
up with that figure of . . . on my property. So there are a lot of 
questions, Mr. Speaker, when you start dealing with property 
tax in this province and when you start introducing an Act like 
this. 
 
The minister also said in consultation . . . they did a lot of 
consultation. Well, Mr. Speaker, I think more consultation 
needs to be done because the property tax issue is a big issue. 
So, Mr. Speaker, I move that we adjourn debate on Bill No. 10 
until we have more input from the interested parties. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 11 — The Urban Municipal Administrators 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this occasion 
I rise to move the second reading of The Urban Municipal 
Administrators Amendment Act, 2002. The Act was passed by 
the legislature in 1981 and established the Urban Municipal 
Administrators’ Association of Saskatchewan, more commonly 
referred to as UMAAS, as a body corporate. 
 
The standard UMAAS sets and maintains for its membership 
ensure that the people working as urban municipal 
administrators are qualified to perform their very important 
role. The proficiency, knowledge, and skill of urban municipal 
administrators respecting the performance of their professional 
duties are greatly improved through the standards and 
examinations UMAAS provides. 
 
The amendments being introduced were all requested by 
UMAAS and are essentially housekeeping in nature. But 
specifically the amendments will, Mr. Speaker: first, give 
UMAAS the flexibility to create different classes of 
membership; secondly, extend the voting privileges to associate 
members; and thirdly, update wording in the Act to reflect 
current practices. 
 
The UMAAS executive has reviewed the changes being 
proposed and agrees with them. Mr. Speaker, passing these 
amendments will contribute to the continued efficient operation 
of UMAAS. Passing these amendments will also show the 
people of Saskatchewan that this government is committed to 
working with the municipal sector to bring about necessary 
change and improvement. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of Bill No. 11, The Urban 
Municipal Administrators Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure today to speak on The Urban Municipal 
Administrators Amendment Act or UMAAS as the minister has 
said. 
 
He has mentioned that this body has requested these changes, 
and it seems on the face of it that these changes have increased 
the flexibility of the organization and possibly brought a little 
bit more self-regulation into their group. And it’s of interest that 
the minister says this law was passed or this Bill was passed 
originally in 1981. It brings to mind a number of governments 
have in the past have sunset clauses on a number of Acts and 
Bills, and it is of interest to know that changes need to be 
updated and looked at in the future. 
 
And it’s of interest that maybe it’s something like a sunset 
clause should be put on a number of Bills and brought forward 
at a certain time and date in the future. On the face of it, these 
are amendments that UMAAS has requested. We will discuss 
that with that grouping to make sure there is nothing else that 
needs to be added to this Act, and at this time I would like to 
move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 — The Horned Cattle Purchases 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, at the end of my remarks I would like to move second 
reading of the amendments to The Horned Cattle Purchases 
Act. The amendment to The Horned Cattle Purchases Act, Mr. 
Speaker, will assist the cattle industry’s efforts to reduce the 
number of horned cattle in Saskatchewan. 
 
Provisions of the Bill will increase the deductions for selling 
horned cattle, modernize our existing legislation, and update the 
organizations advising the minister in the areas of better 
reflecting today’s cattle industry. Mr. Speaker, this Bill is a 
result of the requests from cattle industry stakeholders. 
Following these requests, further consultations with the cattle 
industry show a widespread consensus for these legislative 
changes and the interests of new efforts to reduce the number of 
horned cattle in Saskatchewan. 
 
(21:00) 
 
Through these amendments, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is 
taking the leadership role in working with the cattle industry to 
reduce the damage that horned cattle can cause to other cattle, 
resulting in losses in the cattle industry. 
 
Industry has recommended that the current deduction of $2 be 
raised to $10. Industry has also recommended, Mr. Speaker, 
that the organization advise the minister be updated to reflect 
changes to the industry as well. 
 
As a result of these amendments, Mr. Speaker, the Horned 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 529 

 

Cattle Purchases Act Advisory Committee will now include 
representation from the Saskatchewan Cattle Feeders’ 
Association as well. The following organizations will continue 
to have representation on the advisory committee, Mr. Speaker: 
the National Farmers Union, the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities, Saskatchewan Cattle Breeders’ 
Association, the Saskatchewan Stock Growers’ Association, a 
member from an organization representing the dairy producers 
of Saskatchewan, and a representative of the ministry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the funds collected through the deduction go to a 
producer account and are used to support research design and 
benefit the cattle industry. This Bill will also clarify the 
deduction process for delivery of the horned cattle to points 
outside of Saskatchewan. This Bill allows also for the 
exemption of purebred cattle used for breeding and clarifies 
administrative functions for dealers and inspectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members of the Legislative Assembly, I 
encourage you to adopt the amendments of The Horned Cattle 
Purchases Act, and therefore I move that amendments to The 
Horned Cattle Purchases Act be read a second time. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s again a 
privilege to stand and discuss horned cattle in the Legislative 
Assembly again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember different times where this subject has 
come up, and they’ve put through amendments to this Act. It’s 
interesting though, Mr. Speaker, that as we on this side too and 
many of the members on this side of the legislature are directly 
involved in the cattle industry . . . A lot of the members on this 
side are involved in the cattle industry, Mr. Speaker, and so 
they are very interested in this legislation, this amendment to 
the Act. And any time you can reduce the number of horned 
cattle in the province, we think that’s a good thing. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when you look at the fact that they are 
increasing the fee by 500 per cent, Mr. Speaker, that seems 
quite significant. They’ve gone from $2 to $10 per horned 
animal. And, Mr. Speaker, we think that is quite a large increase 
in cost to producers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I realize the fact that horned cattle do, do damage 
to hides and that type of thing in the cattle industry, but such an 
increase needs to be looked at and needs to be . . . we need to 
consult with a number of the organizations, a number of the 
organizations that this minister had spoke about. Although 
maybe perhaps the organization as a whole are in favour of it, 
there’s a lot of producers under those organizations that will be 
directly affected by this 500 per cent increase on horned cattle 
in the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So until we are able to consult with a number of the producers, 
the direct producers, the producers of those cattle, Mr. Speaker, 
we’ll move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 — The Electronic Information and Documents 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today 
to move second reading of The Electronic Information and 
Documents Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these amendments will clarify the departments, 
government agencies, and other public bodies can engage in 
electronic communications without the need to formally 
designate legislation or regulations under the government filing 
provisions in part III of The Electronic Information and 
Documents Act. 
 
A public body’s consent to use electronic communications 
cannot be inferred but must be expressly authorized. If an 
enactment is designated under the special rules for filing 
electronic documents with the government under part III, the 
general rules in part II will not apply to the filing or registration 
of information under the enactment — as if anybody would 
think they would, Mr. Speaker — and that consumers will 
continue to be entitled to a paper copy of a document when 
conducting Internet sales unless they expressly agree otherwise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, members will recall that Saskatchewan was the 
first province in Canada to introduce legislation to provide a 
basic legal framework for electronic-based commercial 
relations—the first. Since proclamation on November 1, 2000, 
nine other provincial and territorial jurisdictions in Canada have 
introduced companion legislation in an effort to normalize 
labour relations in this new and ever-expanding medium. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Act, based on both the UN 
(United Nations) model law and the Uniform Electronic 
Commerce Act of the Uniform Law Conference of Canada, 
provides in part II for basic rules to ensure equivalent treatment 
of electronic- and paper-based documents and information — 
general principles that will apply to electronic communications 
and rules for particular electronic transactions including the 
formulation and operation of contracts, the use of automatic 
transactions, corrections of errors, and presumed time and place 
of the receipt of messages. 
 
Part III of the Act currently provides for more specific legal 
framework to support initiatives with the actual electronic filing 
of information with the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s more. The Bill before this Assembly today 
is, in large part, a recognition that government bodies are 
becoming increasingly comfortable with the communicating 
with their clientele by electronic means. 
 
While there will continue to be a need for the specific filing 
requirements set out in part III, these changes will provide 
better flexibility under part II to government agencies in dealing 
with less-formal communication. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s important to note that the central principle of 
this Act will remain that it is only where the parties agree to 
using electronic documents that they may be used. Indeed this 
core principle is enhanced by an amendment that will require 
that even Internet consumers will continue to be entitled to a 
paper copy of a document when conducting Internet sales 



530 Saskatchewan Hansard April 8, 2002 

 

unless they expressly agree otherwise. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m proud that Saskatchewan was the first 
province in Canada to advance legislation to provide a basic 
legal framework for electronic-based commercial relationships, 
and with these minor changes we will continue to be in the 
forefront in this regard. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased, as you can imagine I would be, to 
move second reading of An Act to amend The Electronic 
Information and Documents Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
we believe that there is indeed a need for Internet commerce, 
electronic commerce in the province of Saskatchewan. We just 
wish that there was more of it. But under this government, we 
understand that development of economic activity is truly 
difficult, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The minister was talking about how government is getting more 
comfortable with the electronic age, and as I look across I can 
tell that the government is indeed comfortable but I’m not 
exactly sure how flexible they are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is a number of issues in this particular 
piece of legislation that I think need to be pursued and 
investigated more thoroughly. It talks about the public bodies 
not . . . that they can’t presume to have consented to receive 
information, and yet it seems to imply that persons are 
consenting to receive information when it comes to them 
without having to give any indication that they have so 
accepted. 
 
And I think there needs to be some clarifications there, Mr. 
Speaker, just how a person shows their consent to receive a 
piece of electronic information and just what has to happen on 
behalf of a public institution, a public body to show that they 
have received the information. 
 
We know that when it comes to mail, snail mail, Mr. Speaker, if 
government sends out a notice, the person it’s being sent to is 
deemed to have received it. How is this going to apply, Mr. 
Speaker, to electronic mail? If the government sends out a 
document in e-mail to someone, are they assumed to have 
received it, therefore have been served their notice on whatever 
the case may be? Or does that person have to respond in some 
way, shape, or form before that document is actually deemed to 
have been received legally, Mr. Speaker? On the other side, 
what does the public body, the institution, have to do to show 
that they have consented to receive a particular piece of 
information? 
 
There are a lot of questions here, Mr. Speaker. We are entering 
into a new field the last few years, of electronic commerce, and 
new pathways have to be developed. So we need to see just 
what the minister intends to do, how the general public is 
viewing this, whether it serves them well or whether it doesn’t 
go far enough, or does it go too far, Mr. Speaker. So we need to 
talk to those people who are interested, who are already availing 
themselves of the Internet and electronic commerce, to discover 
how this Bill will actually apply to them. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would move at this time that we move 

adjournment of Bill No. 7. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 8 — The Family Maintenance Amendment Act, 
2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 sur les 

prestations alimentaires familiales 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Family Maintenance 
Amendment Act, 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Family Maintenance Act currently has one 
section that deals with child maintenance until age 18 and 
another that deals with child maintenance after age 18. This 
amendment will tie the two sections together and confirm that 
an order for child maintenance is to continue until the child is 
no longer eligible for maintenance under the Act. This change 
will mean fewer court applications will be required by families. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under the Divorce Act, maintenance continues 
past age 18 until the court determines or the parents agree that 
the child is no longer a dependant. By making this Act 
consistent with the Divorce Act, all orders for child 
maintenance will be treated in the same manner. 
 
Some people may suggest that maintenance shouldn’t continue 
past age 18. However, this amendment doesn’t create the right 
to maintenance after age 18; it merely confirms that the intent 
that maintenance continues until a son or daughter no longer 
qualifies for maintenance under the Act. It will prevent 
unnecessary litigation or disputes between parents. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move second reading of An Act to 
Amend The Family Maintenance Act, 1997. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s with great 
pleasure to speak on the amendment to The Family 
Maintenance Act, 1997, as the minister outlined that it ties the 
two sections together. 
 
It brings to mind a couple of concerns and questions about who 
is affected by this and how that criteria is determined and what 
standard and who sets the standard of the individual that may 
fall into this category. And also is there any responsibility 
towards the individual under this Act and how that develops as 
far as in the family situation and in society as a whole? 
 
And I would like to discuss this with the stakeholders and 
review this with my colleagues. 
 
And at this time I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to move second reading of The Real Estate Amendment Act, 
2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this Bill is to update and modernize 
Saskatchewan’s real estate legislation. In addition a number of 



April 8, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 531 

 

the amendments harmonize the provisions of our legislation 
with legislation of other jurisdictions. 
 
The first amendment deals with confidentiality and information 
sharing. The Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission acts as the 
primary regulator of real estate brokers in Saskatchewan and the 
Superintendent of Real Estate oversees the activities of the 
commission. 
 
Both of these regulators have a need to share information in 
certain circumstances with other regulators, law enforcement 
agencies, and real estate commissions. This power is important 
as real estate brokers and salespersons may carry on activities in 
more than one jurisdiction and relocate from one jurisdiction to 
another. 
 
The proposed information-sharing provisions update and 
modernize the restrictions on access to information and are 
common in regulatory legislation. Provisions accommodate the 
regulator’s need to share information while providing assurance 
to brokers and salespersons that this sensitive information will 
only be shared in certain limited circumstances. 
 
(21:15) 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill also allows the commission to enter 
into agreements with other regulators for the purposes of 
allowing interprovincial mobility of brokers and salespersons 
and encouraging interjurisdictional enforcement. The proposed 
amendments will also allow the commission to share licensing 
information with other regulators. This is important as brokers 
and salespersons are increasingly seeking to be registered in 
more than one jurisdiction. 
 
Further amendments include provisions relating to errors and 
omissions coverage, disclosure requirements, and reporting 
requirements. The amendments dealing with errors and 
omissions insurance allow regulations to be passed requiring 
real estate brokers and salespersons to carry errors and 
omissions insurance coverage with specified minimum 
allowance and coverage from a specified carrier. 
 
In the area of disclosure, the amendments authorize the 
commission to enact bylaws which will provide further detail as 
to the disclosure that must be made by real estate brokers and 
salespersons to parties and potential parties concerning real 
estate transactions. 
 
In addition, the amendments will allow the commission to enact 
future bylaws which provide detail as to the type of information 
that is required to be disclosed and the forms of disclosure to be 
used. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in reviewing this legislation, we’ve consulted with 
the Saskatchewan Real Estate Commission, the Saskatchewan 
Real Estate Association, and the Superintendent of Real Estate. 
The results of the consultation have been positive. I appreciate 
very much the time, effort, and co-operation which these groups 
have contributed to the development of this Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of An Act to amend The 
Real Estate Act. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
No. 9, the Act to amend The Real Estate Act, is a piece of 
legislation that, on the surface, looks like it’s very positive. I 
mean any time you can kind of open up the borders a little bit 
so that real estate agents can deal on both sides of the border, 
whether it’s Saskatchewan or Alberta, is a great idea. 
 
I know the people from Alberta and many of the real estate 
agents from Alberta would just love to be able to get a one-up 
on the people in Saskatchewan here because so many of us are 
moving to Alberta all the time that if we could just kind of open 
up the borders and make it a little bit easier. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I’ll take that one step further. A lot of the real 
estate agents that we’ve been talking to most recently are 
saying, open it up because once there’s a Saskatchewan Party 
government many of those people will be moving back and they 
want the opportunity to also bring those people back into 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is a couple of other issues in this Real Estate 
Amendment Act that draws some concern, and one is the fact of 
the real estate commissioner, I believe, buying — 
superintendent — buying insurance. And when we look through 
the Act . . . and there has been some concern already that there 
must be one insurer for this whole process. In other words, 
we’re questioning who that insurer may be. It seems like they’re 
looking for a bit of a monopoly in this situation. And so we 
want to talk to a number of the real estate agents along with the 
commission and the interested parties that this Bill will be 
affecting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So at this time I would move to adjourn debate on the Bill No. 
9, An Act to amend The Real Estate Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:20. 
 


