















































Hansard: May 22, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1491 
 May 22, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens concerned about the state of 
Highway No. 23, primarily the section west from Junction 9 to 
the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
23 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed entirely by the citizens of Weekes. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition today to present 
on behalf of people concerned about the new tobacco bylaws. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be found 
in possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from Wadena. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present to do with the overfishing at Lake of the Prairies. The 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Bredenbury, Saltcoats, and Minton. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with this government’s 
tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

This petition is signed by individuals from the communities of 
Moose Jaw, Spring Valley, and Marquis. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again today I have a petition from constituents in the Cypress 
Hills area concerned about crop insurance premium hikes and 
coverage reductions. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and to hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present but this is regarding the condition of our 
highways. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area, also to prevent rollovers that do happen on that 
highway every so often. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by people from Francis, Odessa, 
Weyburn, and Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
the tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by citizens of Stoughton and 
Weyburn. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 



1492 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

to halt crop insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Holdfast and Penzance. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition this 
afternoon is in regards to crop insurance: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good 
people from Duck Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the crop insurance premium 
hikes. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
It is signed by the good citizens of Sonningdale, Battleford, 
North Battleford, and Vawn, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition of citizens concerned about Highway No. 15. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from Simpson and 
Imperial. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan that are very concerned with the 
Besnard Lake situation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nation representatives, 
to bring upon a resolution to the Besnard Lake situation and 
to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 
 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Parkside, from Shellbrook, from Prince Albert, Saskatoon, and 
Delisle. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of the province concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend the tobacco legislation that would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of Spiritwood 
and Witchekan Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens of southern 
Saskatchewan that are concerned about the lack of cellular 
telephone service. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause government to provide 
reliable cellular telephone services to all communities 
throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this is signed by citizens of Limerick, 
Woodrow, and Killdeer. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby read and received. 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1493 

 

A petition concerning repairs to Highway 42 in the Arm 
River constituency; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional 
paper no. 7, 11, 18, 23, 24, and 129. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 50 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: how many complaints were filed 
by Saskatchewan residents involving the security 
investigations unit of SGI in each of the past three years? 

 
I also, Mr. Speaker, have written questions with respect to 
the costs of the SAP consultants and the SAP training and 
SAP implementation at SaskPower, as well as a number of 
questions on the cost of various methods of the generation 
of electricity. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 50 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: what is the maximum 
allowable coliform content in water being discharged from 
municipal sewage treatment facilities in Saskatchewan; for 
each sewage treatment facility in Saskatchewan, how many 
times has that standard been breached during the last five 
years; for each incident, on what date did it occur and what 
was the coliform count; provide the name of each community 
and/or location where any such incident occurred? 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 50 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Justice: regarding staff cuts at the 
Saskatchewan Human Rights Commission, how many files 
are currently pending determination by the Saskatchewan 
Human Rights Commission; what is the average time lag 
between complaint and disposition by the commission; and 
what is the anticipated impact of the staff cuts of 2.5 
positions expected to have on the current backlog? 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 50 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Government Relations: with regard to 
provincially owned Crown land in the northern 
administrative district, how many parcels of land are being 
leased and what is the total area of leased land; how many 
lessees are there; and what is the total lease revenue per 
year? 
 
I have the same question, Mr. Speaker, for the land south of 
the northern administrative district. 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you 
and to all of my members here in the legislature, I’d like to 
introduce eight people who are in your gallery. This week is 
Emergency Medical Services Week and today we have with us 
a number of paramedics who are here to be part of the second 
reading of The Paramedics Act. 
 
So I’d like to have them stand as I introduce them. Lyle 
Karasiuk, who is the Chair of the Saskatchewan Paramedics 
Association; Daniel Lewis, who is a EMT (emergency medical 
technician) and he’s the director of communications. Jason 
Williams, a paramedic, who is the director of education. Stacey 
Mamer, who is a EMT, director of code and conduct. Ken 
Luciak is a paramedic and he’s the manager of operations, 
Regina Health District EMS (emergency medical services). 
Colin Hartness, paramedic, operations supervisor for Regina 
Health District EMS; Darcy MacKay, paramedic; and Christina 
Backlin, paramedic. 
 
I’d like to have all members welcome them to the legislature 
this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition, I too would like to join the Minister of 
Health in welcoming the members here from EMS throughout 
Saskatchewan. It is certainly a very momentous day for them. 
 
And I again ask all members to please join me in again 
welcoming the members from EMS throughout Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today in the 
west gallery there’s a group of students from Connaught School 
which is only about six blocks from my house. There’s 15 
students from grade 8 accompanied by Bruce Brander and 
Gerald Flett. 
 
And depending on how busy I get after question period, I’ll be 
meeting with the students and we’ll be having an orange drink 
together. And I look forward to meeting with you. Would all the 
members join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to join the member from 
Regina Centre to welcome the students from Connaught School 
and also to Gerald Flett who has lived in my home community 
for many years from Cumberland House 
 
And I might say as well, Mr. Speaker, Connaught holds a 
special place for me in the sense that my two daughters, Koonu 
and Danis, attended Connaught School. So I’d like all members 
to please welcome the students again. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to join 
my colleagues in welcoming the students from Connaught 
School and especially my old classmate — we attended school 
together — Mr. Jerry Flett, Mr. Speaker. And Jerry, I not only 



1494 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

taught him volleyball and basketball, Mr. Speaker, I . . . he also 
had the pleasure of sitting next to me in school and copied off 
me in the finals and we . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — So did you both fail then? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — We both failed, Mr. Speaker. And not 
only did we fail but we both got cut from the basketball and 
volleyball teams. So I want to welcome Jerry here, a dear friend 
of the family. Thank you very much. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to draw your attention, and welcome to the Assembly this 
afternoon, Mr. Joe Bisschop who’s in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. He’s a constituent of mine from Yorkton, long-time 
family friends of ours. Our children spent a lot of time together 
over the years. 
 
Mr. Bisschop has done lots of work in the private sector, but is 
better known in our area for his entertaining. He is a long-time 
entertainer, played at many dances and weddings in our area. 
He is spending some time with Mr. Sklar, probably giving him 
a lesson or two in terms of how to play the fiddle. 
 
So I want to ask all members of the Assembly to welcome Mr. 
Bisschop to the Assembly this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Cathedral Arts Festival 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, well as all of the students 
from Connaught here would know, if you look on your calendar 
May 20 to 25 is the Cathedral Arts Festival. 
 
Banana fritters, face painting, art car cruise, movies under the 
stars are just a few attractions. This year is bigger and better. 
The week-long festival enters its 11th year and is expanding by 
an entire block to make room for all the extra exhibits. 
 
The Saturday street fair is a focal point for the festival. It’s the 
largest craft sale in Saskatchewan and has a rich tapestry of 
village dwellers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Cathedral village houses a mix of cultural and 
social communities that enrich the festival and the area with 
their diversity. New this year are Opera Saskatchewan and 
tonight, Cabaret Oskana, a showcase of Aboriginal poetry, 
music, dance, film, and video. 
 
The village is also home to a vibrant arts community whose 
contributions, I think, are well known in the province. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, the festival illustrates the ideals of 
community, because this festival came about as a tool to build 
community, and I have to say it’s been very successful. 
 

So I’m very proud of all the festival’s organizers and 
volunteers, and I hope that everybody takes at least one day to 
get out and see the festival. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Emergency Medical Services Week 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, May 19 
to 25 is EMS Week in Saskatchewan. 
 
On behalf of all the people of Saskatchewan, all members of the 
House wish to extend our sincere thanks and appreciation to the 
nearly 3,000 emergency medical service providers in the 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, every day our EMS workers demonstrate the true 
level of their compassion and commitment to their jobs often 
under very adverse conditions and circumstances. Clearly, a job 
that requires one to be available 24 hours a day, 7 days a week 
also requires one to have a certain amount of dedication and 
determination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for anyone who’s ever witnessed or been involved 
in any kind of an accident or unfortunate incident, we all know 
the familiar sound of an EMS siren. Not only is it the first 
sound that we hear, Mr. Speaker, it is also a sound that we often 
welcome because it gives us hope. 
 
We know that the men and the women who may be just 
moments or even seconds away may mean the difference 
between life and death. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the theme for this year’s EMS Week is Help is a 
Heartbeat Away. This addresses the importance that EMS 
provides in the chain of survival. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, all members of the House should know 
that in addition to the extremely vital life-saving work that they 
do, EMS providers are also a great public resource for injury 
prevention and health promotion. 
 
Again, to the 3,000 EMS personnel working in communities 
across Saskatchewan, all members of the House extend our 
sincere thanks and appreciation for a job well done. Knowing 
that you are there for us and for our families provides a great 
deal of measure of comfort to us all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Students Compete in Montreal 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, two students from Miller 
Comprehensive High School in my constituency are now 
competing in Montreal. Kristen Francis from Craven and Katie 
Delorme from Regina, accompanied by counsellor Tyronne 
Fisher and teacher Sandra Mann, are in Montreal to compete in 
the E-spirit competition. 
 
The E-spirit competition is an Internet-based national 
Aboriginal youth business plan competition with on-line 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1495 

 

modules, mentoring, and business plan templates for Aboriginal 
youth in grades 10 to 12. Students are required to complete a 
business plan including finances and staffing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this competition is sponsored by the Business 
Development Bank of Canada and accepts entries from 
Aboriginal students from across Canada. Only three teams from 
Saskatchewan were selected. 
 
Results from the competition will not be known until later but 
Kristen and Katie are optimistic. They submitted a business 
plan along with a VHS (Video Home System) video of their 
business and display booth. Their business is called New 
Horizon Salon and Spa. In their video they capture a beautiful 
view of prairie life, including Regina, Wascana Park, and the 
Legislative Building. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Air Cadets Annual Parades 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This past Thursday I 
had the pleasure of joining the 802 Pipestone Air Cadets as they 
celebrated their annual parade and awards night. It was also a 
pleasure to join my colleague, the member from Cannington, at 
the Moose Mountain 723 Air Cadet annual parade on Monday, 
May 13. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this program certainly is a very positive program 
for our young people. What it does is it teaches our young 
people the integrity, it teaches responsibility, it teaches respect. 
And it’s certainly an honour to attend a parade and just to 
observe these cadets as they parade, as they do their march past 
and the different routines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as well a special thank you to all of those who 
work so diligently — to the instructors, to the parents. Without 
their help, without their support, this program would be 
impossible. 
 
And in Moosomin’s case, a special thank you to the Knights of 
Columbus, the Legion, and the seniors’ drop-in centre, and to 
those who have donated their trophies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the cadet program is certainly a worthwhile 
program and we want to thank each and every person involved 
for their hard work and dedication. 
 

Get Well Wishes for Mavis Roots 
 

Mr. Toth: — As well, Mr. Speaker, I would like to extend a 
special get well wish to a very special person in our caucus. 
Mavis Roots acts as receptionist and no doubt she’s probably 
watching us today. And unfortunately, Mavis rather than 
watching would just as soon be in the office and just giving us 
words of encouragement. But we want to offer her our 
encouragement as she recovers from surgery. 
 
Mavis, we’re praying for a speedy recovery. We miss you. 
We’re looking forward to having you back in caucus with us. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Norwegian Constitution Day 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Last Friday was 
Syttende Mai, May 17, Norwegian Constitution Day. And 
Norwegians around the world were singing Bjornstjerne 
Bjornson’s song: 
 

Ja, vi elsker dette landet, 
som det stiger frem, 
furet, vaerbitt over vannet, 
med de tusen hjem. 

 
This song is a reminder to Norwegians around the world and 
especially here in Saskatchewan, where they had celebrations at 
Saskatoon and Birch Hills and many other communities in the 
province, that Norway remembers them. 
 
And I have a special greeting from King Harold and Queen 
Sonia who just completed a tour to Canada and these are their 
words: 
 

We are very happy indeed through the Norwegian 
Ambassador in Canada to send Norwegian and Canadian 
citizens of Norwegian Ancestry our sincere greetings and 
very best wishes as you celebrate the Norwegian 
Constitution Day We have just concluded a highly 
successful State Visit to Canada and met many fellow 
countrymen across the country. The warmth and hospitality 
with which we have been received everywhere has made a 
deep impression on us. It is our hope that our visit to 
Canada will serve to further strengthening both the personal 
and bilateral links across the Atlantic. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, with the members from Regina Coronation 
Park, Saskatoon Southeast, Regina Sherwood, 
Rosetown-Biggar, Saltcoats, Saskatchewan Rivers, 
Lloydminster, and me from Regina Lakeview, we all wish all 
Norwegians and all Saskatchewan people happy Constitution 
Day. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Kenaston Teacher Honoured 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It gives me great 
pleasure to rise in the House today to talk about a remarkable 
teacher from the town of Kenaston who was honoured by the 
community this past Saturday evening. It was my privilege for 
me to attend this event which paid tribute to Michael Hertz, or 
Mick as he’s known to his many friends and colleagues. 
 
Michael had taught school in Kenaston for 30 years, staying in 
the same school. He came out of teachers’ college in 1972, and 
has taught nearly every grade of school in Kenaston, beginning 
with high school English class and then going into elementary 
system, basically teaching all the subjects. 
 
It’s rare to see a teacher with such a commitment to one school 
and to the many community activities that he’s been involved 
in. Michael was also very involved in the sporting side of 
school where he has acted as a basketball coach and a volleyball 



1496 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

coach, and also did a lot of help with the Kenaston senior 
hockey team. 
 
 Most recently he has assisted in organizing and coaching 
Loreburn Aztec football team, consisting of players from both 
Loreburn and Kenaston schools. 
 
Michael is also the resident computer expert in the school 
which keeps him very busy as well. 
 
The evening began at 7:30 p.m. There was a PowerPoint slide 
show where photographs of his 30 years in teaching were 
shown and former students and staff would speak about 
Michael on each year, starting with 1972 working up to the year 
2002. 
 
There were also tributes as well from the local school board and 
school division representatives and many others whom Mr. 
Hertz’s life had touched over his many years of school and 
community involvement. 
 
Michael’s wife Patty is also a schoolteacher at the Clear Spring 
Colony just outside of Kenaston. I would ask that all members 
of this Assembly join me in congratulating Mr. Michael Hertz 
of Kenaston. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Polonia Dance Ensemble Celebrates 30th Anniversary 
 
Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
was my pleasure to attend, earlier this month on May 11, the 
14th Annual Polonia in Concert program which is put on 
annually by the Polonia Dance Ensemble of Regina at the 
Performing Arts Centre here, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to . . . I should point out that this is . . . the 
Polonia Dance Ensemble of Regina recently celebrated their 
30th anniversary of existence. 
 
And as an alumnus of that group I would just like to say that I 
was around during the formative years of that organization and 
it was a pleasure to see how much and how far they’ve come. 
 
Their guest speaker is . . . or guest dancers — performers with 
them were the Biale Orzel Group from Winnipeg. The program 
consisted of 17 dances put on by various levels of dancers — 
senior, intermediate, and junior. And as I say, it was a great 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Polonia Dance Ensemble is a very 
accomplished group. They were the featured performers for 
Prince Charles when he was here a year ago, in front of City 
Hall, and I know they were very proud of that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, if you’ll permit me to say a couple of words in 
Polish. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Polish.) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Legislation to Regulate Raves 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, an 
18-year-old Melville girl is dead after attending a rave in 
Saskatoon. Mr. Speaker, for some time now, the Saskatoon city 
police have been asking the provincial government to introduce 
legislation licensing and regulating raves. 
 
On April 15 in this House I asked the Minister of Culture, 
Youth, and Recreation about this issue, and she said the 
government had no intention of doing anything about raves. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I reiterate: over the weekend, an 18-year-old girl 
died after attending a rave in Saskatoon. Will the government 
now get with it and introduce legislation licensing and 
regulating raves? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me 
first, convey our condolences to the family of Ashley Blixrud 
and I did actually speak with the . . . with her father yesterday. 
 
And the kinds of tragedies that are exhibited here are of concern 
to all of us. We are investigating ways in which we can address 
this concern with the Saskatoon city police. We’re 
corresponding with other provinces who have looked at this 
question but have chosen not to legislate. And we’re also 
looking at municipalities that have bylaws to address this 
concern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I might say that we will leave no stone unturned to 
address these concerns and to ensure that our young people are 
safe. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, indeed other provincial jurisdictions 
have introduced legislation because of the danger of raves. Mr. 
Speaker, for some time now, I reiterate, the Saskatoon city 
police have been calling for legislations to license and regulate 
these raves, and the NDP government has virtually ignored their 
concerns. 
 
On May 15, the Saskatoon police wrote to the deputy minister 
of Justice outlining their deep concerns about raves. They said, 
and I quote: 
 

Raves attract people — no age restrictions — who attend 
with the intention of dancing to loud music while under the 
influence of mind-altering drugs. Although no one has died 
in this province as a result of a rave, our young people are 
at risk if they attend these events. 

 
Sadly, one statement is no longer true. The police department’s 
warning has come true and an 18-year-old girl has died. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the government follow the advice of 
Saskatoon police and bring in legislation to license and regulate 
raves? 
 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1497 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(1400) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, let me say that we won’t 
rule anything out. But the most important issue to address here 
is how to protect children, not how to outlaw or ban something. 
And one of the concerns about making it impossible to have 
these kinds of activities is that it merely pushes them 
underground, which would then make it even more difficult to 
resolve. 
 
Let me just say, Mr. Speaker, that the Criminal Code, the 
Controlled Substances Act all provide . . . both provide police 
with the opportunity to investigate what is taking place at these 
raves, Mr. Speaker. If minors are consuming alcohol, that gives 
the police another reason to intervene. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me say that the police did write to the 
department. They did make a presentation to the Saskatchewan 
Association of Chiefs of Police. And, Mr. Speaker, we will be 
exploring every avenue with them and with others in the 
community to ensure that our children are protected. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — The Saskatoon police specifically asked the 
government for legislation. The police know exactly what needs 
to be contained in that legislation, and I believe they have 
forwarded that information to the minister’s department. 
 
The Saskatoon police specifically asked for legislation in their 
letter, and their letter said that. And I quote: 
 

A presentation regarding this matter was made to the 
Saskatchewan Association of Chiefs of Police. Delegates 
agreed that raves are a serious problem and legislation 
should be passed to regulate the activities. 

 
The letter goes on to say: 
 

There must be provincial legislation, as municipal bylaws 
will simply move the location from one municipality to 
another. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why has the government had this information and 
ignored the request? There is an immediate need to address this 
issue. 
 
So I ask the minister again: will the government introduce 
legislation this session to license and regulate raves? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
let me just reiterate what I’ve said twice already, and that is that 
we will look at the recommendations presented by the 
Saskatoon city police. We will talk to the Association of Police 
Chiefs. It’s somewhat less than a week ago that this contact was 
made to us formally. And we will leave no stone unturned in 
protecting our children. 
 
Let me assure the member that we are as concerned about these 

matters as she is, that we are as concerned about the loss of life 
that has taken place and the potential damage caused to our 
children, and that once we have spoken with the appropriate 
people, we will act and we’ll make sure our children are safe. I 
don’t think I can say any more than that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, this government has dragged its feet 
with many types of legislation that could have improved the 
lives of our children or guaranteed their safety. And, Mr. 
Speaker, maybe they have recently received a letter on May 15, 
but this government knows full well that that legislation has 
been introduced in other provinces and is necessary. 
 
The Saskatoon police want the legislation that includes a 
number of specific provisions designed to protect young people 
who attend raves. 
 
First of all they want raves to be licensed. They want promoters 
and persons with a history of drug dealing or other offences to 
be prohibited from obtaining a permit. 
 
Secondly, they want the police to be notified of all raves, and a 
copy of permits sent to the police at least two weeks prior to the 
event. And they want police to be able to enter the premises to 
check for drug use and drug pedalling. 
 
Thirdly, they want safety standards with regard to matters like 
proper ventilation and exits, and the free supply of water 
provided. They want EMS personnel on premises. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these seem like reasonable requests to protect the 
safety of young people in Saskatchewan so there is not a repeat 
of this weekend’s tragic events. Will the government listen to 
the Saskatoon police and introduce legislation immediately? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think this is a 
matter to make politics of. This is a matter of serious concern 
for all of our young people. And, Mr. Speaker, the issue is how 
do you get to the bottom of these questions? How do you stop 
these things from taking place? 
 
It is not as straightforward as the member indicates. This is not 
a question, strictly speaking, of raves. It’s a question of young 
people abusing drugs and abusing alcohol. That is not going to 
end, Mr. Speaker, by pushing something of this sort 
underground. 
 
But let me say once again, for the fourth time, that we will look 
to the . . . we will look to find . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Well I think I am saying something. I’m saying that we will 
look to find solutions with those who know best about how to 
handle these situations. 
 
The member should know that while Ontario introduced 
legislation of this sort, it did not follow through with it. Maybe 
she should ask herself why that is. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me say once again, we will do what we 
. . . Mr. Speaker, we will do everything we can in our power to 



1498 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

ensure that our children are safe. The member should know 
that, and we all know that, Mr. Speaker, in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Disclosure of Personal and Confidential Information 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, over 
the weekend media sources interviewed the owner of Robinson 
Investigations, which as you know was searched by the RCMP 
(Royal Canadian Mounted Police) in relation to the case 
investigating police officers and government employees for 
allegedly releasing confidential information about the citizens 
of this province. 
 
Mike Robinson told the media, and I quote: 
 

He routinely gets information from police and government 
sources. He says he doesn’t tell anyone where to get the 
information, nor does he ask where it comes from. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there is great concern among the people of 
Saskatchewan about security about their personal information. 
As a result of this news, will the Premier explain how it is that 
private investigation firms routinely, Mr. Speaker, routinely 
access personal and confidential information of Saskatchewan 
people held by this NDP (New Democratic Party) government? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thanks, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
the member will know from media reports, the RCMP has 
entered the offices of Robinson Investigations and has 
investigated and begun their investigation of those activities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, let me just say that organizations of this sort are 
registered by the . . . are licensed by the province. The registrar 
can initiate an investigation himself. And should breaches of the 
law be evidenced, Mr. Speaker, the registrar will take swift 
action to deal with the situation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Swift action should 
have been taken by this government over the past decade to 
ensure the security of the information of the people of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last Wednesday the NDP confirmed that six 
provincial government employees were being investigated by 
the RCMP for allegedly releasing confidential information to 
outside sources. 
 
At the same time, the deputy minister to the Premier said the 
NDP government would hold their own independent 
investigation into the security of confidential information. The 
deputy minister said that the announcement as to who would 
conduct that investigation would be made in a day or two. But 
one week has passed, Mr. Speaker, and there is still no 
indication from the NDP as to the status of their parallel 
investigation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when does the Premier intend to announce the 

details of this investigation? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Now as I said 
last week to the members opposite, we do think this is a very 
serious concern. And ever since 1992, we have had a series of 
measures including legislation, policy, security framework 
across government, security committees that were put in place 
to deal with a whole range of security issues when you handle 
large volumes of public information. 
 
Now the fact is that the RCMP investigation is about people 
who used information in ways that they weren’t authorized to 
use it, not people who used it in ways that they were authorized 
to use it. And the government responded quickly by sending 
these folks home, as well as co-operating with the RCMP 
investigation. 
 
We are very close to engaging a firm. We’ve been looking at all 
the national firms that do this kind of work. Interviews and 
reference checks are taking place as we speak. And very 
shortly, we will be able to announce the firm and their terms of 
reference. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Well, Mr. Speaker, we’re getting a potpourri 
of answers from a potpourri of ministers but we’re still not 
getting the answer to the question. They were told it would 
happen in a day or two; we’re now moving into a week or two 
— we still haven’t been told. 
 
Mr. Speaker, most of the focus has been on government access 
to the national CPIC (Canadian Police Information Centre) 
system. While CPIC inquiries are monitored at the national 
level, provincial Justice officials have said the government itself 
hasn’t monitored this information by its employees for several 
years. Approximately a decade, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And what about the other information systems kept by this 
government? Personal health records, educational records, 
financial records, everything from your birth certificate to the 
coroner’s report. Are there checks and balances in place to 
ensure that information is protected from abuse or unauthorized 
release? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what will be the terms of reference for the 
government investigation into the security of personal 
information, and will this review be made public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I cannot in detail outline 
the provisions, because as they work with these firms, they’re 
also helping flesh out what would be the appropriate matters. 
 
But I will generally outline it for the member. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, order. Order 
please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — What the investigation will be covering 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1499 

 

is issues like the oath of office, the conflict of interest 
guidelines, the acceptable use policy for information, 
technology-based information, and how it relates to the 
Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act. All of 
those matters would be the subject under investigation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investigation of Harassment Allegations 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have two questions today for the Premier regarding the former 
Environment minister who resigned last week over allegations 
of harassment. How much will the investigation into these 
allegations cost the Saskatchewan taxpayers, and will the results 
of the investigation be made public? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, in a circumstance like this, 
the appropriate thing to do has been done by the member from 
Saskatoon. In a circumstance like this, she has done the 
honourable thing and stepped aside from her responsibilities. 
We have engaged a woman from Winnipeg who has much 
experience in the field to meet with the parties and bring to me 
a report. 
 
I cannot at this moment, Mr. Speaker, but we’ll be glad to in 
future, provide for the total cost of the report. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this report will be delivered to the deputy to the 
Premier as the chief civil servant in the province who then will 
report to me. And therefore it is not likely, as in any matter of 
personnel in government, that the report would become a public 
document. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question again is for the Premier. Could he give us an estimate 
of how much this will cost? Will it be hundreds of dollars? 
Thousands of dollars? Or you know approximately how . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again I would like 
to know an estimate of approximately what this will cost. We 
did not pass judgment on the minister. We merely want to 
know, and the taxpayers are asking, the approximate estimate of 
what this investigation will cost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Last week I was in a variety of 
communities in the province, including in Nipawin on 
Thursday. I’ve just come from a meeting of 600 people for 
lunch in downtown Regina. No one asked me about the cost. 
Taxpayers are not asking the question. Taxpayers are very 
appreciative, very appreciative of the actions taken by the 
member in stepping aside from her cabinet portfolios. 
 
It is an interesting thing that’s happened in the House this 
afternoon. We’re all very interested apparently in the cost of a 
report here, but we’re calling from further investigations, 

further investigations, and further investigations in other 
matters but they’re not asking how much might that cost. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the integrity . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Order, order, order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, these people in the House 
this afternoon want this government to conduct further 
investigations into . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. I would ask the 
members to come to order. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, last week the member of 
Rosthern called some kind of a press conference, made all sorts 
of accusations which were simply not true. He sits in the House 
today, he will not listen to an answer either from the Attorney 
General or myself. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today they’re asking us to conduct further 
investigations into privacy matters in government. We’re not 
here referring to that tragic circumstance in Saskatoon, not here 
referring to that — you’re calling for further investigations into 
government — they don’t ask the questions about that. But 
when it comes to politics, oh they’ll have a question a minute. 
 
What surprises me, Mr. Speaker, most of all, is that the critic of 
Agriculture would stand up in this House today wondering 
about the cost of an important bit of work that’s being done in 
government while dust is blowing, people are dried out, and 
we’ve got a farm Bill in Washington that’s killing the province 
and the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s really disappointing that 
the Leader of the NDP government stands today in a 
self-righteous and sanctimonious attitude when they have more 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority) through the ministers . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — From SIGA to ministers to public servants, 
they’ve got more investigations going on than Dodd has little 
liver pills. So they can hardly pass judgment on us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Public Service Commission has a very specific 
anti-harassment policy and it outlines a number of steps that 
should be taken to resolve harassment complaints. Clearly the 
most serious of these steps is a formal investigation. And the 
policy states that these steps are only taken when it is not 
possible to resolve the conflict through any other methods. 
 
My question is for the minister responsible for the Public 



1500 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

Service Commission: how many formal harassment 
investigations usually take place in any given year, and at what 
cost to the taxpayers of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, I will have to take notice 
of that question because it’s very specific and detailed. But the 
Public Service estimates are later today and we could have 
further discussion then. But obviously that’s a very detailed 
question, so I take notice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Drought Assistance for Livestock Producers 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for 
the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
For thousands . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — For thousands of families it’s the same 
depressing story. Another week without rain. Add to that 
extremely high winds over the past two weeks and you have a 
major drought in the making. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Agricultural Producers Association of 
Saskatchewan has estimated the drought is threatening between 
50 and 70 per cent of the cattle herd because of shortage of 
grass, water, and feed. Mr. Speaker, farm families have been 
warning about the potential for a devastating drought this spring 
for some time. Now our worst fears have come to pass. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what action is this government taking to assist 
cattle producers who are facing the sell-off of between 50 and 
70 per cent of their cattle herds because of this drought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the member 
opposite that there are a number of things that we’ve been doing 
with the federal government, the national government, and with 
producer organizations in this province to prepare ourselves, 
Mr. Speaker, for the kinds of situations that we might face again 
this year. And these are the kinds of things, Mr. Speaker, that 
we’ve done. 
 
We’ve gone to our Ottawa friends and said to them that we 
need in this province to have an enhanced crop insurance 
program, Mr. Speaker. And this is what we said to our federal 
government. And, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — We’ve said, Mr. Speaker, that we need to 
take a portion of our crop insurance dollars and we need to 
restructure them so that they make their way to the grass 
program and to the pasture program. 
 
So this year in our province we took our individual program and 
we made it broad based, Mr. Speaker, for all cattle producers in 

the province. Of which we should remember, Mr. Speaker, that 
on that side of the House when I introduced it, they called it a 
gaming program, Mr. Speaker. That it’s not going to work for 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, today in this province we’ve put in 
place for our livestock producers, on the recommendation of 
livestock producers in this province, our new grass program, 
Mr. Speaker, which is now there for our producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan cattle producers 
are in trouble. In many places there’s no water left in the creeks. 
Water wells are dry. Dugouts are empty. And, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s no feed for cattle. As a result, APAS (Agricultural 
Producers Association of Saskatchewan) is estimating as many 
as 800,000 cattle could be on the auction block if the drought 
persists and there is no further assistance from this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, does the government have a plan to assist cattle 
producers with additional water pumping equipment, new 
funding for drilling water wells, and assistance in securing 
adequate feedstocks to get through this devastating drought? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, what we’ve said to the PFRA 
(Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) which this 
member will know — which is the Prairie farm rehabilitation 
program which is managed by the federal government — we’ve 
said to the federal government that they need to put additional 
dollars in, Mr. Speaker, and it’s historical that the prairie . . . 
that the PFRA has provided funding forever, Mr. Speaker, for 
water programs. 
 
Last year what we did, Mr. Speaker, is we went to the national 
government and we said we need additional funding, Mr. 
Speaker, from the national government. And we were able to 
get, Mr. Speaker, a million and a half dollars last year — not 
enough and we know that — and we only got that million and a 
half dollars after . . . and which we were able to lever it out 
from the federal government. 
 
I’m on record, Mr. Speaker, today asking the national 
government to put additional money into the PFRA program, 
Mr. Speaker, because there is a drought in Saskatchewan of 
which we know — a serious drought, Mr. Speaker, for livestock 
producers and for cattle producers in this province. 
 
But we can’t do this on our own, Mr. Speaker. And we’ve said 
on many occasions that the prairie . . . that the PFRA needs to 
get some of their dollars in place in order to help the farmers 
across the province, particularly cattle producers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Saskatchewan 
Rivers on his feet? 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, with leave, to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1501 

 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, in the east gallery this afternoon I’d like to introduce 
the grade 7 and 8 students from East Central School. And, Mr. 
Speaker, you may be familiar with the school; it’s located about 
15 kilometres east of Prince Albert. 
 
Accompanying the students this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is their 
teacher, also the principal of the school, Valerie Horner. She’s 
accompanied by Eileen Olsen, Marian Byrne, Ervin Nichziol, 
and Kim Jabusch. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask that all members of the House please 
join with me in welcoming the students from East Central 
School. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 52 — The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
move that Bill No. 52, The Municipal Revenue Sharing 
Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and read for the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 53 — The Department of Economic Development 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 53, The Department of Economic Development 
Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased today 
to stand on behalf of the government to table responses to 
written questions 201 and 202. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 201 and 202 are 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 38 — The Paramedics Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 

reading of The Paramedics Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for approximately 20 years, paramedics have been 
licensed by Saskatchewan Health under The Ambulance Act. 
As such, the department’s emphasis had been on the registration 
and licensing of paramedics. 
 
Mr. Speaker, The Paramedics Act was developed after 
consulting with the Saskatchewan Paramedic Association and 
other stakeholders to enable the profession self-governance and 
responsibility for regulating approximately 1,800 EMS 
personnel in our province. Self-regulation will provide the 
Saskatchewan Paramedic Association with the legal authority to 
register, license, and discipline emergency medical responders 
and all levels of emergency medical technicians. 
 
The registration of volunteer first responders will continue to be 
with Saskatchewan Health. 
 
Public accountability provisions have been incorporated into the 
new Act. For example, public representatives will now be 
included on the association’s council and discipline committee. 
Discipline hearings will now be open to the public and the 
association will file an annual report on its activities with the 
Minister of Health. 
 
As is the case with other health professions, bylaws which 
potentially affect the public will require the minister’s approval. 
The new Act clearly outlines the association’s responsibilities 
in effectively responding to public complaints of professional 
misconduct. While we can be proud of the emergency services 
delivered by EMS providers, it is important that we work 
together to make these services even better. 
 
One of the commitments in our government’s action plan for 
Saskatchewan health care is helping emergency health 
providers improve their skills. Beginning this year, our goal is 
to train 240 new or existing EMS providers up to the EMT 
basic level over a three-year period. This will help ensure that 
over time, on the majority of calls, there will be at least one 
member of an ambulance crew trained and certified at the EMT 
basic level. 
 
Skills of EMS providers are critical in an emergency situation. 
So is a quick response. Given the vastness of our province, 
ensuring a timely response to patients living in the most remote 
areas can be a challenge. The medical crews of Saskatchewan 
Air Ambulance make more than 1,100 flights per year 
transferring critically ill or injured residents to health facilities. 
EMS providers are onboard these flights helping to stabilize 
patients and providing care that can mean the difference 
between life and death. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these improvements to emergency services in our 
province reflect the government’s broader goal to improve the 
quality of health services and access to care while ensuring our 
health system is sustainable into the future. By working with 
health partners such as the Saskatchewan Paramedic 
Association, we will continue to provide strong emergency 
services throughout our province recognizing that these services 
will continue to evolve to reflect changing service needs. 
 
The Paramedics Act will serve the profession well. The 



1502 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

Saskatchewan Paramedic Association fully supports the new 
statute and is willing to assume the responsibilities it entails. 
Mr. Speaker, The Paramedics Act contains all the newer 
features of professional legislation and is more responsive to 
our changing health care system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to rise and respond to the minister with the second 
reading of Bill 38, The Paramedics Act, especially when it was 
introduced this week. Of course, it’s the EMS Week, 
Awareness Week, and the Bill being introduced is very timely. 
Listening to the minister speak about the Bill, I think for the 
most part everything in the Bill meets with our approval. Being 
able to self-regulate their own profession we think is a very 
good idea. 
 
They do a service in our province that we all have to be very, 
very thankful for. The minister talked about the vast expanse of 
our province, and I think that is one area that I know in the 
constituency that I represent, Indian Head-Milestone, in talking 
to some of the different people out there is that, you know, 
there’s large areas where if there is an accident or whatever — a 
farming accident or an automobile accident — there is some 
time before the people get there. 
 
So the people that arrive on the scene first, the EMS team, have 
to be trained to the highest standard as possible; because that 
time is very, very important by the time they get back to a 
health care facility. 
 
It’s not like many, many years ago when there were certainly 
more health care facilities in the province that the travel time 
may not have been as great. But certainly now it’s taking longer 
to find, to get back to the health care facility. 
 
So when we look at this Bill it looks like it meets with our 
approval. We do want to, I guess, question and ask a few more 
questions on this piece of legislation and consult with a few 
more groups. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, at this time we would move to adjourn debate 
on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 41 — The Health Quality Council Act 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to move second 
reading of The Health Quality Council Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan is known both nationally and 
internationally for its leadership in health care. The creation of 
the Health Quality Council is a first in Canada, with a mandate 
directed at quality improvement in health care. The council will 
provide objective, timely, evidence-based information and 
advice for achieving the best possible health care within our 
available resources. 

To fulfill its role, the Health Quality Council will be expected 
to remain independent of specific interests and organizational 
views. Quality Council board members will be chosen for their 
knowledge and expertise. This will include experts in health 
services delivery and quality improvement from both within 
and outside the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the formation of a Health Quality Council is an 
important part of the government’s action plan to improve the 
quality of health services and access to care while ensuring our 
health system is sustainable into the future. 
 
When our government announced the action plan for 
Saskatchewan health care in December, we promised to act 
quickly to create an independent council to guide government, 
regional health authorities, and health care professionals in 
providing the highest possible quality care for the people of this 
province. 
 
The steps we are taking today, Mr. Speaker, fulfill this promise 
outlined in our health action plan and reflect our government’s 
strong commitment to health excellence in Saskatchewan. 
 
Our consultations with the public and health sector groups 
following the Fyke Report found strong support for an 
independent. In drafting the legislation for this Act, we again 
consulted with our key health partners. 
 
The result of our research and consultations is an organization 
that will provide an independent, knowledgeable voice that will 
recommend standards for health care based on solid evidence. 
As well, it allows us to move forward on innovations in our 
action plan including the establishment of the Health Quality 
Council. 
 
Annual funding for the Quality Council is anticipated to be in 
the amount of $5 million. The council’s overall goal is to ensure 
the best possible patient outcomes within our available 
resources. From the council’s evaluations we will be able to tell 
which services are most effective and where we should be 
putting our resources to achieve the greatest benefit for our 
citizens. 
 
The development of a Health Quality Council is not an 
indication that people are getting poor health care right now. 
Surveys tell us that most people are satisfied with the care they 
receive. The health providers who work in our health care 
system are second to none. They are committed to their 
professions and to the people they serve. 
 
What the council will do is ensure that the system, the 
standards, and the processes are in place that allow health 
providers to do their best work and allow the system to function 
more effectively. 
 
We know that money alone cannot fix the shortcomings in our 
health care system. It is no longer good enough to simply spend 
more money on health care, we need to spend more wisely. 
Health spending must go hand in hand with a broader health 
plan for quality improvement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our government’s action plan for Saskatchewan 
health care and its strategy to create a will ensure that 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1503 

 

Saskatchewan people are getting the best possible health 
outcomes. 
 
The will also ensure that the people of our province are made 
aware of quality improvement initiatives and health issues. 
Saskatchewan citizens want to know about the quality of health 
services in our province and our government is committed to 
providing citizens with this information. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the formation of a Health Quality Council has 
been well received by the public and the health care sector in 
our province. The Health Quality Council Act will provide 
good service to the health care community and the citizens of 
the province for many years into the future. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I move second reading of this Bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to speak 
on the second reading of An Act respecting the Health Quality 
Council. It’s interesting, the minister has laid out a number of 
areas where the Health Quality Council is supposed to improve 
a number of concerns in the health system, of course monitoring 
existing standards in health care in the province and evaluating 
prescription drug practices and drug utilization. 
 
It’s very important that we look at how effective our health care 
system is being used. And we hope that this Quality Council 
will be a step in the right direction as far as that concern. It also 
goes on to say they will implement training and education 
programs and promote research and education, hopefully 
leading to an improvement in the health care system. 
 
I also would like to state that we, we hope that this Act will also 
take into account the perception and reality of poor access to 
health care in rural areas, longer waiting lists in our cities as 
well where people are on waiting lists that quite . . . it seems 
quite unnecessarily, and people that are waiting longer and 
suffering more, waiting for operations and getting their health 
care concerns looked after. 
 
And so I’d like to just restate that we . . . hopefully that this 
Quality Council will look into all those areas and speak on 
behalf of all of Saskatchewan residents, both in urban and rural. 
A big concern is with the hospital closures in the past, that it’s 
just directed more patients to the city hospitals where the 
waiting lists have developed and grown larger and longer. And 
unfortunately health care hasn’t improved in the past. It’s 
actually deteriorated. 
 
So at this time I’d like speak to the stakeholders concerning this 
Act and I’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 42 — The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
move second reading of The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Amendment Act. 
 

Mr. Speaker, there are three issues that are addressed in this 
Act. 
 
The first amendment expands the definition of optometrists, 
chiropractors, and dentists to include them as professional 
corporations under The Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance 
Act. This expanded definition puts these three health 
professions on an equal footing with physicians. 
 
In the year 2000, amendments were made to The Medical 
Profession Act to allow physicians to form professional 
corporations. 
 
In 2001 The Professional Corporations Act extended the same 
right to optometrists, chiropractors, and dentists. And this Act 
will facilitate the billing through the medical services plan for 
insured services. 
 
The second amendment I will put before the House today, Mr. 
Speaker, amends the section in The Saskatchewan Medical Care 
Insurance Act, which allows that monies owed to the medical 
services plan due to a billing error or a reassessment may be 
collected from the practitioners or the professional corporations 
by the Saskatchewan Health. 
 
The third amendment, Mr. Speaker, is to repeal an obsolete 
section dealing with refunds of certain taxes paid to 
municipalities or health boards. This section is no longer 
necessary with the implementation of The Health Services Act, 
effective January 1, 1997. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government is committed to an accessible, 
quality care health system. We will provide leadership to 
making the changes needed to strengthen and sustain this 
system for the future. And it’s for these reasons that we bring 
forward these amendments to this Act today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to move second reading of The 
Saskatchewan Medical Care Insurance Amendment Act. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
42, The Medical Care Insurance Act talks about a couple of 
different things, listening to the minister. Also he talks about 
expanding some of the professions to be able to incorporate, 
which we think is a great idea. You know, they moved it last 
year so that doctors could incorporate. 
 
But any time that you can make the tax system a little bit easier 
for some of these professionals to navigate, and incorporation is 
one way of doing that, allowing a number of the professionals 
to deal with the tax situation we have in the province perhaps a 
little bit easier. There are a number of other benefits for these 
professions to be able to incorporate. 
 
But we think that’s a good idea because, Mr. Speaker, it seems 
like over and over and over again we look at the papers and I 
know there’s many anecdotal, many anecdotal evidence that 
people are leaving our province. And a lot of these 
professionals are leaving our province. And we need to be able 
to keep as many of these people in our province as possible — 
whether it’s a dentist, whether it’s optometrists, doctors, 



1504 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

whatever. And this is one method we think that would help 
keep some of those professionals here. 
 
One of the other areas, the last piece that the minister spoke 
about was the refunds to municipalities and, etc., is going to be 
taken out of the Act. And I think that’s a good idea. If it’s not 
needed, it shouldn’t be there. 
 
Over and over again when I’ve been out in different functions 
in my constituency or different meetings that we’ve had around 
the province, one of the things that people say very, very often 
is the number of loopholes and the number of regulations that 
really don’t need to be there. And I guess this is one that they’re 
just cleaning up the Act a little bit and removing. 
 
So we would think that would be a pretty good idea. But until 
we have the opportunity to consult with a number of the parties 
that are going to be affected by this, I think it’s only fair that we 
would move to adjourn debate on this Bill until the consultation 
has been done. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 48 — The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to rise today to 
introduce the amendments contained in Bill No. 48, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2002. The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act provides the statutory 
basis upon which the Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority regulates gaming and the distribution and 
consumption of alcohol in the province. 
 
This Bill will enhance the Authority’s accountability as a 
regulator, improve business and administrative practices related 
to liquor permits, enhance the authority’s legislative basis for 
action in its role as distributor and regulator of the liquor and 
gaming industries in the province, and support the Authority’s 
role in promoting the socially responsible use of liquor and 
gaming products. 
 
I will begin, Mr. Speaker, with the amendments to the Act that 
will enhance the Authority’s accountability as a regulator. 
 
During the last session a number of issues arose in this House 
with respect to some inconsistencies between The Alcohol and 
Gaming Regulation Act and established policies at the Liquor 
and Gaming Authority, particularly the absolute prohibition in 
the Act against any government employees accepting gifts from 
liquor suppliers and distributors. 
 
(14:45) 
 
Mr. Justice Thomas Wakeling was engaged to investigate the 
situation. Among other findings the Wakeling report clearly 
indicated that, while the Authority’s conflict of interest 
guidelines were quite reasonable, they conflicted with section 
133 of The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act. 
 
In his report, Justice Wakeling indicates, and I quote: 
 

I see section 133 as much too restrictive. It cannot 

reasonably be adhered to in . . . light of existing industry 
and community practices . . . this section should be 
amended to permit a more reasonable and practical 
approach to the problem it is intended to address. 
 
To the extent the guidelines are in conflict with section 
133, they are not valid and cannot support a justification for 
actions prohibited by section 133. They are nonetheless 
quite reasonable, hence an appropriate amendment to The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act should be made at the 
earliest possible date. 

 
Amendments included in this Bill reflect Justice Wakeling’s 
recommendation and are similar to those found in The Public 
Service Act. The Bill also provides regulation-making authority 
to establish a code of conduct and ethical behaviour for 
Authority employees. 
 
The regulations and code of conduct will follow guidance 
provided by Justice Wakeling, allowing for the reasonable 
exchange of gifts and courtesies such as a business lunch. 
Notably the present prohibition against solicitation of gifts will 
be maintained in the regulations and the code of conduct. Once 
the legislation has been amended through this Bill, the 
regulatory changes will be enacted and a code of conduct 
adopted to fully implement Justice Wakeling’s 
recommendations. 
 
A number of legislative amendments will be made to strengthen 
and improve accountability provisions. These include the 
process for registering the boards of directors for 
Saskatchewan’s casinos and restructuring the system of 
registering suppliers of gaming supplies and services and 
non-gaming supplies and services. 
 
In the past, registration was limited primarily to companies that 
supplied equipment and services directly related to gaming. The 
proposed amendments require all suppliers that are significantly 
involved in the gaming industry to be registered regardless of 
whether they supply gaming supplies and services or 
non-gaming supplies and services. Mr. Speaker, this is similar 
to the registration requirements currently in existence in 
Manitoba. A regulatory exception will exclude minor 
contractors so as not to unreasonably increase the red tape 
burden on small-business owners. 
 
The legislative changes introduced today will improve the 
administration and business practices of the Authority. Some of 
these changes are being made in response to concerns expressed 
by our stakeholders with respect to transfers of liquor permits 
and with respect to liquor permit eligibility provisions. 
 
One amendment will reduce red tape for a small group of 
businesses with the creation of a permit transfer process. In 
cases where a business changes its legal form of ownership 
without changing the people involved, a shortened process for 
transferring the liquor permit will be available. For example, the 
process would be available when a sole proprietor incorporates 
and the sole proprietor remains the sole director and shareholder 
of a new corporation. 
 
An additional amendment will clarify liquor permit eligibility 
provisions. The Act lists categories of entities that are eligible 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1505 

 

for commercial liquor permits. However the current Act does 
not recognize some forms of businesses such as personal 
partnerships and co-operatives. In order to meet the current 
eligibility requirements, some applicants must change their 
structure to come within one of the categories of applicants 
permitted under the Act. This places an unnecessary 
administrative burden on those particular applicants. This Bill 
will add new categories of entities that may be eligible for 
commercial liquor permits, including personal partnerships and 
co-operatives. 
 
As noted, Mr. Speaker, these amendments are consistent with 
the government’s aim to reform regulations and cut through the 
red tape for businesses in all sectors of the province’s economy. 
I am certain, Mr. Speaker, that these are the kind of changes 
that will be welcomed in the hospitality industry. 
 
Finally, and perhaps most importantly, this government is 
concerned with the socially responsible use of both liquor and 
gaming products. The Authority participates in and sponsors 
programs that promote the responsible consumption and use of 
alcohol and gaming products. These include problem gambling 
awareness initiatives, server education programs, the provincial 
designated driver program, and initiatives to raise awareness of 
the dangers of drinking alcohol during pregnancy. 
 
This Bill will enhance the Authority’s ability to promote these 
activities. It will specifically include a provision within the 
legislation for the Authority to support these activities which 
have increasingly become a significant part of its role as a 
socially responsible regulator of these products. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are also a number of housekeeping 
amendments included in this legislation and I would be pleased 
to discuss them or provide any answers to any questions about 
them later in the debate on this very important Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to move that Bill No. 48, The 
Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
read a second time. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Act to amend 
The Alcohol and Gaming Regulation Act brings up a number of 
concerns and questions and the minister has touched on some of 
them. I guess the question is, has the amendments really looked 
after the concerns that the citizens have concerning many areas 
as far as alcohol and gaming? 
 
The first point the minister spoke about is the conflict of interest 
and the gifts that were allowed . . . the employees of Liquor and 
Gaming were allowed to accept in the past. And it was through 
the Saskatchewan . . . with the official opposition that this 
concern and problem was highlighted. And we certainly have 
many concerns in that area. And as we noted in last year’s 
sitting that there is many problems with how the government 
was handling this. And so it’s through the opposition party’s 
work and concerns that this was finally brought forward. 
 
The minister’s concerns about being socially responsible are 
very valid, and I think we all agree that government of the day 
has a responsibility to look after that area and try to prevent as 
many fetal alcohol . . . prevent as many concerns around the 
fetal alcohol syndrome as possible and make people aware of 

the serious health problems around that whole issue as well as 
just the abuse of alcohol in general. And it is a responsibility of 
society and the government to look after many of those 
concerns. 
 
The minister spoke about the liquor permits and that’s a huge 
concern in many areas. Any group or individual wanting to get 
a liquor licence now, it seems there are many restrictions and 
regulations there now. And I hope this streamlines the process. 
 
I know in my constituency and other areas that people normally, 
well, basically, would like to buy the liquor permit within their 
trading area where they normally purchase other items and they 
are being forced to go to other communities where they don’t 
normally travel or don’t normally shop to buy their liquor 
licence. And of course, they’re forced to buy their liquor there 
rather than the community that they’re holding the event in or 
their local community where they would prefer to buy their 
liquor and their liquor licence. 
 
So hopefully in the debates to follow, that many of these 
concerns will be looked after because that’s certainly a big item 
in the minds of the people of Saskatchewan around this whole 
area. 
 
So at this time I would like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 37 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 37 — The Medical 
Profession Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to stand today to 
take part in the debate about The Medical Profession Act. When 
we had an opportunity to look at this Bill we could see that 
there was many different issues that were brought forward 
within this Act and it’s touching many different aspects in many 
of the professions within the medical area. We are dealing with 
podiatry, with physicians’ incorporation, and discipline by the 
College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this Act makes it legal now for podiatric surgeons 
to practise in Saskatchewan. This is an issue that has been 
brought forward a number of times and is something that is of 
growing importance in the province. When we look at the 
treatment of saving limbs in Saskatchewan, when we know the 
prevalence of diabetes in Saskatchewan, this issue is becoming 
even more important and our caucus supports moves to allow 
greater access of podiatry services in our province. 
 
The Act also puts surgeons . . . podiatric surgeons under the 
regulations of the College of Surgeons and Physicians and this 
. . . the ones that have no impact on non-surgical podiatry. 
 
This Act also gives podiatry surgeons title protection; they’ll be 
regulated by the college which shall set out their scope and 



1506 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

practice through bylaws. 
 
In the terms of psychiatry, the Act is being changed to put more 
emphasis on the qualifications of a psychiatrist when it comes 
to deciding whether to license him in Saskatchewan. We know 
that the current Act sets out that a psychiatrist that is trained in 
certain areas can be licensed here. The amendment deletes 
references to specific countries, and refers to the training and 
qualifications that the psychiatrist has. 
 
Physician incorporation is also being tweaked in this Act. The 
incorporating provisions are being expanded so that earnings 
made by locums and other residents can be included under the 
corporation. 
 
And the disciplinary powers of the college is being expanded to 
include doctors who have stopped practising in Saskatchewan 
for up to two years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we talk about the whole area of podiatry and 
surgery, we know that there is need for some movement in this 
area. A year or two ago, we remember there was a case of a 
Saskatchewan resident who had been trained in this area in the 
US (United States) and wanted to return to Saskatchewan to 
practise. Under current regulations it was impossible for him to 
do that. 
 
And we know that this Act does not deal with the overall 
practice of podiatry. It has been traditionally . . . and the way it 
has been traditionally performed. It deals with the issue of foot 
surgeons and for the first time puts in place regulations that 
allow podiatric surgery in Saskatchewan. In a place where 
there’s a real shortage of doctors, any movement that allows 
more doctors in our province seems to be positive, and there is a 
lot of need for this type of treatment. 
 
However, we do recognize that on this issue there is no 
agreement on how it should be undertaken. We understand that 
the College of Physicians and Surgeons and the Saskatchewan 
Medical Association are fundamentally in disagreement on how 
the whole topic of allowing podiatric surgeons to practise in our 
province. 
 
Both the college and the SMA (Saskatchewan Medical 
Association) are highly respected bodies, and when it comes to 
commenting on issues regarding our health care systems . . . 
and so it doesn’t make our job as legislators easy when these 
two very respected bodies don’t agree. But we have to 
recognize that this disagreement does exist, so I want to outline 
some of the SMA’s concerns for the record. 
 
To summarize, Mr. Speaker, the SMA disagrees with the parts 
of the legislation that will put podiatric surgeons under the 
regulatory authority of the College of Physicians and Surgeons. 
The SMA believes that by putting this new type of practice 
under the authority of the college it weakens the concept of 
self-regulations as a fundamental precept for professional 
practice in Saskatchewan and Canada. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a few minutes ago we heard the minister 
introduce a Bill on EMS and he talked about self-regulation and 

the importance of it, so this seems to be going against what the 
minister had spoke about just a few minutes ago. 
 
The SMA believes that a decision to expand the college’s scope 
of regulation to podiatry is a fundamental and significant 
decision that should only be undertaken after a lot of broad 
consultations. The SMA also suggests that there are other roads 
that could have been travelled in dealing with this issue. One 
suggestion was that podiatry could have been included under 
another Act. They also state that if this is not possible, 
podiatrists could be licensed and regulated by representatives 
from another province. 
 
In bringing these issues up, our caucus is not suggesting that 
one method is the correct one, only that there are options that 
have been put forward and rejected by the government. When 
we discuss this Bill in committee we will certainly be asking the 
minister to explain why he chose one option above the other 
one. 
 
On the other side of the coin, the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons also supplied the opposition with a letter of support 
for the Bill and the changes it makes in terms of podiatry. While 
the college was initially reluctant to undertake this regulatory 
authority, they have agreed, after consultation with the minister, 
that it would be in the best public interest. Again, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re wondering what type of advice the minister gave to the 
college to assure them that now this is the best road to travel. 
 
Given the changes in terms of podiatry in the recent years, 
changes that have seen much more invasive procedures, 
particularly by those trained in the US, this form of treatment 
and surgery does belong under their auspices. The traditional 
podiatry practice which really does not include surgery cannot 
regulate this because their practices are very different. 
 
According to the college, the work of podiatric surgeons is 
much more akin to that of orthopedic surgeons and plastic 
surgeons, who are regulated by the college. Mr. Speaker, it 
should also be noted that their college also regulates podiatric 
surgery in Alberta. 
 
So clearly we have a very large difference of opinion on these 
and how surgeons should be regulated. The one thing everyone 
can agree on though is the valuable service the podiatrists offer 
and how our province needs access to their service. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I should also mention that the SMA has come 
forward with concerns about the provision of this Bill that deals 
with greater powers of discipline for the college when it comes 
to doctors no longer registered to practise here in the province. 
They have no problem with the concept, but they feel that more 
work has to be done in the areas of notification of former 
Saskatchewan doctors who are under the threat of such 
disciplinary measures. 
 
The SMA has stated support for the provision that allows the 
college to apply sanctions in Saskatchewan imposed in other 
provinces, but they have raised concerns with the fact that they 
don’t have identical sanctions. 
 
So these are the areas that we as the opposition want to explore 
more closely, and clearly we can’t make everyone happy. But at 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1507 

 

the same time we want to hear from the minister as to why he 
has made the decisions in the way he has. 
 
The Bill also deals with the provisions dealing with psychiatry 
and doctors’ incorporation. That does seem to have strong 
support but we’re going to need clarification on some of these 
matters as well. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, while we do overall support the Bill, we are 
waiting for more information from other jurisdictions. So at this 
time I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 39 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Nilson that Bill No. 39 — The 
Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 39 dealing 
with The Prescription Drugs Amendment Act is something that 
we have been waiting for for awhile. It’s interesting that a 
certain part of the issues dealing with prescription drugs is 
singled out when we know that overall The Health Information 
Protection Act hasn’t even been proclaimed. 
 
So while the umbrella isn’t there, the government is bringing 
forward another Act that’s dealing specifically with prescription 
drugs. 
 
The main objective of course of this Act is to avoid the practise 
of over-prescribing and over-dispensing of drugs, and this came 
about because of the inquest a year or so ago and it’s something 
that we recognize the importance of. 
 
There were a number of other recommendations that were 
brought forward through that inquest and I think it’s something 
that the government should be looking at at this time as well. 
 
One of the most important areas that we haven’t heard the 
government talk about is an area dealing with people that 
actually have problems with drugs and the home that they 
would need so that they can get the help they need to get off of 
their addiction. We recognize that there’s a lot more that could 
be done. The proper detox facility is just one of the other issues 
that we’re waiting for government to deal with. 
 
We are encouraged that the NDP is actually committed to 
consult with stakeholders in this area. That shows that they have 
done a thorough consultation. That’s something that we don’t 
always see and we’re pleased with their work in this area. 
 
But one of the big concerns that we have about this Bill is the 
whole issue of privacy. Privacy and confidentiality has become 
a very serious issue and we’d hate to see the wrong kind of 
information fall in the wrong hands. We note that the NDP has 
gone to great lengths to ensure that privacy will not be an issue 
regarding these amendments. But following the last week’s turn 
of events, we’re always a little bit concerned. 
 
Again we know that The Health Information Protection Act 

hasn’t been proclaimed but, like so many Acts the government 
has brought in and so far has not proclaimed, we’re wondering 
if this one is ever going to see the light of day. 
 
We’re wondering why pharmacists and clinics and doctors and 
hospitals . . . if they’re going to be able to legally apply this 
legislation. It’s interesting to note that another one of the 
recommendations that we really do need to see come forward is 
the whole idea of the detox centre and helping people out that 
have actually gone down the road of overusing some of these 
drugs and the serious effects that they have in the province. 
 
Today we heard about the effect of drugs on young people in 
this province and we know that the government has a big issue 
to deal with. And I think that this Act is one of the small ways 
that we could be talking about it. 
 
The entire application of the legislation speaks to a . . . 
effectiveness of SHIN, the Saskatchewan Health Information 
Network. We understand that the government has spent about 
$50 million on this area of government and we have not seen — 
but we need to be seeing — is this a good use of our taxpayers’ 
dollars? Or are we really just going to be setting up another 
SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company)? 
 
We’re wondering about the reliability of SHIN and the 
increased pressure to ensure privacy and confidentiality. Overall 
we can appreciate the intent and purpose of this Bill, and we . . . 
but we believe there’s further consultation required. So at this 
time we’d like to move to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Chair: — Order. Before the committee begins, there’s a 
special guest that the Chair would like to introduce. Is leave 
granted to introduce the guest? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much. In the Speaker’s gallery 
is someone members of the all-party committee on tobacco 
control will recognize as a presenter in Saskatoon a number of 
years ago. He’s also known as my son, David, and he’s just at 
the back there and he’s in town for a band concert. So I’d ask 
all hon. members to welcome David. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Saskatchewan Water Corporation 

Vote 50 
 
Subvote (SW01) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman, 
and also welcome to David in the Assembly. 
 
Right to my immediate right is our president, Stuart Kramer, 



1508 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

and directly behind Stuart is Tom Gehlen and Tom Gehlen is 
the vice-president of utility and engineering Operations. And 
directly behind me is Wayne Dybvig, and Wayne is the 
vice-president of water resource and infrastructure 
management. And to the extreme right of President Kramer is 
Terry Hymers, who is the corporate comptroller. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. And good afternoon 
to the minister and his officials in attendance here today. 
 
We recall with some surprise an announcement made earlier 
this spring by the minister responsible for Sask Water at the 
time about the termination of the Meridian dam project in terms 
of the idea, the study that had been initiated. And I must say 
that the announcement came with some suddenness and some 
surprise, frankly. 
 
And what I would like to ask the minister this afternoon, Mr. 
Chairman, is whether the minister would be prepared to tell us 
the total cost of the study. I know there were some estimates 
made public earlier on about what the cost would be. But can 
the minister today tell us the total cost of the Meridian dam 
study that was undertaken last year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chairman. 
Just to point out that the study cost was 100,000. Twenty-five 
thousand of that was paid by Saskatchewan and Alberta paid 
75,000. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, if I recall correctly when the topic 
of a study of this type was introduced, the mandate for the 
engineering firm that undertook the study was pretty clear. It 
was outlined as finding out what questions needed to be asked 
in order to complete a larger study. So what we were going to 
get for $100,000 was an attempt by this engineering firm to 
visit various communities in Alberta and Saskatchewan, and 
appeal to the people of those communities and just find out 
what types of issues the individuals in those communities felt 
needed further investigation. 
 
A hundred thousand dollars seemed like a small amount for a 
study of any significance but that was a very clear mandate. 
Could you tell us whether you got your money’s worth? Did 
you get $100,000 worth of questions raised by those public 
meetings in the communities visited by the engineer or the 
consultant in Alberta and Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. I just 
want to point out that of the $100,000 cost of the study, of 
course Saskatchewan only paid $25,000, and we sincerely can’t 
speak on behalf of the province of Alberta in terms of the value 
for their money. 
 
But I would point out that the mandate, the joint terms of 
reference if you will that was entered into on this agreement 
between Saskatchewan and Alberta — what we wanted to do 
and we agreed to do — was do an accurate cost analysis as well 
as to look at how much land could be irrigated. 
 
So we looked at the analysis of the feasibility in terms of the 

cost-benefit, and the conclusion was — and it was joint — that 
the cost was three times the benefit. And that’s one of the 
reasons why the Meridian dam was not something that had 
further study attached to it. 
 
So clearly it was a lot more than asking the area folks what 
questions or what concerns they had. There was a thorough 
cost-benefit analysis that was done. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister. Mr. 
Minister, that’s a clearly different understanding, a significantly 
different understanding than was presented to the people who 
attended those public hearings. 
 
I was at some of those public hearings and the gentleman that 
was leading that series of hearings indicated that the purpose of 
the hearings was to determine the questions that people wanted 
answered as a result of a larger feasibility study. At no time did 
they give us any indication that the purpose of this $100,000 
study was to come up with a clear economic benefit analysis for 
the proposed project. 
 
And I guess out of the $100,000 that you said the study cost, 
can you tell us specifically what the cost of the hearings were? 
What proportion of that $100,000 spent on the consultants’ fees 
were directly related to the public hearings that were held in 
roughly a half a dozen communities in Alberta and 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Our early guesstimate on what the 
public hearing component of the overall cost would be, would 
be roughly a quarter of the cost. And don’t hold me to that 
figure because we’ll get the very specific information for you. 
 
And the reason why we can’t give you specific information is 
we don’t know what the Alberta side consultation costs were 
that was associated with the study. So that’s one of the reasons 
why we can’t be specific. This is basically a ballpark figure of 
roughly a quarter of the cost. 
 
And again, what the costs were on the Alberta side, we don’t 
have that information but we’ll get as best we can a ballpark 
estimate of what the public hearings costs were associated with 
this overall study. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, I think just from a general 
information point of view we’re all reasonably familiar with the 
cost of these types of megaprojects and the amount of money 
that is committed to studying the viability of such projects. I 
guess what I . . . where I’m going with this line of questioning, 
Mr. Minister, is that we have $100,000 study, $25,000 of which 
were committed to the public hearings roughly — and I’ll 
accept that as a fair representation of the cost. So $75,000 was 
used to determine that we had a potential $5 billion dam 
project, a cost associated with this megaproject, and quite 
possibly a return of only about half of that amount of money. 
 
It seems to me, given what I’m familiar with in other major dam 
projects, that $75,000 is not a significant enough of an amount 
to come up with a conclusion. We’ve got a very small amount 
of money arriving at a very big dollar amount conclusion. And 
I’m wondering how thorough a study you could have for 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1509 

 

$75,000 on a five . . . potentially $5 billion project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — What I’d point out to the member 
opposite is that what we mustn’t forget is that this was a joint 
effort between Alberta and Saskatchewan. So it was a 
conclusion made by both parties. 
 
So this is not as if Saskatchewan come along and said we want 
to devalue this whole process. We did have a partner and when 
asked . . . (inaudible) . . . the partner put more money in. And if 
you want to call it a pre-feasibility study to do a very rough 
analysis of what is necessary, then certainly two parties would 
have to agree to this. 
 
So I would point out that both agreed — Alberta and 
Saskatchewan agreed — that the project was not viable. And 
certainly $100,000 in terms of the significance of the overall 
project may not seem to be a huge amount, but what I would 
point out is that there is ongoing work that Sask Water does 
through the Prairie provinces water management board, in 
consultation with other provinces, Manitoba, Alberta, 
Saskatchewan, and the federal government on various water 
agreements. So there’s been a lot of relationship and a lot of 
studies over the years that talk about a number of issues. 
 
So we in Saskatchewan, certainly we value that relationship and 
we participate through that committee and a number of 
subcommittees. So there’s a lot of work that goes on in the 
background to ensure that Saskatchewan’s interests are 
maintained and that this 1969 water agreement, all the 
particulars are understood. 
 
So this is not really . . . This is a pre-feasibility on one project 
for one specific area, while we . . . I can assure the member that 
we have a number of other areas that we have constant meetings 
on; and clearly Alberta and Saskatchewan, both provinces agree 
that this is not a very viable project and therefore we did not go 
any further than spending the 100,000. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, to you 
through the Chair, the last major dam project in Alberta, I 
believe, was the Oldman River dam, and it was nowhere near as 
costly as the $5 billion estimate we’ve got for the Meridian dam 
project, but I’m sure that they spent considerably larger sums 
than $75,000 to determine the viability of that project. 
 
And I think that from your own perspective, the familiarity you 
have with the North, you would know from your own 
experience that no major project of any kind is undertaken in 
northern Saskatchewan with a feasibility study so vastly 
underfunded. It usually takes significantly more resources to 
come up with the viability of a project, the economic feasibility 
of a project of a major proportion. 
 
So I guess where I’m going with this now is that we have heard 
the Minister of the Environment from Alberta, Lorne Taylor, 
talk about Alberta’s urgent need to retain more water; looking 
at a variety of ways of holding back the 50 per cent water that 
they are guaranteed from the sources that run through both 
Alberta and Saskatchewan. 
 
Given his recent pronunciations on that subject, some of which 
have come just recently and much after the Meridian dam idea 

was scuttled, it would seem to me that something just doesn’t 
add up. 
 
So I guess what I’m asking, Mr. Minister, is: is the cost, is the 
potential cost of this project realistic in the first instance? And 
secondly, is there maybe something else at play here? Is the 
cost of the Meridian dam project the real reason why the 
Alberta government beat an unseemly retreat on this particular 
subject, in view of their well-stated desire to hold back more 
water? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for the question. 
And certainly I would point out that this was a pre-feasibility 
study initiated by Alberta and their efforts to try and retain as 
much water, as much water as they possibly can. 
 
And I go back to my earlier comments that Sask Water is 
involved and the province of Saskatchewan is involved with 
this Prairie provinces water management board. And we take 
that role very seriously because we do want to protect our water 
source, and we certainly want to protect that access to that 
water. 
 
And if the costs and the benefits had been closer, it may warrant 
further expenditures on feasibility. But the conclusions were 
about for every $3 of costs, we had $1 of benefits. And both 
parties, Saskatchewan and Alberta, agreed that this 
pre-feasibility cost clearly showed that the project was not 
feasible. 
 
Now I’ll make my earlier comments about how important it is 
that we protect the water source. Alberta initiated the project. 
We participated to make sure that we are fully aware of what is 
going on. And that’s very important for people to understand. 
 
And I’m glad you’re asking these questions because many 
people will say, well, why would you put money into studying a 
proposal being forwarded by a neighbouring province? Well 
because we have this water agreement that we have to pay 
attention to, and we also have to make sure that we commit to 
processes to determine what kind of projects are being proposed 
on the Alberta side to make sure it does not affect our Master 
Agreement of 1969. 
 
Now we view that role as something that’s very clear, and we 
know that major projects are what Alberta is trying to do to 
recover or to hold back some of their water. Because right now 
they haven’t got the capacity to hold back as much water as 
they would like. We are staying very firm that we have 50 per 
cent of the water flows from Alberta, and it’s right across the 
Alberta/Saskatchewan border to ensure that we have our 50 per 
cent. It’s a 1969 Master Agreement. 
 
And the relationship has been very good between Alberta and 
Saskatchewan in terms of keeping us well informed. 
 
And as I mentioned before, time and time again, if you have 
any evidence or any theories that you would like to share with 
us, that’ll certainly give us some insight. But I can assure you 
that it is well within our practice and our effort in Sask Water to 
make sure that we protect Saskatchewan’s interests and we take 
that role very, very seriously. 
 



1510 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

(15:30) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister, there’s no 
question about whether or not you’re taking your role seriously. 
The question is what is Alberta looking at doing that might 
impact us? At least with the Meridian dam project being so 
close to the border, Saskatchewan did have an opportunity to 
share in those benefits in a very immediate way. The border 
was the boundary, virtually, for that dam and we would have 
immediate access. 
 
Now given the fact that Alberta has said they’re running 
seriously short of water and if they don’t retain more of the 
available water for their own purposes, their growth in that . . . 
what is now becoming an industrial corridor between Edmonton 
and Calgary is going to become completely stymied. They don’t 
want that. 
 
So obviously if the Meridian dam project isn’t going to work, 
they’re going to be looking at alternatives. And if your 
relationship with the Government of Alberta is as good as you 
say it is, maybe you’d be able to enunciate for us today what 
some of the other alternatives might be that the province of 
Alberta is looking at. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — One of the things I think is very 
important to point out . . . And we sincerely appreciate your 
comments of the Meridian dam being close to the 
Saskatchewan/Alberta borders to make sure we’re able to 
monitor what goes on back and forth. I think that certainly has 
merit in the sense that we’re able to physically see what is being 
planned on the Alberta side on a day-to-day basis, whereas if 
they have a proposed dam or other reservoirs and so on and so 
forth further in the interior of Alberta, that perhaps may have 
some impact. 
 
But I’d point out earlier that the relationship that we have with 
Alberta has, to date, has been good. But it’s much like a chess 
match, if you will, as we watch very carefully the moves that 
they make. And we are heavily involved. And what we have to 
ensure that there isn’t a checkmate on this game of chess — and 
the relationship is good; it’s one of respect and certainly 
committee work and so on and so forth — is that they do not try 
and checkmate the 1969 Master Agreement on water rights. 
And that’s what we hold very close to our chest as something 
that we feel is very important in this game of chess, if you will. 
 
Now what I don’t want to do is to show this as an adversarial 
relationship, is that it’s always important to neutralize and to 
defend. And that’s part of the role of the game of chess as you 
may know, and we want to make sure that we continue holding 
the 1969 agreement as part of our arsenal, if you will, to ensure 
that there is good protection of the waters needed for 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I also point out that Alberta themselves . . . Albertans 
themselves are acutely aware of some of the challenges 
environmentally when you have a whole pile of transfers of 
water from one watershed to another. And I know that they are 
aware that some of these plans are being undertaken, and they 
do also have some very good leadership on the environmental 
front and certainly on the political front as well. 
 

So we are very aware of what is happening on their side but we 
don’t speak for Alberta. We certainly speak for Saskatchewan 
and we are certainly going to stand up for Saskatchewan’s 
rights. And the 1969 Master Agreement gives us a huge bat 
which we will certainly use to protect our interests. 
 
That being said, we don’t want to heighten the . . . you know, 
our relationship between the provinces. We want to continue 
working because so far it’s worked out well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Deputy Chairman, I guess I’m not as 
concerned about what Alberta might do to shortchange us. 
What I am concerned about is getting the full benefit of 
anything we might do for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
So if there’s an opportunity in the future to look at a joint 
project of some sort . . . I don’t know if there are other rivers or 
other waterways that are nearly as beneficial to this type of 
project as the South Saskatchewan and the Meridian dam. But if 
there were, would the province of Saskatchewan be prepared to 
look at investing in something of that nature for the benefit of 
Saskatchewan people? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — What I would point out that would add 
a bit of optimism to the whole scenario is the rains. As you may 
know, it’s been threatening rain here for the last few hours and I 
can tell you the great news: it’s just raining really well out 
there. So that’s always important to point out that — the 
moisture levels — and the drought conditions has absolutely 
everybody worried about water quality and certainly the supply 
of water. 
 
But I’ll point out to the question, absolutely, yes. One of the 
examples that we would use of course is the Meridian dam. It 
would go through the same processes where we’d look at the 
pre-feasibility processes. Perhaps a grander feasibility process 
to see what benefits this could have for both provinces. 
 
But I’ll point out that while some work was done in Coal Lake a 
number of years ago, Alberta was prepared to invest into this 
feasibility process to see the impacts downstream, at the 
Saskatchewan border. And certainly, we participated in that 
process as well. But clearly at that point, with Coal Lake, we 
decided was not a good project. The feasibility was not there 
again. 
 
So I’d point out, you know, to the member and the question 
that, absolutely, we’d look at any kind of agreements with 
Alberta provided — and I underline, provided, by about 10 
times here — that Saskatchewan’s interests are maintained. And 
the 1969 water agreement that we have, we’re holding that very 
close to our chest. 
 
And again, I would point out right now that drought conditions 
in southwestern Saskatchewan, and certainly in Alberta as well 
has everybody clearly concerned. And we have to pay extra 
attention and be very diligent in some of these agreements and 
some of our work. And this is what is being undertaken now by 
Sask Water. 
 
And as always, if there’s more things that we could learn and 
more processes that could benefit both parties, of course we’re 
prepared to look at that. 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1511 

 

But again, as I pointed out, it’s raining really hard out there. It’s 
wonderful, and we hope it lasts for another week or so at the 
very least and warms up for a week and rains again for another 
week. So that’s what we’re hoping happens but, of course, we 
don’t control that. We just wish that to happen. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Well I’m glad it’s raining in Alberta hard. And 
I just hope that it starts raining here really hard for very long . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Well I just phoned back home and 
it’s not raining there yet. 
 
Just to follow up on the question of my colleague there, I 
understand that you and Alberta probably don’t have any joint 
. . . other than the Meridian dam looking at some projects. But 
is Alberta considering some projects right now which might 
impact on Saskatchewan waterways that you know of, that 
Alberta’s possibly looking at some or doing some studies on 
some projects that may impact Saskatchewan waterways right 
now? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. I would just point out that, as you’re probably aware, 
right now Alberta is holding public consultations to see what 
Alberta people want. And what I don’t believe is what they’re 
doing is to look at the stage of proposing projects yet. 
 
But what I’ll point out is very important, in this game of chess, 
is that we stand up in Saskatchewan and we say we want to 
protect our water interests. And we work very closely with the 
Alberta government in this game of mutual chess to make sure 
things are happening and happening fairly. The 1969 
agreement, as I mentioned before, is something we hold very 
close to our hearts as something that we’re going to go to the 
bank with. 
 
But I also point out is in this game that we want to make sure — 
I don’t want to call it a game because it is a partnership 
agreement — but that we also let the people of Saskatchewan 
know that we are aware as a province — and we wish to share 
that with them — that Alberta right now, they have a 
legislation, the Alberta government does, that prevents transfers 
of water from one watershed to another, you know, and that 
legislation is there. And if there’s any kind of diversions of 
rivers or lakes or streams, then they’d have to obviously repeal 
that Act. And that’ll be a first hint that something is coming 
down the road. 
 
But the other thing that’s very important, and I want to 
commend the environmental movement on this, is that Alberta 
does have a very strong environmental movement. And they are 
acutely aware of some of the challenges that are happening in 
the province and they really stay well informed. So that’s also 
another strong aspect that the Saskatchewan people can rely on. 
 
As well, there’s a resistance from other areas of Alberta, in 
particular northern Alberta, where they feel that while the 
drought is something that people don’t want to minimize in 
southwestern Alberta, there is some concerns of a radically 
changing ecosystems or diverting rivers and lakes and having 
this huge infrastructure put in place to hold back water at a cost 
of probably billions of dollars and so on and so forth. That they 
are also saying well, we don’t want to minimize the drought but 

be careful here, don’t radically change ecosystems on us 
because that’s not what this is about. The drought may be just a 
process of nature. It may take us some time to get over the 
drought but be very careful, the environment is quite important. 
 
So if you factor in what Alberta themselves and the hoops and 
the hurdles that they have to go as well . . . will have to go 
through as well, and factor in the fact that we would be acutely 
aware of what’s going on on that side, factor in the fact that we 
have this 1969 Master Agreement, factor in the fact that if 
there’s any kind of proposal we’re going to be intimately 
involved, factor in the fact that the people of Saskatchewan, the 
public of Saskatchewan, will be acutely aware of what’s 
happening, factor in the cost, and factor in all the historical 
projects like Coal Lake, the Meridian dam, then one can see that 
there is a lot of work ahead of anybody trying to do something 
radical to change the water flow rights to the province. 
 
And again, you look at the drought situation now, it just 
certainly heightens the awareness. And there’s nothing wrong 
with awareness and making sure that Saskatchewan protects her 
interests when it comes to water rights that flow from Alberta 
through the Saskatchewan and on to Manitoba. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Following with that 
agreement, I would take it then we have the same agreement 
with Manitoba. Would . . . How much flow do we have to pass 
on to Manitoba? And are we passing on our full allotment or are 
we holding . . . or are we letting more pass into Manitoba? 
Could you kind of enlighten me a bit on that agreement how it 
works with Manitoba? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The agreement, as I mentioned before, 
Alberta is obligated to transfer 50 per cent over to us, and in 
turn we have to transfer 50 per cent over to Manitoba, and that’s 
kind of the basis of the agreement that we’ve had in place since 
1969. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Going off in a little 
different direction, I will go back to Last Mountain Lake. You 
. . . the city of Regina I believe applies to you for a permit to put 
water into the water system. Have they discharged more water 
in the last year or two years than they normally put in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Just to point out, just for your 
information, more good news in terms of the rain. It is now 
pelting down and that is something that is always very 
important. And yes, absolutely, we wish we could get rain all 
over the place. But now it’s pelting down nicely so that 
certainly gives us some cause, you know, to be happy. 
 
What I would point out is that the volumes that the city here 
would be letting loose into the system is quite similar over the 
years. There is no increase. The volumes have remained 
consistent. 
 
Regina treats their effluent at a tertiary level which is one of the 
highest levels. They have one of the best manners in which they 
treat their effluent. This effluent is tested and it meets all the 
requirement for treating, you know, all the effluent in the 
province at that level. 



1512 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

I would point out that one of the most important things that we 
have to be very careful of here is that, as I mentioned earlier in 
question period a couple of weeks ago, is that every town and 
village and city on some of the river systems in the province 
often releases treated effluent into the rivers. So one town lives 
downstream from one city and one city lives downstream from 
another city. For example, Saskatoon would live . . . Or sorry, 
North Battleford would live downtown from Edmonton . . . or 
downstream, sorry. 
 
So it’s important that as we look at the manners in which we 
allow some of the effluent enter some of our rivers and streams, 
it has to be treated, it has to be tested, and it has to meet all the 
requirements, which in this case Regina does. 
 
Now I would also point out that if you operate your water 
treatment system to its optimal level as well as operate your 
waste water treatment system to its optimal level, then you 
wouldn’t have any problems. So that’s one of the points that we 
want to make, is that it’s very important that we follow the rules 
and regulations. 
 
And Regina has not increased their discharge. They have treated 
their effluent. It’s clearly treated. It meets all the requirements 
and they test it on a regular basis. And I think over the process 
of a number of years it has been consistent volumes that have 
been let go. And clearly, as we mentioned before, optimize your 
operation of your waste water plant and your water treatment 
plant and certainly some of our water challenges in the province 
will certainly be lessened. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Have you . . . I take it 
you’re putting more water into Last Mountain Lake this year 
than last year, would be one question I would ask you? 
 
Another one is talking about, since irrigation is still under Sask 
Water, a town in my constituency, Davidson, also irrigates with 
sewage. And I was looking up some statistics here — Moose 
Jaw I think does 2,400 acres. Did Sask Water ever work with 
the city of Regina to see about irrigating out of there instead of 
putting that into the river systems? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much for that question. 
That’s a very good question. And as far as we know, Regina has 
not explored irrigation. And Sask Water is acutely aware of the 
. . . some of the benefits of effluent irrigation. And in fact Sask 
Water has 31 effluent irrigation projects in Saskatchewan. So 
we do support irrigation in the Sask Water Corporation. 
 
But I think when the city looks at that possibility, it would 
require a very large land area and expenses will certainly enter 
into the . . . into the costs. So these are some of the things I 
think we have to look at. 
 
And I would point out Regina has certainly done a tremendous 
amount of work. They should be commended for the manner in 
which they have not only managed their water supply but they 
certainly also have set some very good standards and practices 
in their waste water treatment. And of course we in SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management) and 
certainly we in Sask Water continue to work with them to make 
sure that testing is there and all the regulations are followed. I 
think that that goes without saying nowadays. 

But the other thing that they have done as well is they have 
brought the awareness level up of the average city resident, 
where they’ve also asked them to conserve water. And I’m 
going to get the stats here in a few minutes but this will 
certainly explain and explain to a lot of people out there exactly 
what is happening when we talk about Regina not adding to the 
problem but in fact solving some of the challenges that are out 
there. 
 
And I would point out from an article of today, Wednesday, 
May 22, and it’s a viewpoint and the article headline reads, 
“Good to the last drop.” And what they’re making reference to 
there of course is the quality of the city’s water. 
 
But more important is the report here says, quote: 
 

. . . consumption in Regina declined by 33.2 litres per 
person per day over the five-year period. 
 
However, the more-than 380 litres of water used per person 
per day by (the) Reginans is still way above the Canadian 
average of 335 litres a day. 

 
So there’s good progress being made and greater progress will 
be made in the future. So we would point out that, you know, 
the city has certainly done their part — the water quality is 
there, the effluent is being regularly treated and meets all the 
requirements. They’re looking at conservation of water. So 
there is somewhat of a success story to be told. 
 
And certainly as technology moves forward and as better 
practices are understood, and perhaps if more inexpensive 
options are available, that we always must be diligent of trying 
to make sure that we treat our effluent as best we can. And as 
these practices become more cost affordable or more available, 
then we would be diligent and continue working to try and put 
those measures in place. 
 
So these are things that we still have to work on. And certainly 
as I pointed out, Sask Water Corporation is keenly aware of 
some of the options that may be developing, but cost is always a 
factor and many communities are doing a lot of good work. 
And Regina is one of them that has co-operated fully. And 
certainly as time goes on, that co-operation will be counted on, 
and hopefully better practices, technology, and better means to 
treat water and make it cleaner water is always encouraged. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Talking about water 
quality, will Sask Water be going to the public meeting in 
Regina Beach on Monday evening? Will you be there or will 
some representatives of your department be there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well certainly at the public meeting we 
will have officials from Sask Water there, so I can assure them 
that the Sask Water officials will be there. 
 
And the Regina Beach people can rest assured that if the 
minister could be there and not stuck in the Assembly here 
making sure we keep you folks accountable and certainly make 
sure we have the numbers in this Assembly . . . You know, if I 
can take five of you with me, I certainly will go. But, you know, 
sometimes you guys hide in the bush on nights so I want to 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1513 

 

make sure that I’m here. And that’s one of the reasons why we 
would be unable to make it. 
 
But I can assure the residents that we will have Sask Water 
officials there. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Thank you. And I 
was going to . . . I will extend an invitation that you can ride out 
with me so that we’re side by side, so you don’t have to worry 
about the numbers changing in the House if you would like to 
come out. Because I believe I’ll be coming out there. 
 
Just getting back to one quick question on the irrigation. Are 
there currently any studies ongoing or completed that identify 
sewage water as a dryland option? And what would the average 
cost of sewage water irrigation be opposed to traditional 
methods of disposal and treatment? 
 
(16:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Well I think that’s not a very good 
question, and I would point out that the cost of using treated 
effluent for irrigation as opposed to other methods . . . what I 
would point out it’s actually a two-way street. 
 
First of all it may be less costly to irrigate in certain types of 
land. And what we have to be careful of here is that when you 
look at this option of using treated effluent to irrigate land, you 
have to look at what type of land that you’re going to be 
irrigating, how close is this land to the plant, how big of a 
system that you need — like often you have to build a reservoir 
to hold treated effluent over the winter time. 
 
So a lot of these projects that you’re talking about are site 
specific. You know it’s difficult to put a cost to this. We have 
31 projects in Saskatchewan so we do have some history, but 
what we can’t give you is a very specific number. We need a lot 
more data, as I mentioned, about the size of the land and what 
type of soil and how far it is from the plant and so on and so 
forth. So we need a whole heck of a lot more information and 
we can’t generalize a cost of using treated effluent as a . . . in 
irrigation versus disposing it in other means. 
 
And what I think I would point out as well is that perhaps 
disposal of . . . you have to treat your effluent anyway. So there 
is a cost attached for treating the effluent and perhaps it’ll be 
better to irrigate with just water out of the river system because 
the effluent, you’re going to use it, you have to treat it anyway. 
So there could be cost factors in there as well. 
 
So we had to be very careful how you analyze the benefits of 
irrigation with treated effluent versus the irrigation with basic 
water. There are some cost factors associated. There’s 
site-specific challenges that we have. But clearly, it’s certainly 
something that we’re not totally unaware of. 
 
There has been 31 projects in the province and we continue 
assessing some of these options as we go down this path. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. It’s good that you are 
working with irrigation because I think it’s a worthwhile 
venture into using . . . a way to use effluent water. 
 

With that, I see in an interview you did, I think it was on May 8, 
you had said that there would be new legislation with new rules 
and regulations for drinking water that will come into effect in 
June. Can you give me a little update on that’s coming? 
 
And also with these new rules, will that also affect cities and 
towns that do put effluent water into the river systems, that 
drinking water is drawn further down the stream? Will this 
legislation possibly affect that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Yes. What I’ll point out in terms of the 
. . . I believe the details you’re talking about is on April 5 in 
terms of the announcement on our provincial water strategy. 
And while normally we would defer the questions of the 
Watershed Authority and certainly The Environmental 
Management and Protection Act, EMPA, to the Environment 
ministry, I’m able to share some of the details today, on a 
temporary basis I might add, as to what is being planned. 
 
But the answer to your question, absolutely, the waste water 
plants, I will have the same rules and regulations to protect 
water at source. Certainly the water regulations for people that 
consume water will certainly be strengthened and that the 
people would be advised of that. And I would point out that 
we’re going to pass them, hopefully, by June. 
 
There’s going to be three Acts that we’ll be introducing in the 
Assembly. And one of them has to do with Sask Water 
Corporation providing services to the communities out there 
that may need our services. Utility services is basically what 
we’ll be offering. And that Act will come under Sask Water. 
 
The Watershed Authority, which talks about protecting water at 
source, that’ll be certainly being proposed by the Minister of the 
Environment. And also the rules and regulations of which you 
made reference to, that Act will be introduced by Environment 
and that’ll be under The Environmental Management and 
Protection Act. 
 
So there’s three components to our water strategy. One is 
providing service — engineered technical advice to 
communities to assist them in putting in good systems. And 
two, other components talk about protection of water at source. 
And the third one, of course, is improving the rules and 
regulations. 
 
And those three Acts will be introduced this session, and they’ll 
be passed in June, and they’ll be proclaimed by September, this 
fall. And that’s a rough time frame. And upon proclamation, 
those rules and regulations will come into effect. 
 
But we’re working very closely with SARM (Saskatchewan 
Association of Rural Municipalities) and SUMA (Saskatchewan 
Urban Municipalities Association) and a number of other 
media, organizations, and the general public to try and explain 
to them what the strategy is. 
 
And there’s been a lot of good meetings so people are becoming 
more and more aware of meeting . . . of some of the challenges 
we have with water. And that awareness is probably our biggest 
weapon in trying to alleviate the challenges that we all faced 
and we’ll be all facing in the future. So a lot of work has been 
done; a lot more needs to be done. 



1514 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess, looking, our 
time is up. I want to thank you for your co-operation in 
answering my questions and I look forward to when you come 
back again. I have many more questions to ask you. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, given that it’s raining outside of 
the legislature and has been raining almost all the time that Sask 
Water estimates have been up, it’s tempting to leave Sask Water 
go on and on and on. But we can call them back again and hope 
for more rain. 
 
And I will now move that the committee report progress on 
Sask Water and move to estimates on Public Service 
Commission. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Public Service Commission 

Vote 33 
 
Subvote (PS01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the minister to introduce her officials. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. With 
me today is Wynne Young, the Chair of the Public Service 
Commission; behind her, Rick McKillop, executive director of 
employee relations; beside Rick, Clare Isman, executive 
director of human resource development; and sitting next to 
Wynne is Lynn Jacobson, director of corporate services. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and welcome to the 
minister and her officials. 
 
I would like to . . . of course, it’s obviously become quite a 
concern about the safeguards to protect people’s personal 
information is sort of the hot item now in the news. And 
different articles have been written in the newspaper. So can 
you tell us what official mechanisms and safeguards the 
government has in place to date to protect people’s personal 
information from being released accidentally or on purpose to 
unauthorized persons from outside of the Public Service 
Commission — from within to without? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, thank you very much for that 
question. I appreciate the opportunity to go through, I guess 
what at this point I’ll call the nine-point program, because there 
seems to be about nine or ten points here. 
 
The first was in 1992 we proclaimed two pieces of legislation: 
The Freedom of Information and Protection of Privacy Act and 
The Local Authority Freedom of Information and Protection of 
Privacy Act, which together go farther and have broader 
coverage than any similar legislation in Canada because they 
also include the municipal level of government. And there’s a 
whole range of authorities embedded in those Acts. 
 
Now in 1999 we also implemented the IT acceptable use policy 
for — of course IT meaning information technology — and that 
provides policies and guidelines that govern the use of all 
information systems of government. In 1999, as well, the 
information technology office developed a process that 
committed all government departments to develop and update 
internal security procedures. 

And as well, I don’t have the exact date here, but The Health 
Information Protection Act was proclaimed as well which was 
specifically regarding the protection of health information and 
is considered to be a leading-edge Act in Canada. 
 
In 2000, a cross-government security group was set up of over 
70 public servants who were brought together several times in 
the last two years to be educated about security and provided 
with the tools to write and revise their security policies. And as 
well we’ve had municipal officials participating in these events. 
 
And all of these activities that they’re talking about of course 
are governed by The Freedom of Information and Privacy Act. 
 
In 2000, as well, a comprehensive security policy template was 
created and it provides an outline of all the questions the 
department would need to answer and all the circumstances it 
would have to cover in order to have an appropriate security 
policy. So each department is responsible for ensuring their 
own security policy based on the template. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Now in 2001 the information technology office created a Web 
site of security news alert for all of government. And this Web 
site is updated daily and is password protected. And additional 
information is also posted as a result of a weekly national 
conference call. 
 
In 2002, the Information Technology office developed a 
government-wide security policy for department Web sites. 
And the government also continues to participate in a national 
group that has produced a national data classification system 
which is the cornerstone of security management and it’s now 
being incorporated into all ongoing security policies. 
 
And likely the most recent thing has been, as the government 
migrates to a single data network under the CommunityNet, it’ll 
enhance security by forcing all Internet traffic through a single 
connection at SaskTel. 
 
And this connection is actively being monitored for attempts at 
intrusion by external threats such as hackers. So speaking to 
your question about external, so there’s actually been a number 
of things done on the policy, procedure, and technical side. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. I’m just going 
to clarify something you said. Each department has — I believe 
you said — each department has it’s own personnel that would 
be security checkers or someone that would police that security 
is doing fine, and that would be under the jurisdiction of each 
department separately? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Every department would have 
somebody who’s responsible for developing policy and 
procedures in those areas, subject to the template. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Do the 
Crowns also have the same policies, the same mechanisms in 
place? And again, would each Crown have its own security 
personnel that would be checking this on an ongoing basis? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It’s a little more difficult for me to 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1515 

 

answer detailed questions about the Crowns, because the PSC 
(Public Service Commission) largely is responsible for 
executive government. But we certainly do co-operate with 
them and share practices and information. But they would 
likewise have people responsible and would have an 
overarching policy that they worked with. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Obviously 
something in this mechanism hasn’t worked. There has been 
leaks or there’s leaks being under investigation at any rate. 
 
Will your department be considering making changes to your 
safeguard mechanisms in the future to tighten it up? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — You know, I’m going to put this 
answer in the context of the armed forces. And there’s security 
to, I guess, a reasonable degree subject to human fallibility, and 
then there’s security at all costs. And this is no doubt the 
question that’s been going on in airport security systems when 
it comes to military issues. 
 
And at the moment I would say that without a fairly substantial 
investment that we probably are doing most of the things that 
we affordably can do within existing systems, although 
certainly the investigations will tell us whether there’s places 
where we could tighten up or do things within existing 
resources. 
 
But I think as we move further down the IT road, one of the 
things people are going to have to come to grips with is that 
these things do require some investment to set up the fail-safe 
type of systems that do internal tracking, etc. And it certainly 
would be our goal as we, like we say, as we move towards a 
single data network with CommunityNet, to be able to have 
more and more of those safeguards. 
 
For example, under CommunityNet one of the things we’re able 
to do is help protect schoolchildren from accessing 
inappropriate data because they’re sharing a network. And 
rather than each school having to do it, we’re able to do it 
network-wide. So as more departments move into the network 
it’ll make it a little easier to do those things than it is right now 
with a lot of separate systems. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Just to further 
. . . Okay, the investigation, if I’m understanding it correctly, 
would be finding out or identifying where the problem was if 
there was a problem, who was sort of at the bottom of the 
problem, and if the problem’s bigger than what was first 
discovered. So that is sort of a discovery mechanism as to 
whether or not the law was broken or the Acts were not adhered 
to. 
 
Do we also have sort of an evaluation process? Now once the 
investigation’s done obviously something hasn’t worked. Will 
there be an evaluation done as to whether what we have in place 
is good enough or if we should be looking at improvements? 
Because I don’t think the investigation will recommend 
improvements. It’s going to just find the problem and identify 
it. But is it going to give recommendations as to what we can do 
differently to . . . so this doesn’t happen in the future? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well we certainly share your concern 

that this should not happen. And as we get the information back 
from the RCMP investigation we will, in a complementary way, 
have the work that will be going on with the independent 
review that’ll be taking place. 
 
And the independent review will cover everything right from 
employee oath of office, any checks and balances to ensure 
systems are working, whether employees are appropriately 
oriented to their responsibilities. It’ll cover the whole gambit of 
policy and procedure in place around security. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Has there 
been in the past — obviously not one as public as this one — 
but has there been problems in the past, perhaps a little more 
minor, of information, personal information that has gone 
places that it perhaps shouldn’t have, and you’ve had to look at 
having investigations done in any of the departments? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I just wanted to mention that in 1989 
was the last time there was a security — funny you should ask 
— in 1989 there was a . . . Shan’t I say that? 1989 there was a 
security investigation and although we’ve done, you know as I 
listed in sort of the nine points earlier, we’ve done a lot in that 
area since then, it wasn’t as a direct result of that investigation. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. What policy 
do you have in place that determines what information can be 
accessed from what employees? There seems to be quite a 
number of employees that can access quite personal and 
in-depth information. So what policy’s in place to give those 
employees the authority that they need? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll give you the short form and if you 
want more detail we can go into that. But in any duty in 
government, first of all the risks are assessed and the level of 
necessary security is determined appropriate to both the 
sensitivity and the confidentiality of the information under 
consideration. 
 
The next thing is the access to data is determined based on 
individual employee job functions, a sort of who needs to know 
approach. Passwords are implemented to provide for authorized 
access, and some systems require up to the three passwords 
before you can access them. And firewalls are used to protect 
data from outside unauthorized access by hackers or 
unauthorized users. 
 
Those are the main features of access. Now I don’t know if you 
wanted to know something a little different. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. In particular 
. . . Okay obviously what’s at question in this latest issue is the 
CPIC system and who has access to it. And there seems to be a 
number of government employees that do have access to CPIC. 
 
So if I was working in SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) for example, what would be the reason why I would 
need to access CPIC and what would be the criteria that would 
give me that authorization? Would I have to be management? 
Would I have to be a CEO (chief executive officer) of the 
department? Where would I . . . Or who would be given that 
authorization? 
 



1516 Saskatchewan Hansard May 22, 2002 

 

Hon. Ms. Crofford: — It would have to do more with your 
specific job rather than your level within the organization and 
what your specific duties are. I’ll give you a for example. If you 
were perhaps wanting to — I don’t know if this is the best 
example but — sell insurance in the province, there would have 
to be checks done to make sure that it was a legitimate activity 
with legitimate representatives who had not been involved in 
any criminal activity. It ties into licensing in quite a few areas 
as to who can be licensed for securities for a range of financial 
activities people are involved in. 
 
But it’s very job specific and it’s not . . . Although I think a 
person who is accessing information would not tend to be a 
very junior employee, it is related to their job duties more than 
to their level in the organization. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Will there be a 
comprehensive review done at all of the different government 
departments and the Crowns as well to see if perhaps we don’t 
need quite as many employees that can access that information? 
Will that be tightened up or lessened to some degree? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I think it’s fair to say that would be a 
matter for our review to determine whether in fact there would 
be any problems tracked to the kind of issues you’re raising, the 
level or the particular reason for access. And if in fact it’s 
necessary to narrow access, then obviously that’s something we 
would look at. 
 
But I just want to mention is one of the issues raised in a news 
media report on this was that we also have to be careful in 
narrowing that we don’t create such a backlog of people waiting 
to be approved. For example if you are registered and licensed 
as a broker to operate in Saskatchewan, they do thorough 
criminal background checks of individuals who are entrusted 
with people’s money. 
 
And so I guess you have to balance off the ability to provide 
timely service in important areas of public service with security 
measures and hopefully the review will determine whether 
we’ve achieved that balance or not. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Would you 
have any idea as far as number of people or percentage of 
people that work in the Public Service Commission that have 
access to CPIC? The percentage of people that have access 
would be . . . In compared to other provinces in the country, are 
we in line or are we looking at more employees that have this 
access or less or where is that at? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — This may be a question that could more 
appropriately be asked specifically of the Justice minister. But 
I’ll just mention that CPIC is used for police services, 
correction officials, conservation officers, and regulatory 
agencies who have a role in keeping communities safe. 
 
So I think I did mention that the people that have access is SGI, 
SERM, Corrections, and there’s another one with “s” — 
SERM, SGI . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . No, that’s 
Corrections. At any rate, there is four areas of government in 
total that have involvement with CPIC. 
 
But in terms of the rules governing CPIC, I think the Justice 

minister has the largest involvement with people who have 
CPIC access. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Does the real 
estate board have access to CPIC? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We wouldn’t grant third party access. 
So if anybody had access, it would be something they had 
arranged directly themselves. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. We’re going 
to go to a totally different area right now, and I know we talked 
about it last year, on what was happening to the implementation 
of pay equity throughout the Public Service Commission. Can 
you give us an update on your goal to achieve pay equity across 
the Public Service Commission and where we’re at with that? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We’re about 85 per cent completed 
right now and CUPE (Canadian Union of Public Employees), 
CUPE’s not completely done and the out-of-scope people are 
not completely done. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. 
Approximately how many people does this involve then? 
Eighty-five per cent are now implemented into pay equity 
scales. So if you’re looking at 15 per cent, approximately how 
many people would that involve? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Yes, it would be about 8,500 people. 
And I’ll just emphasize, because our plan was gender neutral in 
the sense that it also became part of a reclassification of 
positions that hadn’t been classified for years and government 
had changed and people’s duties had changed, so it was part of 
sort of a big overall classification process. So it actually 
affected a large number of employees. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Can you give 
me an estimate to date what additional funding this has cost the 
government to bring employees into an equitable position? Like 
how are they being paid out — is it a retroactive payment? And 
if so, then what kind of money are we looking at to go back and 
implement? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The part that is completed so far would 
be a total cost of 16.12 million. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Going 
specifically to one of your programs, which was the first interns 
from the Aboriginal public service internship program should 
be . . . were to begin their terms in September of 2001. Did this 
occur? And how many interns do you have? And what 
departments have they been assigned to? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The parts of that question that I can 
quite quickly answer are that we have hired all of the interns 
that were approved in the budget, and that they are now 
entering their second round of placements. And we’re now 
recruiting for the next intake. 
 
And although I can’t give you every department, departments 
like Learning, Health, Public Service Commission, Corrections, 



May 22, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1517 

 

Agriculture and Food, Environment and Resource Management, 
Economic Development, Highways and Transportation, Justice, 
Health, Municipal Affairs — it ranges across all the 
departments. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And that 
budget has been maintained the same as last year, and moving 
on to hopefully the same next year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — We have slightly increased in that we 
kept the 10 from last year and have added 5 more. We felt the 
program was important enough to strengthen it a bit. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. So what is the 
percentage in the Public Service Commission which are made 
up of Aboriginal people? And as compared to last year, have we 
increased that as well, overall percentage of Aboriginal people? 
 
And if you take a moment probably to look through the 
statistics, how are we doing on increasing the employment of 
disabled people and women as a percentage of the Public 
Service Commission? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Now I wasn’t clear if you were asking 
about the whole public service, so I’ll give you the numbers for 
the whole public service. And I’ve only got comparison from 
’92 to 2001. 
 
But in ’92 we had 3.1 per cent participation by employees of 
Aboriginal ancestry; now we have 9.8 per cent. Persons with 
disability in ’92 was at 2.4 per cent; that’s at 2.9 per cent now. 
Women in management has gone from 26.8 per cent to 33.3 per 
cent, and women in non-traditional occupations from 19.8 per 
cent to 21.8 per cent. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. An issue that 
was brought to my attention from the visible minorities was the 
fact that there is no mechanism in place in the Public Service 
Commission to equate their level of education in whatever 
country they have come from to what that would be equivalent 
in Canadian education. 
 
Is this something that your department’s looked . . . you know 
considered or looked into, that there was perhaps we should 
look at some way of doing an equation on what the equivalent 
education would be in Canadian education standards, so that 
they would be able to more easily know what jobs would be 
available for them, what they’re qualified for? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — There’s a couple of different ways that 
happens. One of the ways is through the prior learning 
assessment, that actually you can go through a process of 
having your degrees from another country compared to what the 
same degree would be in this country. 
 
The other thing that happens is the PSC uses competency-based 
hiring which means that the . . . tend to look at competencies as 
opposed to rigidly looking at qualifications. 
 
But I think there’s . . . the one other place is where professional 
associations have designated that you must have a certain kind 
of degree. And that happens in the medical area where doctors 
from Commonwealth countries, their qualifications are 

transferable, but if they’re not from a Commonwealth country 
they then have to go through a pretty intense regime of testing 
and work placement in order to qualify to practise here. 
 
But more and more efforts are being made to remove those 
barriers. And we have made a commitment to work with the 
Visible Minority Employee’s Association to keep working on 
bringing down those barriers, and being as fair as one can 
possibly be in the hiring process. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. If I heard you 
correctly in the beginning of your question, you said there is 
some mechanism to do an education equivalency comparison. Is 
that provincially or is that something that’s available federally? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — The place that tends to do it for the 
region is Edmonton. But there is also . . . if people are taking 
classes within provincial educational institutions, they also have 
the ability to do some in-house assessment as well. But the 
official place that does it is in Edmonton, and we refer people 
through them. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. Are you 
finding — this is a very general question but — are you finding 
basically globally we’ve all become more transient and so are 
you finding a lot or an increase in people from out of Canada 
applying for jobs within the Public Service Commission? Is that 
increasing at all or are we not seeing that here in Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Well that’s an interesting question 
because since our application process has become more Web 
based, you will get people job hunting from around the world 
who might not have ever found you before — might have been 
a little harder to find a career bulletin if you were in another 
country before — so the access is more direct. 
 
But we still find that we have to — if I would put it this way — 
beat the bushes sometimes to get sufficient inventory of 
applications in order to be able to provide hiring managers with 
a range of applications to choose from. So it’s kind of a yes and 
no. 
 
But certainly the Internet has changed everything as far as the 
number of hits you get on your site and whatnot. Even the youth 
jobs, when we posted the jobs on the Internet, what had been a 
fairly small intake just mushroomed up to 7,000 applicants. And 
so it gives you more to choose from, but it also then becomes a 
bit of a volume issue in terms of handling the stuff. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Madam Minister. And I don’t 
have any further questions today. 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — I’ll just thank the member very much 
for her thoughtful questions and look forward to further 
discussion, and thank the officials for assisting us today with 
the replies. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:45. 
 


