















































Hansard: March 18, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 69 
 March 18, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

SPECIAL ORDER 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

ADDRESS IN REPLY 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the address in 
reply which was moved by Mr. Prebble, seconded by Mr. 
Forbes, and the proposed amendment thereto moved by Mr. 
Toth. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — It’s nice to be appreciated. I just want to recap 
some of the things we talked about in my speech. One of them 
. . . I think maybe some of the members opposite . . . start right 
from the start again because I think a few of them missed it. 
 
But the main thing, when I go around talking about the 
constituents, the main thing they bring up is agriculture. They 
know this government now. They don’t expect any help from it 
because they know they’re not going to get any help from it. So 
one of the things that we talked about at the meetings, our Grow 
Saskatchewan meetings, was value added. They know that we 
can’t keep shipping raw product out of this province continually 
because behind it goes the jobs and the people with that. 
 
And what the people of Arm River and what the people of 
Saskatchewan want, they want diversification out there. They 
want value added out there. They want a plan from the 
government how to do that. They haven’t had one for 10 years, 
how to grow this, whether it’s feedlots, ethanol plants, 
infrastructure, and irrigation. Do you know that we import 93 
per cent of our vegetables that we need here in Saskatchewan? 
You know with the land around Outlook, the sandy soil, the 
irrigation, and with some promotion from this government, we 
could be growing vegetables here, Mr. Speaker. That’s just one 
thing. 
 
Another thing we’ve talked about . . . they’ve talked about is 
ethanol production, Mr. Speaker. And even the few NDP (New 
Democratic Party) members that I’ve got — and if you check 
the polls I don’t have that many of them — even they are telling 
me, I hope this government does not — and I repeat, does not 
— use government money or build them through CIC (Crown 
Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan). That’s coming from 
the NDP members in my constituency that I’ve talked to 
because even they know now, after the repeated failures that 
CIC has been involved in, that it won’t work. 
 
Another thing they want is livestock. We ship, I would say, 80 
per cent to be finished in Alberta. At least 80 per cent of the 
cattle, calves that are shipped out of here are gone to Alberta to 
be finished. They should be finished here with the jobs. That 
would increase the feed barley, feed wheat, give a little more 
money into the farmers’ pockets. 
 
Another thing they’ve talked about is how to get some of the 
investment money rolling in here, some incentives from this 
government on maybe some tax cuts or something, somehow 
some kind of tax credit — somehow to get some investment 
capital back in this province or even some of the money that’s 

already in this province for some of them to invest in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Another thing that the people have talked about at the meetings, 
they would like to see some initiative from this government 
moving in some kind of a direction like that to have some kind 
of a plan, some kind of a vision, how they would build rural 
Saskatchewan and so far, Mr. Speaker, there hasn’t been one 
from this present government. 
 
And that’s all that people would want right now is a plan and a 
vision, and that’s why they voted for us. We had 40 per cent of 
the popular vote in ’99, and that’s why we’re going to have 
more in the next election because it’s just not rural 
Saskatchewan. You talk to the people in Regina and Saskatoon; 
the population in Regina has dropped. The capital city of 
Saskatchewan the population has dropped. Every other capital 
city in Canada is growing. Why isn’t this city growing? You 
know, that’s one of the things that the people in this province 
have expressed through the numerous meetings. 
 
You know another theme that seems to come up when you talk 
to the people here is that they say a bigger government . . . if 
bigger government and Crowns were the way to grow the 
province, we would be the richest province in Canada instead of 
the poorest one. So obviously bigger governments and trying to 
grow the province through the Crowns does not go. It doesn’t 
even sell to the people any more. 
 
Basically the socialist view of the members opposite just isn’t 
growing this province any more, you know, and this province 
basically is on the brink of disaster. You talk to the people out 
there, Mr. Speaker, and it is getting close to the brink of 
disaster. We’re running a deficit government. We cannot . . . we 
have less than 460,000 taxpayers left on a province that’s 
almost as big as Texas. 
 
There’s no way that we can keep up this infrastructure and 
never keep up our health and our education commitments with a 
shrinking tax base and a shrinking population, Mr. Speaker. 
And basically this government is old, and it’s tired, and it 
should be getting out of the way. And it’s going to be getting 
out of the way next election, Mr. Speaker, when we move in 
with our plan and our vision to grow Saskatchewan. 
 
And that’s what the people want. Whether it’s from urban to 
rural, Mr. Speaker, they want a plan to grow this province, and 
that’s what they haven’t got from the members opposite. And 
that is why, Mr. Speaker, that I will support the amendment 
brought forth by the member from Moosomin, and I can’t 
support the Throne Speech, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, as I enter this Throne Speech 
debate of 2002, I will be making some commentary in regards 
to my transition period, you know, as a person from moving 
from a field of education, politics, and possibly back into 
education. And as well the Throne Speech which talks about the 
need for hope and optimism even in a period of uncertainty. 
 
Of course we had met with it when the Devine government was 



70 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

around — you know the devastation of that period, and we were 
able to bring this into very many years of balanced budgets and 
also hope for people, not only for the people with big dollars, 
but the people who really needed help in this province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I’ll be talking a bit about the Saskatchewan 
Party’s position as well, and basically talking about why it was 
the same, very similar to the Grant Devine formula. 
 
But first of all I’d like to say this. Last fall I made a statement 
that I was retiring from politics, and I will not be running in the 
next election. I said that I would probably be working back in 
the field of education. I did 19 years in education. I got my 
Bachelor of Education and my master’s degree in education, 
worked at the university level, worked at the colleges system, 
worked at Gabriel Dumont Institute. And so I had many areas 
. . . As a matter of fact, I was . . . this summer, Mr. Speaker, I 
visited some of my students in Ontario. I taught there 34 years 
ago in this one community, in this Ojibwa community. It was 
very, very interesting because, as I went over there and I told 
them that I was coming to town, I met some of the students, and 
it was interesting to see that one of my grade 2 students was 
now the chief. And she had her daughter there, coming to meet 
me as I visited there for a short time. 
 
And later on, I went to this other community where I taught 
school there for two years. In the first community I taught 
grades 2, 3, and 4. Then I taught grade 6 in this community for 
a couple of years. And I had the same greeting, and it was a 
great time that I had, visiting the places where I used to teach a 
few years back. 
 
Now as I talk about the need for myself in terms of a transition, 
I’d like to say a tremendous thank you to the people of northern 
Saskatchewan, to the people of Cumberland constituency 
particularly. 
 
I have been very, very lucky to have been born in the period of 
time right after the war, and many of our people fought and died 
for this country. I had a time as a politician, knowing that many 
of them were buried in Europe and died for this land, and them 
coming back and trying to get a sense of hope. It was tough 
times in the world; 45 million people died in the war. And there 
was a lot of devastation, you know, in Europe and all over the 
many parts of the globe. And in that sense, a lot of our people 
saw what had happened in those places. They came back. They 
knew how tough it was, and we were in a fishing, trapping, and 
hunting economy, from where I was and some of our people 
were now getting into mining and forestry. So it was something 
that I was brought up and raised with, as I was in that period, 
that I knew that some of those people that were leaders at that 
time, that experience internationally, protecting democracy, and 
growing up with that idea of bringing back the hope, although 
there was devastation during that time. 
 
So as I look at this Throne Speech debate we hear about, you 
know, the idea of the US (United States) economy going down. 
We see the September 11 situation. We see the drought, you 
know, from last year. And we see the prices here and there of 
uncertainty. But in time we wanted to present a picture, you 
know, this time around that there is still hope out there. 
Uranium prices were a little bit better you know than last year. 
There is possibilities that there might be a diamond mine in this 

province. We have an excellent plan on forestry, which I will 
talk about later on. 
 
But before I do anything, I would like to say a special thank you 
again to the people of Cumberland constituency, and some of 
the people that work with me. I would like to say thank you to 
some of my staff, who work with me. 
 
There was in my staff, as the minister, I’ve had Cheryl Stecyk, 
who worked with me for many years, right from the beginning, 
from ’92. And Adele Ecarnot. And there was Brenda Husli, 
Gail McNab, Don McKay, Dale Robison. And I had somebody 
from, a couple from my home town, who came to work for me 
as well: Elaine Deschambeault, and Brian Chaboyer. There was 
also a guy from Pelican Narrows, Ron Merasty, who worked for 
me. There was Maggie. There was Laura. There was quite a few 
people that had experience working in the legislature. You 
know, many of our people haven’t had the opportunity to work 
in many different situations, and this presented, you know, an 
opportunity for some of our people to be able to work in 
different situations. The legislature was an important part of 
their experience. 
 
So I thank these people because, in many cases, as you are a 
minister, as you are an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) doing the work, you’re only as good as what your 
staff put forward for you. So a special thanks to my staff in that 
regard over these years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Thank you also to all the workers of this 
province, whether they work in the highways to fix our roads, 
or whether it is the social services worker dealing with, you 
know, very stressful cases, or whether we’re dealing with the 
teachers, or whether we’re dealing with nurses. You know it’s a 
special thanks to all those people because in many ways, as 
we’re talking about change, we’re talking about hope. These are 
the people who are on the front lines dealing with the actual 
cases as we’re dealing with policy in this legislature. So a 
special hat off to all the people who do the hard work in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I’d like to thank as well some of those people 
who work with me. I’ve been through four campaigns, four 
elections. I’ve had . . . the first time I ran, I had a little over 60 
per cent of the vote. At my highest point, I had over 80 per cent 
of the vote, and that comes along because there’s people that are 
working for you at the community level. 
 
I’d like to . . . there’s many, many I could mention. I could 
probably stand here for many years, but I’ll mention a few. 
There are people like Earl and Barb Cook that are from my 
hometown who lived in La Ronge, worked with me there for 
quite a while. There’s Lyle Brooks and Lorna. There’s my sister 
Josie and her husband George Searson, Jimmy and Tammy 
Searson-Cook, Ordean and Francis Goulet. There was Harry 
and Adelle Morin in Sandy Bay. There was, as well, people 
from Montreal Lake: Ed and Shirley Henderson, Christian 
Nelson and also Caroline Nelson. In Creighton, we had Moyle 
Barkhouse, Janice Irmrie and her late husband Bob and also 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 71 

 

Nestor and Vicky Dolinsky. I had also in Beaver Lake, in the 
Denare Beach, the late Rod McDermott and his wife Marie and 
the late Thomas Morin. 
 
So I had many supporters, you know, that are out there over the 
years dealing with the issues of making sure that there was a 
hope out there, that they believed in democracy. They believed 
in the process of politics, and they believed that you needed 
representation in the system. 
 
I’d like to, as well, mention another special worker for me. 
She’s been with me from, pretty well right from the beginning, 
and her name is Cec Allen. She went through an operation a 
little while ago. She’s slowly recovering but I wish her, you 
know, the best in her health but also that she’s worked with me 
all these years and did a bit of experience at the federal level, 
but she is . . . hopefully she goes a little bit better through the 
operation that she had had. 
 
(19:15) 
 
Now on this Throne Speech, we deal with many issues, and I’d 
like to reflect them back on the time that I was being raised, on 
this hope and optimism idea and reflecting back on education 
and a need to focus in on economic development and jobs. 
 
When I was growing up my father, Arthur, died when he was 
75. He got to see me become a minister in this province, a 
cabinet minister. And I was at a co-op gathering one time and 
this elderly gentleman came up to see me and he showed me a 
picture. He said, do you know these people that come from your 
own community? I looked at the picture and there was my dad 
at a co-op school in 1951. He became to be the first co-op store 
manager in Cumberland House and also later on we ran our 
own confectionery and café. And we also dealt with tourism, 
bringing in people from the United States, and we also did 
trapping and fishing and hunting as well. 
 
But just to give you a little bit of an idea on him, he not only 
worked in our community, but he travelled in different 
situations. One year he left us to go to the United States to work 
with one of the people that he was guiding for, in a heating 
place in Waterloo, Iowa. So he lived there during the winter 
months to make some more money so that we could survive 
during the year. And so he worked in the DEW (distant early 
warning) Line as well. So many people figure, you know, when 
you’re doing hunting and trapping and fishing in one 
community that you never get out of there and go to different 
places. But he worked in the Territories, he worked in BC 
(British Columbia), he worked all over in the United States as 
well. 
 
But as well, my late mother . . . I was quite lucky in a sense that 
when I was growing up we had seven sisters, four of us 
brothers. And I lost my mother when I was fairly young. I was 
16 years old. But she had a dream for all of us. As we’re doing 
the budget and we’re talking about education and change, you 
know all of us know that we have come through some 
educational experiences. My mother had wanted me to become 
a teacher. Her dream, that one day I would become a teacher. 
And as I was there growing up I never thought that I would 
become a teacher. You know you don’t think of those things. 
 

You lose your mom and you’re sad, and your brother is there 
with you. Then you lose your brother that’s there with you 
when you’re in grade 12. But you keep on going. There is a 
sense of determination that they instill within you, your parents, 
and you move forward with it. But she had interpersonal 
relationship skills that were excellent. She was in charge of . . . 
the president of the Catholic Women’s League. She was as well 
the head of the school trustees in the community. 
 
So both my father and mother were from a leadership 
background and both of them were very, very strong-minded 
people. So in that sense I was fairly lucky. And I might say that 
with a lot of our uncles and our friends in the community who 
dreamt the same things as we did, you know, trying to make 
sure that we had a good education and to move forward into the 
future. 
 
So that dream that we lost on an Easter Monday, you know, 
when I was only 16 years old, it came to be fulfilled. We were 
growing up with seven sisters and it ended up that four of us got 
our degrees in education, and we did consulting work. My 
younger brother, Ordean, right now is a regional coordinator for 
the colleges up in northern Saskatchewan and I was a principal 
of a college at one time, community college, as well at Gabriel 
Dumont. And my other sister works on pre-language 
development programming for the Saskatchewan Indian 
Federated College, one of them, Millie. And Josie works into 
northern Saskatchewan. And I also have another younger sister, 
Arlene, who works for the federal government, who works for 
Indian Affairs. And I also have another one who works for the 
Manitoba government in the field of justice in making sure that 
we have a community approach to justice in northern Manitoba. 
And so I was very, very lucky, you know, growing up in the 
midst and being with brothers and sisters and other people from 
the community who were able to be successful in instilling that 
pride and determination as we moved forward. 
 
And in this budget, as . . . I mean in this Throne Speech I look 
at the aspect of education which was so critical, you know, for 
us. And as I became a cabinet minister, there was about 1,000 
people from northern Saskatchewan who were getting a 
post-secondary education. And when I was growing up in 1965 
I went to university. And I was the only one that I knew of, 
excuse me, at that time that was at the university from northern 
Saskatchewan. There was only about four of us Aboriginal 
people at the university that I knew of. There may have been a 
couple of more, but those were the only ones that I knew back 
in 1965. But then ’65 to about ’90, ’91 when we come into 
power there was over 1,000 people. In the past 10 years now, in 
northern Saskatchewan, last year we had over 2,500 people in 
post-secondary education. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — So we’re seeing a trend in regards to the 
education; the feeling of optimism that you see that indeed the 
Throne Speech is. It brings hope, you know, for a lot of people. 
So when you’re talking about this hope, I’m looking forward. 
 
In many cases when I was making the shift . . . As I say, I’m 
going back to education. I’ll probably do my Ph.D. later on. At 
least I’m talking about it; whether or not I actually do it is 
another question. 



72 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

Of course I went through that experience with my master’s 
degree. But I did my master’s degree in 1986 and I did oral 
history. It’s interesting one of the Supreme Court cases finally 
acknowledged that our people’s stories could be truthful. And it 
took many years for people to understand that the story is no 
different than the stories from Europe or from Asia or from 
Africa or anywhere else can actually be truthful. And in many 
cases, that was finally recognized in the Supreme Court 
decision. But I already did this oral history master’s back in ’86. 
 
So I’m trying to go back and get some of that critical Cree 
language concepts that I was born and raised with that is not 
written down. I know what’s written down in the 
anthropological, historical, and sociological texts but they’re 
incomplete in regards to the knowledge that the people have 
from northern Saskatchewan. So I want to get back at some of 
that. 
 
Our institutions, our Gabriel Dumont Institute. We have the 
Dumont Technical Institute, the SUNTEP (Saskatchewan urban 
native teacher education program) programs. We have 
Saskatchewan Indian Federated College. We have 
Saskatchewan Indian Institute of Technologies. These are 
top-level, indigenous institutions in the world; and there is no 
question about that, that the knowledge that they create there is 
better than anywhere else you will see in the different situations 
in the world. We will be taking a leadership role with a new 
building, you know, going up over here at the Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College, Gabriel Dumont Institute. The history 
will become a little bit more complete, you know, as we move 
forward because that’s where it’ll be. 
 
I think the new challenges that I see for First Nations and Métis 
people is in the educational sphere. We’ve done well on the law 
program. Eighty per cent of the people, interestingly enough, in 
Canada went through the law program in Saskatchewan, you 
know, created here in Saskatchewan in co-operation with our 
people. Something to be very proud of. And also when we look 
at the social work programs, the educational programs, some of 
the administration programs. 
 
But the areas where we fall short on are in the science generated 
area. We are starting to move . . . we’re moving to the health 
sciences. We’re starting to move into the nurses training 
program, the LPN (licensed practical nurse) programs, and 
we’re starting to move into these programs. But we need to do a 
lot more in those areas, not only in the health sciences areas, but 
into the environmental sciences, into the engineering areas, into 
the many areas that are very, very important for the future — 
genetics, neuroscience, etc. 
 
So this is an area that needs to be worked at over the future, but 
I think that the hope that we have learned from our parents and 
who fought in the wars, saw what was happening in the world, 
showed us that we needed an education, and whereas this 
government follows through a strong program in education it’s 
something that we can really look forward to. I’m seeing those 
2,500 people now, you know, last year that graduated. I mean, 
they’ll create hope. You know, they’ll create a feeling, yes, 
Saskatchewan is good a place to live. Not only Ontario, not 
only Alberta, not only the Territories, not only United States. 
Saskatchewan is a good place to live. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — When I was doing the . . . so I think it’s very 
important on the Throne Speech that we did focus in on 
education. The other thing that I thought about was this, you 
know, to focus in on health. 
 
We are recognized internationally, of course, as the birthplace 
of medicare, and in many cases people are looking at us in 
regards to our Fyke Commission and the consultation processes 
that took place after that and to see where we were at. Now 
we’re beginning to see that the Saskatchewan plan is something 
that we will be looking forward to. 
 
I thought that the combination, the teamwork approach, a very, 
very strong value in the Aboriginal community, you know, the 
value of co-operation and teamwork, and in many cases the 
concept of “we,” you know, rather than “I” only. I think “I” is 
very important and the “we” is very important, but to put them 
together is going to be the key in the future. 
 
You know, the key . . . the teamwork process that you’re seeing 
and we’re developing, which will be a Saskatchewan base, is 
very similar to, you see, in many of . . . even the successful 
areas of business. I looked at the key corporations who were 
competitive in the industry and I looked at places . . . companies 
like Microsoft and others. It was not the individualism only of 
paying higher money for the ones at the top, you know, that 
counted. It was a dynamic teamwork approach that made it 
possible for the development of that company to be as 
competitive as it was. And many of those people who decided 
to go on this dynamic team approach were the ones who 
benefited over the long run and who survived. You know, the 
top-down authority system just didn’t bode well, you know, for 
this new century; you needed a new dynamic. But it was 
already being created, the basis of it, over the last century. And 
we saw that for ourselves, you know, with . . . on a social area 
with health development, and now we’re seeing our new phase 
on the teamwork approach. 
 
So I was very, very pleased with the action plan, you know, 
lacing out that idea — and also dealing with concrete problems 
on waiting lists and moving forward with that. 
 
For me in the North, and I see Aboriginal people with high 
levels of diabetes, we have a lot of problems. I, you know, 
sometimes visit the communities. I see people, you know, close 
relatives and people who are not relatives, who lose their 
eyesight. You know they struggle, you know, on a daily basis. 
You know they lose their toes, they lose their feet, their legs, 
and it’s a very, very tough thing, you know, to experience. 
 
And as we’re looking at the health development, we’re seeing a 
greater co-operation and teamwork in the North between the 
three health boards and the tribal councils. And I see that as a 
good possibility, as something that will be very important for 
future development in tackling . . . you know, the federal 
government, the First Nations government, and the provincial 
government working together on the field of health 
development — dealing with concrete issues of diabetes and 
FAS (fetal alcohol syndrome) and FAE (fetal alcohol effects). 
 
So I think that that’s, you know, the way of the future. But I 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 73 

 

also know that as I was growing up, the idea of . . . We still 
have community gardens. And in many cases, as I was growing 
up, we used to have the gardens and we used to share these, and 
somehow along the way that became lost. Now I’m visiting the 
communities and they’re coming back. And there’s hope back 
there again because, you know, a proper diet and good exercise 
makes for good health. And in many ways that’s what’s 
happening in addition to the quality health care system that we 
do have. 
 
I might say this on the health. I was proud being part of a 
government who gave the actual control of health back to 
northerners. We used to run things on a quantitative sense from 
the government departments, etc., which was fine in and of 
itself, but we needed to have a sense of people’s control on 
policy-making in the North. 
 
(19:30) 
 
When we were a government in the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) in the ’70s, we did control, northern control on 
education; we did northern control on municipalities; and now 
we bring northern control on health. And it really bodes well in 
regards to what is possible in this province. 
 
And while we were doing that change, that is in that capacity of 
health with our action plan, it really bodes well for not only 
First Nations and northerners, but for people in this whole 
province. 
 
When we look at the issue of economic development and jobs, 
there is still a long ways to go in economic development and 
jobs front with Métis people, and First Nations people, but 
we’ve seen some very positive changes. We’ve seen the 
corporate circle, you know, that was being held, and we’re 
seeing the youth in the developments, and we’re seeing the very 
importance of tying with business and business development 
with First Nations and Métis people and, for that matter, for 
people in this whole province. 
 
When I was growing up we were involved in fishing, hunting, 
trapping; we were involved in, you know, the small-scale 
contracts — sometimes doing the brush cutting, you know, 
sometimes doing a bit of the harvesting of the trees, but not 
very much more than that. 
 
Now we’re seeing a . . . over the past 10 years I’d like to report 
that we used to have about $20 million worth of contracts in the 
mines, and last year we had approximately $200 million, you 
know, for northern businesses. And to me, when the 
opportunity for entrepreneurs was provided for northerners, it 
was there — lo and behold it went by tenfold in a 10-year 
period. And many times people thought it wouldn’t happen but 
it did. 
 
And we then moved it to the next level on forestry. In this 
Throne Speech we have a special reference on forestry. And I 
must say that the leadership we took in mining — we had about 
900 people working in the mines, from the North, of which 85 
per cent were Aboriginal people — that with that success we 
wanted to move it to forestry. 
 
But we wanted to move it at a new level, qualitative level. It 

was important to do the training of people; it was important to 
employ people, getting them involved in businesses. But we 
wanted to do the full circle of sustainability which was found in 
the sustainable development concept that international 
community took with the environment and the economy. 
 
And that forestry development needs forest management. And 
the key was forest management lease agreements to do both the 
business and also the environmental management side. And for 
the first time in the history of anywhere on indigenous peoples, 
you now have partnerships, you know, with Meadow Lake 
Tribal Council chiefs over the years. You have the Métis 
communities and their partnership; or when they find an 
industrial forestry partner in their area, they will have their own 
lease. The one in the central area with the Lac La Ronge Indian 
Band, Zelensky Brothers, they will have their partner, Peter 
Ballantyne Cree Nation. So that we’re forming not only strong 
partnerships in the trading side in the jobs and on the business 
development side, but in the management side, you know, of 
forestry development. 
 
And I think that really bodes well. I mentioned that at the 
forestry conference this past year and people were saying great 
stuff to what we were doing. They said it’s breaking new 
ground. We’re going to see what happens there and I know that 
from experience there will be ups and downs. But I noticed one 
thing from my experience. People, no matter how tough it is, 
you have a sense of hope. Yes, there is always people who 
grumble and complain but there is people who will move 
forward and create the change. And this is the type of attitude 
that I was raised with. And this is a Saskatchewan spirit. 
 
You know, this is a type of stuff that built Saskatchewan. I 
don’t talk about whether I go elsewhere or over there. I talk 
about what we can build in this province. This is the stuff of 
what I learned in the trapline, this is what I learned when I was 
growing up when my parents said we need an education. This is 
the type of stuff that is building. It makes people feel that 
although that there are stresses out there, though there is periods 
of uncertainty, they can see it on their TV, they have this 
feeling yes, deep down, yes we can do it. So this is the spirit 
that I see in this Throne Speech. 
 
The other thing is that as I look at the housing components we 
did when we got into government, we had put in about over $40 
million worth of sewer and water developments in the North. 
And that has been very, very helpful for a lot of people because 
going a quarter of a mile and trying to chop, you know, through 
the ice, the way we were growing up, and sometimes three feet 
of ice or two feet of ice, and getting water in the wintertime was 
extremely tough. And having running water, you know, getting 
the . . . washing the kids you know, and grandpa and grandma 
having a shower, I mean this is great stuff. 
 
This creates a lot of . . . I go around the communities and where 
we’re putting the sewer and water in and a lot of those people 
thought that after we did the study they said, oh the study, there 
won’t be nothing that will happen. Well we did our study and 
we followed the plan. We took a little bit of time, but it’s now 
there. People now can turn on the taps. Now that to me is 
developing hope and optimism and developing the 
Saskatchewan spirit. 
 



74 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — On the Throne Speech you will note that we’re 
trying to do a co-operation. We never give up on things. We 
never even give up on the federal government. I knew that at 
one time they were very good in northern development on the 
housing side. I must add this on the federal government. They 
do very good work on the RRAP (residential rehabilitation 
assistance program) program. You know, they help us on fixing 
houses and so on and they pay 75 per cent of it. 
 
But in the olden times in the ’70s they used to pay 60 per cent 
of the costs on the building and the . . . (inaudible) . . . up in our 
northern area and because that was a development strategy that 
the federal government had followed at that time. But they got 
out of the housing, you know, development side and we now 
have to put in, you know, our money, the 9 million on our last 
program to do northern housing and also our housing program 
in the South as well. 
 
But on this housing strategy, we’re trying to partner with the 
feds. I know that we have, you know, people who are capable at 
the ministerial level to work with the federal government and 
push that issue and make sure that we have those 1,000 houses 
in the next five years. It’s part of our planning, you know, to 
work. I mean that there’s always differences between municipal 
governments, provincial governments, and federal 
governments. But the dream of people is for us all to work 
together and to get that plan in place so that indeed, you know, 
the houses are there, you know, for the people, the jobs are 
there for the people, the roads are there for the people. The 
infrastructure, you know, the water quality is there. 
 
So those are the things that they’re looking for in regards to 
leadership but it’s a leadership of hope is what they’re looking 
for. 
 
So when I looked at the idea of the Sask Party, and I looked at 
their strategy, it’s a good thing that I’ve been in the legislature 
for four terms, otherwise I might have thought it was amusing. 
But it wasn’t amusing. The strategy was quite simple. 
 
When I was in opposition when Grant Devine was around, he 
said the same thing. I’m going to be cutting taxes. So he made 
all kinds of great speeches of cutting taxes. And then he would 
say . . . Or somebody would pressure him whether it was for a 
road or whether it was for this . . . oh yes, yes there’d be money 
for spending. But everybody knew after all that fiasco that the 
interest payments on the debt became to be more money than all 
the money we spent on education. 
 
Just think of it. The money you pay the teachers up in La 
Loche, and up in Cumberland House, you know, way to 
Kenaston, going down to Cypress Hills and all the way . . . the 
money we pay all the teachers, the heating costs of the schools, 
when you look at all the universities we pay for, when you look 
at all the money that is spent in the colleges system, the Grant 
Devine right-wing debt, the interest payments in that one year 
stood to be more than all the money we spent in education. 
 
But I’ll tell you something. So the Saskatchewan Party does 
exactly the same thing again, exactly the same strategy. They 
have this idea of Grow Saskatchewan. Well I saw it with Grant 

Devine. All there went was . . . The only thing I saw growing 
was a debt, and they were scrambling. They started growing 
mismanagement. Mismanagement became to be the big word, 
you know, during that period because a lot of . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . One of my friends adds, a little bit of 
corruption as well. And so there was a lot of that going on at 
that time. 
 
But they get a little bit of pressure and they would spend the 
money. They didn’t have the money but they would spend it. 
And they would keep on promising all these things. They would 
speak from one side one day, the next side the next day. And 
I’m hearing the same thing from the Saskatchewan Party. 
They’re doing exactly the same type of strategy. 
 
But a lot of people are worried about them. It’s not only people 
from the North who are worried about them. I see a lot of 
people are worrying in the South. I see them worried about their 
own people . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . oh yes. And the 
problem they do have is that they’re tied in with the Alliance 
and you know they’re tied in with that type of an approach. And 
their popularity went up when they went up and it went down as 
they’re going down. 
 
A lot of people are worried about them because some of their 
views are fine, but some other views are a little extreme in 
certain situations. They don’t have that co-operative spirit, you 
know, that’s out there to work with people from all 
backgrounds and to be able to do those types of things and learn 
to appreciate that. Because even as I look at recently when there 
was a meeting and the people always ask me tough questions 
when I go to the meeting, and I’ve dealt with a lot of tough 
questions over the years. But I notice that a member from — the 
leader, Hermanson — went to the FSIN (Federation of 
Saskatchewan Indian Nations) convention. And he got a little 
bit of a roast on there. 
 
Now they wonder why that happens, though. And you can’t do 
an overnight success story. You have to build a certain sense of 
trust with people. I know that when they ask questions in the 
House — and I was waiting for a question from the North. I 
know that the Leader of the Opposition — and I apologize for 
mentioning his name — but the Leader of the Opposition is 
talking about maybe going to La Ronge, etc. But a lot of people 
know this one thing. Ever since I was minister of Northern 
Affairs — of course I was very happy to be the minister of 
Northern Affairs — I had worked as the associate minister of 
Education, I was also a minister of SGI (Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance) when we made the big change on 
no-fault insurance. So we did quite a bit of the change. Now 
I’ve got them talking from across over there a little bit. 
 
But as we’re doing the overall change in the system, we looked 
at the concrete aspects of our development and it is so good to 
be able to come out here with a team of people over the years. 
And as we’re talking I first came in on opposition and I was 
with a team, Allan Blakeney, was of course our premier for 
many years. And I learned about, you know, the strategies in 
opposition. I went through the Meech Lake debate, I went 
through the Charlottetown accord, and we went through that 
whole situation. I’ve learned a lot about being in opposition. 
 
(19:45) 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 75 

 

Then I worked with Premier Romanow and that’s when the 
Charlottetown accord took place and learned more about the 
constitutional talks. But also the premier at that time, we were 
in opposition at that time, our leader, Roy Romanow, used to 
say that yes, the constitution is 20 per cent, but it’s 80 per cent 
of the other things that we have to really work on. And in many 
cases I learned a lot over the years from Mr. Romanow and 
from Blakeney, and now our present Premier as well, and many 
of my colleagues over the years. 
 
You know, I started out with . . . As a matter of fact, we were 
starting out together, the present Premier and I, along with our 
other member, our friend from Moose Jaw, and also our friend 
from P.A. (Prince Albert) and from Saskatoon. And we were 
moving forward and learning, you know, the gives and takes of 
politics. It was quite the enjoyable experience because when the 
people were talking as I was growing up, you know, coming 
back from the war, and us being you know partaking in politics, 
some of them may have not thought that we would ever make it 
here. 
 
And when we finally made it here, the people were so happy. 
And some of the success stories that we’ve had — there’s still 
unfinished business of course — but there’s always unfinished 
business. You know the next group of elections will get new 
politicians. There’ll be always unfinished business because 
there’s always room for improvement in systems. 
 
Now I also, on the Aboriginal question as it relates to the Sask 
Party, and also to us, as we build a sense of trust over the years, 
as I looked at the NDP, the ’76 formula was there on treaty land 
entitlement, you know, with Allan Blakeney. And there was a 
certain sense of trust built there from Tommy Douglas and the 
first meetings of the federation on municipal formation were 
held at this legislature, you know, under Tommy Douglas. 
 
And over the years a sense of trust has been built with the party. 
A certain amount was built with the Liberals during the ’60s 
period, and then we gained a lot of that in the ’70s and ’80s 
period. But a lot of it is because of concrete action. You know, 
we worked to get the understanding that, yes, people not only 
needed education, people could be policy makers as well. There 
was Indian governments to be run, you know, Métis institutions 
to be governed, and those things — putting power and control 
in the hands of people to a certain extent, you know — made 
that possible. And we’ve seen the changes with the . . . as I 
mentioned earlier on, on educational institutional development. 
 
So I’ve been very, very happy, and lucky, and proud as a 
politician over the years. I’ve, in many ways when I was 
working in education, it was also a bit of a microcosm, you 
know, as a teacher. You have children from different 
backgrounds, you know, from different levels of economic 
backgrounds. You know different cultural backgrounds, and in 
many cases you see a microcosm of society anyway. It’s not as 
complex as what you will find towards the whole because 
there’s a little bit of similarity in certain communities. But you 
get a sense of that as a teacher. And so it helped me out as a 
teacher as I come into the politics. 
 
But it is such an important field. I’ve talked to a lot of young 
people and I really tell them: I said it’s good to become — and I 
push the science envelope — become scientists and do all of 

that and become business people, but also to take part in 
politics, take part in democracy, you know, move forward. Take 
part in First Nations local politics, tribal council politics, in 
provincial FSIN and Métis Nation politics, federal politics, 
provincial politics, municipal politics. Take a strong part and 
active involvement in all of those because that’s what the 
essence of change is all about. 
 
Now I’d like to say a few words in Cree to talk about those 
things that were very important for me, because as I came to 
this legislature for the first time and I stood in this House, I 
delivered my speech in Cree and English. And over the years 
I’ve watched this develop because all of a sudden I heard 
somebody speaking in Ukrainian and then German and in the 
Polish language and so on. 
 
But it’s been taking place a little bit better which to me is very, 
very important. You don’t only respect the person in regards to 
their background, in regards to their dress, but also their 
language, their culture. It’s very, very important to actually do 
it. Talking about it is not good enough; it’s to actually do it. 
And although in many cases we were taught not to speak our 
languages in schools, I was lucky enough when I was born in 
Cumberland that I was able to keep my language and, you 
know, move forward with it. I’m also extremely lucky as a 
politician because then I could talk to the elders and the 
younger people because there are some nuances on certain 
concepts that I talk in Cree that are not necessarily there in 
English. And it’s very, very important, therefore, to have a 
bilingual person, you know, as an MLA. 
 
There was certain things that I did learn too, a few words in 
Dene, you know, for . . . But Dene is a very different language 
from Cree and I wish I would have learned a lot more of it. As I 
travel around I learned a few words that were key concepts, but 
not the way that I should have because one of my communities 
was a Dene community. So I take my hats off to people who . . . 
I travelled in Europe a little bit and they speak two languages, 
three languages, four languages, some of them seven languages. 
And I look past at some of the history of our people, and they 
used to do that. They used to speak three, four languages, and 
so the norm was that. It’s only recently in the past 50 years or 
some in certain committees, that monolingualism, you know, 
became a little bit of a practice, but never perfect in each 
community. There’s always been people who were bilingual 
and sometimes trilingual. 
 
So in Cree I’ll . . . for the listeners who are out there, some of 
them I talk to are in the hospitals. Sometimes I will hear a 
commentary from some elder who was at the hospital. And they 
say, oh I can hear that voice because you’ve been speaking in 
the legislature, he said. And they were very, very, very proud 
and happy that their issues could be discussed in this House. 
 
And so with that I would like to move forward to say a few 
words in Cree. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
My friend said, egosi, egosi and the same as hear, hear. Now 
when I was . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 



76 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

I guess in my commentary I relayed in a more concise form, in 
Cree, the commentary that I made, you know, vis-à-vis the 
comments I made on the importance of economic development 
and jobs and education, health development, that you see in this 
Throne Speech, this idea of providing hope for people. You 
know that’s the idea that even though there’s tough times you 
know you can always pull through. 
 
When there are important challenges, there’s always people that 
you can point at that will have even a more difficult time than 
you and you know that they actually pull through. And they 
don’t talk about only the negative stuff. They talk about what 
you can achieve, what you can actually do. They talk about 
hope. They talk about the spirit of the people. They talk about 
the spirit of this province. 
 
You know there’s people who point elsewhere and say it may 
be better over there, but there’s always things that were better in 
this province. We’re the ones who created medicare. We 
probably developed a team approach 20 years from now that 
they’ll look at in regards to our health action plans. There will 
be things that we will have learned from it, things we could 
have improved on it, but we will learn at the next stage of 
development what it will be. It will be something that people 
will look at. 
 
There will be things that we will look at on the forestry strategy 
for the North. They will see how our concrete strategies not 
only on jobs, on the idea of getting the ownership base, but on 
the management of the environment and also the management, 
you know, of the business — those put together, we will see 
what improvements we will have made and where we will be 
into the future. It’s a sign of hope, you know, for the people. 
 
On the side of education, like I said, a handful of us in 
education a few years back and when I was growing up. Just in 
the North alone, over 2,000 — I know that Indian Federated 
College, they have about 2,000 people at the university; Gabriel 
Dumont Institute has over 1,000. So these systems, you know, 
coming through will be where, you know, the hope will be 
created. I’m seeing a sign of breaking down the barriers, you 
know, of discrimination and racism, but I see a great hope. 
 
I’ll tell you a little story as I leave. When I was growing up, I 
went to The Pas, Manitoba. I used to have a 3-horsepower 
motor. We used to go and get our goods and supplies from there 
because it was only 90 miles away, but when we had a load on, 
you know, coming back, it used to take us 18 hours coming 
upstream on this 3-horsepower. And we used to run this café 
and restaurant. 
 
But when I was there, I heard about this thing they called a little 
bit of a theatre, and it’s where . . . of course in Cumberland we 
just called it the picture show, and I couldn’t even probably 
pronounce theatre when I went over there. I was 13 years old. 
 
So I got over there and I go to this picture show and I had been 
there before, but as a kid, but I didn’t know what was going on 
and how you pay the ticket and how you went in. So I go into 
this theatre anyway. So I walked in there. Now I watch how 
they buy the ticket, so I buy the ticket and I walk in. Now as 
I’m walking in, my goodness, they even have some popcorn in 
there. I said, popcorn, my goodness. I had some change and I 

bought some popcorn and I’m pretty proud. I’m walking into 
this theatre. 
 
So as I sit down, I see a seat over here and I see a seat over 
there, and I chose the one to the left. So I chose that seat to the 
left and I go and sit down. All of a sudden there is a voice 
behind me, and it says: 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
And translated in Cree, it says, I think that little white guy is 
lost. So I turned around and I spoke back to them in Cree. And 
they said, oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, they said, you’re from 
Cumberland House. They could tell my dialect in Cree because 
we spoke a little different Cree from them. 
 
So I asked them, I said, well why is it that you ask me whether I 
was lost? It appears that I’m in the wrong place or something. 
He said, yes. He says a long time ago, he says, we were not 
allowed to go to this theatre, but now they allow us in here, they 
said. But he says, this side is for us, you know. The Indians sit 
over here and the white people sit over there — we’re 
segregated, we’re segregated. 
 
And when I was, interestingly enough, when the dam was built 
I was in grade 9 and I was at the E.B. Campbell dam. And we 
had worked there, we lived in the tents out there — and they 
had houses, you know, for the SaskPower workers — but we 
lived in the tents by there. And we tried to get some water this 
one time, but there was a big kerfuffle that we had to haul our 
water down the river about a quarter of a mile. But they had 
running water there and my dad persuaded a family, and we 
finally got the water and I was so happy because I didn’t have 
to carry the pails way down, you know, the steep embankment 
on the lake — on the river. But that person that helped us out 
was chastised. You know, there was in those days they used to 
say the “Indian lover” or things like that, you know, on helping 
us out in regards to that whole thing. So we were raised with 
that type of situation. 
 
One day I came home and I said, Dad, could you go and ask if I 
could go to school there. I see that they opened a school there 
and the kids are going to school there. And I wanted to go 
because I was in grade 9. I wanted to make sure I’d catch up 
because we were probably going to work there at the dam till 
Christmas and go back to Cumberland. I says, we’re already 
behind in school and I wanted to see if we could go to school 
there. But you know what? Lo and behold my dad went back to 
work, and so he asked around to see if we could go to school 
there. But you know, they didn’t allow us to go to school there. 
Now these are some of the experiences that I went through. 
 
But I’ll tell you something, what I heard from what my aunts 
and uncles told me, he says, you had it easy. So what it is, is 
that we’ve seen a change. The change is improving. It’s not 
where it should be at yet, but it’s improving. We’re seeing a 
greater willingness, you know, to tackle that issue; we’re not 
running away from it. 
 
I went through . . . I had this great experience when I was at — 
the members from opposite would love this — at the, I went to 
the international conference, The Socialist International. And I 
would speak of it . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . And I was 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 77 

 

pretty lucky in a sense. And I was over there and one of the 
modern-day concepts of sustainable development . . . 
Brundtland was there, you know, from Norway. She was the 
first prime minister, woman prime minister in Norway at that 
time, and she was there. 
 
And there was Yitzhak Rabin, you know, tried to create peace 
in the Middle East at that time, and later assassinated. Yitzhak 
Rabin was there. And we have another situation in the Middle 
East right now. 
 
And so I’ve had a chance to see this situation, and so I’m at the 
Reichstag, in Germany, and we’re dealing with these different 
issues. And I knew how sensitive it was, you know, talking 
about the concept of self-determination. I knew what it was 
like, you know, with the debates, what was going on. Because 
how wrong for extreme nationalists, the problem of extreme 
nationalists, but also the problem, you know, that is there for 
any ultra group that’s around. 
 
But I was there at that time, and it was a very, very, you know, 
good experience, you know, for me to see this format. I would 
have never expected and dreamed that I would be there, 
listening to the international debates and talking about 
sustainable development and talking about the social democrats 
in development. And in that sense, it was a good, positive 
learning experience. 
 
And those experiences for me . . . I could talk all night long. I 
went to . . . when the right-wingers took over in Chile, Pinochet, 
when the right-wingers took over there, and they dealt things 
with the hand of authority, you know, top-down control. And I 
saw people there . . . there was tear gas. Some people got shot 
and killed. And it was an authoritarian dictatorship. Later on, 
they changed, you know, on that. But I was there working with 
them and the indigenous peoples there. And their land, their 
reserve land, was taken away by the right-wing government. 
 
And in that sense, I learned a lot in my years in politics. I think 
when my parents were growing up, and they thought I would 
become a teacher later on, they would have never dreamt, you 
know, of all the things that I would see. When I was travelling 
on a dog team, going to the traplines, you know, living in a tent 
at 40 below — those types of, you know, images, that are still 
reflected in my mind, and seeing the change, you know, that I 
have seen over the years was very important. 
 
But the very importance in the world as well, to respect each 
other. And I have a sense . . . and I see the rural members from 
the past . . . Some of our people went to work for the farms, you 
know, when I was growing up. Some of them went to work for 
the sugar beet plantations in different locations, and we went all 
over the place. And I sense that sense of respect as well. There’s 
an elitism, you know, that’s out there. Sometimes you have an 
urban elitism; you know, sometimes you have this mixture, you 
know, the problem of town and country of the past since the 
Middle Ages, and people start looking at you sort of differently 
just because they come from the bush, or from the rural areas, 
or from the city. 
 
And to me, as a government, as a person in the House, you try 
and break that down. You got to try and respect people whether 
they come from the farm, the trapline, you know, or from the 

chem lab at the university. You got to get people to work 
together in different . . . you got to give them hope that indeed 
people can work together. 
 
And that’s the type of vision that we look at in this new century. 
Yes, there’ll be ups and downs on this particular issue, you 
know, and . . . as people tend to blame things easily, you know, 
on situations from time to time. 
 
But one of the things that was taught to me, you know, as I was 
growing up, yes, things were tougher, you know; the racism 
was tougher before — but things are improving. You know, 
we’re moving forward; we’re trying to get at the key issues. In 
the Throne Speech we dealt with the economy, you know, the 
jobs, the health, you know, the education, and the modern 
aspects of the Internet. 
 
You know, these types of issues are the issues of this new 
century. A dream that my parents had for me when my mother 
. . . you know, after my mother died, you know, of . . . being 
part of change, and being part of hope. That’s a dream that I 
still have for me as . . . For me, possibly, as I make the change 
as the politician, you know, back to working, you know, in the 
field of education. 
 
To me, that’s what I hope to see more of. You know, that’s 
what I believe will happen though. Because as more and more 
people know about what’s happening — not only 
internationally, but locally — things will improve. 
 
And so it’s not I . . . of course I stand up here to support, you 
know, the Throne Speech, and also to oppose the amendment. 
So to the members, I guess, thank you for this . . . who knows, 
this may be my last Throne Speech debate. I may have another 
year, you know, next year, but there might be another . . . 
another member said there might be another three more. 
 
But to all the members of the House, I was in opposition — it 
was a very, very good period for me, a learning of the whole 
thing; and how to do the opposition and then being in politics. 
But it’s good to play both roles. You know, I knew the 
importance of being in opposition and the role that you play as 
an opposition member; but I also know the importance of being 
in government. And in the latter I must confess my bias that I 
prefer being in government, you know, rather than being in 
opposition. 
 
So with that, thank you very much, and again, Mr. Speaker, 
those are my comments. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I want to thank 
you for . . . my best wishes to the previous speaker, the hon. 
member from Cumberland. And, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say 
how pleased I am to be speaking this evening. And first of all I 
would like to point out how happy I am to be joined in the 
House this evening by our leader, David Karwacki, who is also 
here with Debbie Ward. 
 
Now Debbie Ward will be well known to colleagues on this 
side of the House. She is representative of so many, many 
people in this province who joined the Saskatchewan Party, 



78 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

thought this might be the way to go, thought this might be the 
way to build the province, and after a stint over there decided 
that that was a mistake and joined the Liberal Party and is 
running as a Liberal candidate. 
 
Now it’s unfortunate that I’m speaking tonight as North 
Battleford is playing in the seventh and final deciding game of 
the Saskatchewan Junior Hockey League against the team from 
Kindersley — I believe that’s the Kindersley Clowns — and 
this is the deciding game. And I expect that we will see the 
championship come home to North Battleford tonight. 
 
(20:15) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker . . . well, Mr. Speaker, the last election was 
1999 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Some people are sore 
losers, I know. But last election was 1999. At that time, the 
NDP promised us 500 more nurses, 200 more police officers, 
and 30,000 more jobs. Well, what did we, what did we get? 
What did we get? 
 
We got, well, we are told now that our nurses are leaving; we 
have fewer nurses than ever before. They’re leaving the 
province. We have the Minister of Justice saying, “I’m sorry; 
I’m sorry but our promise of 200 police officers cannot be met.” 
And we have job losses and population in this province which 
now is the highest since statistics started being recorded during 
the Great Depression. 
 
And what has been the government’s response? Well the 
government has come up with the most novel job-creation 
strategy, I think, in the history of the free world. Last year, they 
hired 500 civil servants, and this year they tell us they’re going 
to lay them off. That is the job-creation strategy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Well in the Throne Speech, her honour the Lieutenant 
Governor, told us we were lucky we had the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund. I was surprised that the Lieutenant Governor would be 
talking about the Fiscal Stabilization Fund that the Minister of 
Finance told us last month no longer existed, that it’s gone. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I’m having trouble being heard. The 
member who used to say to Aboriginal members of this House, 
“you always stand there with your hand open,” seems to have 
the same thing about me now. I don’t know what the problem 
is, but I know he used to always heckle Aboriginal members by 
saying “you folks always have your hands out.” 
 
Well Mr. Speaker, on the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, two years 
ago, the Saskatchewan Party said they were opposed to us 
having reserves in the provincial government. They said we 
shouldn’t have reserves. They claimed there was a billion 
dollars swirled away somewhere, and it should be instantly 
spent. Well they non . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — What do you say? 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I said it made sense to have some reserves, and 
as it would so turn out, the Saskatchewan Party has now gotten 
its wish; there are no reserves, and the Minister of Finance has 
confirmed we have no reserves. So this must be good news to 
the Saskatchewan Party that we have no reserves, however I 
don’t know what . . . while this certainly is very bad news for 

those who say we need to build the economy, build the 
employment base, build the tax base, I frankly don’t know what 
this does in terms of the Saskatchewan Party’s promise of 
massive tax cuts and how that will figure in to their plan. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, previously there is on the books the 
balanced budget legislation and it says first of all that in 
determining whether or not we have a balanced budget the 
government must use the same accounting rules from year to 
year, and if they change their accounting rules the question of 
whether or not the budget is balanced will be determined on the 
former rules and not the new rules. And we will be interested to 
see if that is observed this year. 
 
I also note that the government is saying that they have had a 
major event that has thrown the economic strategy and the 
economic plan off track. Well I note that the balanced budget 
legislation says that if there is a major, unanticipated, 
identifiable event or set of circumstances which has had a 
dramatic impact on expenses or revenues in a fiscal year, the 
Minister of Finance is required to present to the Assembly a 
special report identifying those circumstances and the financial 
implications of the event and a plan for dealing with the 
situation. So if it is the position of the government that there has 
been a major, unanticipated, identifiable event, then I would 
anticipate that that legislation will be followed and will be 
respected. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, you have heard me speak of Crown 
investments and it was interesting to see a list recently of the 
full Crown investments in the province . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Yes, and I opposed them as you will no doubt 
recall, Mr. Speaker. Hon. members sitting opposite will no 
doubt recall my opposition. However what do we have now? 
What do we have now for Crown investments? What do the 
taxpayers of Saskatchewan have for their money? 
 
Well here is a partial list of the companies in which our 
government has now invested: Schneider’s Popcorn Parties, a 
company called Pastryworld, another company called Rinkles, 
an insurance company in Toronto, another insurance company 
in Charlottetown, a cable company in Newfoundland, a gas 
company in Chile, a pipeline company in Mexico, a sound stage 
in Regina — similar ventures in Winnipeg, Calgary and 
Edmonton are all losing money, but let’s hope that the Regina 
one does better. Ag Dealer, a farm equipment magazine; 
broadband communications provider in New Zealand and 
Australia, Starstruck Enterprises, a women’s apparel 
manufacturer, and the Information Services Corporation. That is 
the one that started out with a budget of 20 million and it’s now 
gone to 80 million, and which has spent so much time trying to 
market around the world before we get it operating here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I ask how much it would have cost us to take the software 
from the province of Alberta when they automated their land 
titles system and how much it would have cost us to adapt that 
to Saskatchewan? I suspect a lot less than even the 20 million, 
much less the 80 million we are now spending. 
 
This is to name but a few of the investments totalling hundreds 
of millions of dollars that are being made. 
 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 79 

 

Meanwhile, Mr. Speaker, Prairie Alliance for the Future, that 
was attempting to establish a not-for-profit short-line railway on 
abandoned tracks, was rejected for financing by this 
government on the grounds that the venture was too risky. 
 
There have, I admit, been some positive investments for our 
province. I do congratulate the government for the clean coal 
research that they are initiating. I think that’s a very positive 
move. I also congratulate them on moving on the ethanol issue. 
I think that’s very positive. 
 
I am concerned, though, that the provincial government has set 
up a strategy where we now appear to have about 40 
communities around Saskatchewan looking into setting up an 
ethanol plant, and I am worried that our government is reluctant 
to announce where the two or three or four ethanol plants will 
be located because inevitably they will have a few communities 
happy and many communities unhappy. So I hope that this is 
not holding back an ethanol announcement because they have 
now set up a process in which there will be more unhappy 
communities than happy ones. 
 
I would also like to mention the bio-diesel initiatives spoken of 
by David Karwacki. I think that is an excellent one, and I 
commend that to the minister for his consideration because I 
think that is something that stands the prospect of building this 
economy. 
 
But on the whole, Mr. Speaker, the investment strategy of this 
government stands in stark contrast to the investment strategies 
of every other province. Now the fact we are doing something 
very different than all other provinces makes this a textbook 
laboratory situation in which it’s easy then to test whether what 
we are doing is right or wrong. 
 
Well, what do we see? I understand the thinking of the 
government. I have followed the reasoning that it is important 
to strengthen SaskTel by competing with companies in the 
private sector even if that is at the price of driving out private 
companies from this province, be they in the 
home-security-system market or be they in the system of cable 
providers. I understand they’re saying that’s strengthening our 
province because it’s strengthening the Crown corporations. I 
also understand the thinking of the government that when we 
invest 160 million in Australia, the benefits and dividends come 
flowing back to province, and we all can clip the coupons and 
be rich ever after. 
 
I understand that thinking, but I think when we’re going to 
assess whether this is the right strategy or the wrong strategy, 
we have to say, well if we’re doing something different than 
everybody else and we’re right and they’re wrong, then 
obviously we’re rich and they’re poor. Obviously we have 
investment coming into this province. Obviously we have jobs 
coming into this province. 
 
Well tragically, Mr. Speaker, we know it ain’t so. We know. 
We know that what is happening is we have more job loss than 
any other province. We know that we are desperately short of 
investment capital. We know that we have population loss 
unparalleled since the Great Depression. 
 
So if this investment strategy was right, Saskatchewan would be 

growing. But I put it to you, Mr. Speaker, if this investment 
strategy is wrong, then our economy will be contracting. Our 
jobs will be going elsewhere. Our young people will be moving 
out. Mr. Speaker, the investment strategy of this government is 
wrong, wrong, wrong, wrong. And that is not a mere opinion; 
that is the empirical evidence. That is the statistical evidence of 
a failed investment strategy on the part of our Crown 
corporations. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I want to speak for a moment, if I may, 
about the North Battleford water inquiry. Last month, by order 
in council, the government paid $2 million for the water 
inquiry. At the time, our mayor and city council was trying to 
meet with the minister and he wouldn’t meet with them. He told 
me that there would, unfortunately, be no money for North 
Battleford for fixing our water problems, beyond the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program which North 
Battleford would get in any event. 
 
So let’s run by this again, Mr. Speaker. We have at least $2 
million to study a problem. We have nothing to fix it. How does 
this work? Mr. Speaker, we were told in North Battleford at the 
outbreak of our water problem that annual maintenance had 
been done on the system. Part of the system was put back not 
correctly and cryptosporidium was able to come into the water. 
We knew that a year ago, and yet we have spent millions on an 
inquiry while the minister says: sorry, times are tough, money is 
tight, nothing to fix the problem. 
 
This is a stark example of where the problem is not lack of 
money, but lack of priorities, misplaced priorities that says it’s 
more important to study a problem than to fix it. 
 
I also want to speak for a minute on the Fyke Report and about 
the new health initiative announced by the provincial 
government in December. At the time it was announced, the 
Liberal Party said that we were basically pleased with the 
announcements made by the provincial government; we 
supported it. Since then, the government has told us that the 
new health regions are going ahead, but the rest will be done as 
money becomes available. And I’m very much afraid that the 
rest of the health action plan is little more than a wish list. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Well, I hope I’m wrong, but I recall in 1996 when there was a 
by-election in North Battleford, they announced a $25 million 
nursing home. There was a by-election, and nothing more was 
heard about the new nursing home. Then in the year 2000, there 
was an announcement of renal dialysis in the Battlefords Union 
Hospital. And nothing’s been heard since. 
 
And now they’ve announced a CT (computerized tomography) 
scan for Battlefords Union Hospital and other regional hospitals 
in the province. I supported that. I hope that that announcement 
will not turn out to be of the same quality as the earlier 
announcement. I hope that the health action plan is not a wish 
list. It’s not a campaign document, but actually a blueprint for 
action. And if it is, I can assure the government that it will have 
my support and have the support of the Liberal Party. But I’m 
not encouraged when I think of the 500 new nurses and the 200 
new police officers that were promised to this province a couple 
of years ago. 



80 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, federally we have the Romanow 
Commission looking into the future of health care. And I would 
like to say that I wish that commission well. We know that the 
right wing would like to — what they call — reform Medicare, 
and most of those reforms sound like an introduction of two-tier 
medicine. And I think that most of us want to see the single-tier 
public health system preserved. 
 
However, if we are going to preserve it, we have to do 
something about three-year wait lists for surgery. We have to do 
something about the long lists for diagnostic and other services. 
And it’s my hope that the Romanow Commission will point out 
practical ways where we can modernize and update our health 
plan to the 21st century. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in that regard, I want to tell you about one 
constituent of mine who had extremely serious headaches. She 
was told she needed an MRI (magnetic resonance imaging) for 
proper diagnosis. She was told that her MRI would come 
through in approximately 12 months. She did, I think, what 
almost any of us would do under the circumstances. She went to 
Edmonton; she paid her $1,000, and had her MRI done the next 
week. Unfortunately that cost about $1,000 out of her own 
pocket, and more sadly she did indeed have serious health 
problems — serious health problems which our public system 
wouldn’t have even diagnosed for another year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to say that I believe — the Liberal Party 
believes, in the five principles of the Canada Health Act. We 
believe in one-tier medicine; we believe in public health care. 
But public health care will not survive in this country or this 
province if we are going to go on putting people on one year 
waiting lists for basic diagnostic services or three year waiting 
lists for surgery. 
 
I also want to speak, Mr. Speaker, for a moment about the issue 
of the community-based organizations — the CBOs 
(community-based organizations). In 1991 the NDP said that 
they wish to pay parity between the wages of those working in 
group homes, shelters, sheltered workshops, and other such 
community-based facilities and they should get parity with 
those people who are working for health districts and in the 
formal public service. 
 
We now have a situation in this province where group homes 
run by the Department of Social Services have a pay schedule 
sometimes 25 to 50 per cent higher than group homes run by 
the community-based organizations. This inevitably creates 
resentment and tension and now I think is very close to creating 
a serious labour disruption in this province. 
 
These workers are giving service in areas where, if there is a 
strike, the clients served by them will be very, very hard to 
service in other facilities or an extreme hardship on the families. 
These are very high needs individuals. But when they say they 
are getting 7 and $8 to work in a group home whereas in a 
nursing home under the health district they would get double 
that, we can certainly understand their frustration. The 
government has been promising to address that issue for the 
entire term of its office, unfortunately little or nothing has been 
done to date. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I understand that we are now faced with a 

situation where group home workers are very likely to go on 
strike this spring. That will create serious dislocation in this 
province and I call on the government to finally address this and 
so many other outstanding issues that need to be addressed in 
this province. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, some of the speakers have already referred 
to the National Post article titled, “Saskatchewan: not the 
biggest but the best”. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I appreciated that article. It underscored that 
there are values and a sense of connectivity and community that 
sustains this province and its people. And I think those of us on 
this side of the House should be honest enough to admit that 
these values are in part both the cause and an effect of this 
province having had many years of NDP government. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, we now have a crisis where if people 
are to live here and enjoy the quality of life we have, there must 
be economic development, there must be a renewal of our 
infrastructure. We have to start celebrating success and not be 
suspicious of it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — I say with all sincerity to my NDP friends, it is 
time to let Tommy Douglas be history. Douglas was a visionary 
and a great man who did much for this province and this 
country. He was also a man, however, who distrusted success, 
who did not want private investment in this province, and who 
thought everything should be done by and owned by the 
government. 
 
As we move forward there are old values that continue to be 
beacons. Mr. Speaker, Tommy Douglas was not tied to the past. 
He was willing to try new things. He did not slavishly follow 
the script. In the words of that dreadful modern buzz-phrase, he 
was a man who could think outside the box. 
 
Sadly his political successors appear incapable of doing the 
same. We must be prepared to adopt new solutions and leave 
behind outdated ideology if we are to build a modern, dynamic 
province of opportunity and growth. Instead of bragging about 
us being a wee province with a wee leader, the time has come to 
again think big and to write large. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not in favour of being a wee province. I am 
not in favour of thinking small. And therefore, I will not be 
voting for the address in reply to the Speech from the Throne. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m proud to rise 
today to enter into the debate on the Speech from the Throne 
that was ably delivered by Her Honour the Lieutenant 
Governor. Moving the Throne Speech, the member from 
Greystone drew attention to many important initiatives that 
could only be highlighted in the speech last Thursday. I 
congratulate him and truly admire the steadfast works he carries 
on as a champion for social justice, community development, 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 81 

 

and our environment, to name just a few. I know him as an 
inclusive and a compassionate colleague. 
 
To my newest colleague, the member from Idylwyld, I say well 
done. Your speech allowed us to get a glimpse of not only your 
commitment but also your flare and your humour. I look 
forward to many years of working with the member to keep our 
province strong and to stop the forces that would keep us 
sleepless in Saskatchewan. 
 
The mover and the seconder are two excellent reasons why I 
enjoy the Throne Speech debate, Mr. Speaker. It lays before this 
Assembly the reflection of the great constituencies that make up 
this province. It also allows us to understand how each of us 
will bring forward concerns and address the weighty issues that 
are placed before us in the session. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to take this opportunity to highlight 
the important work that you do to further the understanding of 
the British parliamentary system of democracy in the 
communities across this province. The students and staff at 
Pilot Butte elementary school in my constituency, Regina 
Wascana Plains, thank you for the time that you spent with 
them holding a mini legislative session. 
 
It was complete with premier, opposition leader, both sides of 
the House represented, private members’ statements, and even a 
Bill to debate and to be passed, not to mention the presence of 
the mace and the Chair. Staff and students spent many hours in 
preparation for their debate. They told me they learned so much 
more about the work of peace and good government. 
 
I congratulate you, Mr. Speaker, as well on the selection of the 
Pages for this session. They not only reflect the diversity of our 
province but also the youthful exuberance and intelligence the 
next generation brings to our province, and yet another good 
reason to be confident about the future of Saskatchewan. 
Welcome to our Pages. I hope your time spent with us is not 
only informative but also a bit of fun. 
 
I’m fortunate, Mr. Speaker, to have another young person work 
with me. Mr. Tim Baker, one of the participants in this 
inaugural year of the Saskatchewan legislative internship 
program. He has helped me to prepare for this session, and he 
has been learning about all the hours of work that is spent in 
committees, in research, and outreach, in order for the work of 
this Assembly to go forward. 
 
I’m impressed with the resumes of all the interns, and especially 
with the life experiences, their formal education, and world 
travel, in their backgrounds in their resumes. 
 
The internship program provides an opportunity for these young 
people to work on both sides of the House, and gain valuable 
experience, and knowledge that can be returned to our 
communities. 
 
I would also like to welcome back the officials at the table who 
will offer wise advice on the procedures of the Assembly, and 
assist both sides to conduct our sittings with grace and dignity. 
 
I would also like to congratulate and thank the 
Sergeant-at-Arms and his staff who will provide a secure 

environment for, at times lively, and often emotional and heated 
debate that will occur. 
 
Today it is a privilege and a pleasure for me to profile 
Regina-Wascana Plains. We are one of four urban, rural 
constituencies in the province, that include the communities of 
Pilot Butte, White City, Emerald Park, and Balgonie, as well as 
the southeast corner of the city of Regina, including the 
subdivisions of University Park, Gardiner Heights, Varsity 
Park, Wascana View, Wood Meadows, and Windsor Park. 
 
We are blessed with farmers, teachers, health care 
professionals, civil servants, technical and trades people, and 
homemakers, just to name a few, as well as many beautiful 
children of all ages. I thank them, sincerely, for allowing me to 
be their representative. 
 
It is with their faces in mind that I rise today to support the 
vision placed before us in the Speech from the Throne. 
Wherever I go, I will be telling them that Saskatchewan is able 
to look to the future with confidence, knowing the wealth of 
human and natural resources that we possess. 
 
To this end, I would like to highlight this government’s 
achievements in the area of sustainable tax reform. Since 1993, 
the provincial income tax, sales tax, and fuel taxes, paid by the 
average Saskatchewan family have been reduced by 24 per cent. 
 
(20:45) 
 
We have de-harmonized the sales tax, and have reduced sales 
and personal income taxes in every budget since we balanced 
the budget. We now have taxed capital gains from the sale of 
farm and business assets at the lowest rate ever. It’s something 
our friends on the other side of the House, Mr. Speaker, will not 
propose, and they do not highlight in anything they talk about. 
 
We’re also eliminating the flat tax, the debt reduction surtax, 
and the high income surtax — all of which the initiatives that I 
have talked about are not proposed by the Sask-a-Tory Party in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Additionally, we have reduced the provincial sales tax by 33 per 
cent and have extended a sales tax credit to assist lower income 
people. The corporate income tax rate for small business has 
been reduced by 40 per cent since 1991, from 10 per cent to 6 
per cent, Mr. Speaker, and we’ve increased the small business 
tax threshold by 50 percent, from $200,000 to $300,000. 
 
Last but not least, Mr. Speaker, this government has introduced 
dozens of targeted tax and royalty incentives in areas such as 
manufacturing and processing, enhanced oil recovery, potash 
and base mineral development, aviation, film and video, 
livestock and horticultural facilities, and research and 
development. 
 
The cornerstone of our economic development strategy is the 
Partnership for Prosperity. Launched on June 7, 2001, this 
government’s Partnership for Prosperity is an economic 
strategy that sets the stage for increased diversification, a 
greater emphasis on innovation and new technology, and a 
competitive commercial environment. This will lead to more 
and better jobs for Saskatchewan people. 



82 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Since putting our financial house in order in 
the early 1990s, Saskatchewan has been blessed with strong 
economic growth. Partnership for Prosperity builds on that 
growth. It builds upon that strong base and positions this 
province to meet new challenges — challenges like 
globalization — and take advantage of new opportunities. It is 
this strong economy that helps us build stronger social 
programs. 
 
In consultation with almost ten thousand people, we discovered 
a desire to focus on our youth, focus on innovation and the 
revitalization of our rural economy. 
 
First, our youth. In order to keep more of our youth, we are 
broadening access to the tools of the future and producing a 
society that is well-educated, competitive, and confident. To do 
this, we have enriched the educational system with 
technology-based enhancements, expanded opportunities for 
computer learning, and ensured that young people are aware of 
the opportunities right here at home. 
 
In innovation, we can create more and better jobs by building 
on Saskatchewan’s tradition of innovation as we address the 
challenges of globalization. To do this, we have expanded the 
research and development capabilities within the province. 
We’ve integrated new technologies and ideas into our 
traditional industries to create more value. 
 
We’ve extended the range and the depth of IT (information 
technology) training in the province and increased the 
opportunities for participation to make sure everyone can 
contribute to a prosperous province and share in our success. 
 
Revitalization. Here our focus is to maintain our balanced 
approach to economic growth and the quality of life issues to 
make Saskatchewan a great place to live, to work, and to do 
business. To do this we’ve fostered a competitive environment 
in which to do business. Teamed up with rural people to 
strengthen the rural economy, ACRE (Action Committee on the 
Rural Economy), we have reinforced our transportation 
infrastructure, and we’ve communicated the many success 
stories of Saskatchewan people. 
 
So where are we today? Despite the global economic slowdown 
experienced as a result of September 11 terrorist attacks, the 
drought conditions experienced in Saskatchewan over the 
summer of 2001, and the falling oil and gas prices . . . we’re not 
blaming these facts; Mr. Speaker, we’re stating these facts as 
reality. But despite all of this, Mr. Speaker, within our first year 
of implementation of the Partnership for Prosperity, over half 
of our targets are on track — to be met or to be exceeded. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Some of these include the reduction of 
personal income taxes by over 25 per cent. Increasing the 
average disposable income by 20 per cent. Increasing the 
proportion of people completing some post-secondary 
education by 15 per cent. Increasing the number of businesses 
and families connected the Internet by 40 per cent. Increasing 
the sales of agri-valued process products by 50 per cent. 

Increasing the GDP (gross domestic product) per capita by 2.5 
per cent per year. To become a world leader in research and 
development. To invest in the transportation network for 
economic development and retain competitiveness in the 10 key 
sectors of the partnership agenda. 
 
In addition to the attainment of these targets, Mr. Speaker, I’d 
also like to highlight several other positive developments in the 
Saskatchewan economy. 
 
In January 2002, KPMG completed an update on the 
competitiveness of 42 cities in Canada, 43 cities in the United 
States, and 30 in other countries. The study included Prince 
Albert, Moose Jaw, Regina, and Saskatoon. They say that while 
Canada was found as the overall cost leader in the study, I’m 
pleased, yet not surprised, to note that all four Saskatchewan 
cities covered in the survey rank better than the Canadian 
average. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Moreover, Mr. Speaker, among 17 major 
cities in the Canadian and US Midwest, Saskatoon ranked 
second behind Edmonton and ahead of Calgary. Ahead of 
Calgary, Winnipeg, and all of the US cities. 
 
This study confirms that many Saskatchewan people already 
know that the province fares very well when compared to 
jurisdictions worldwide. However, Mr. Speaker, we as a 
government are not prepared to simply rest here. There is much 
more to be done. That is the plan; that is the vision that was 
unveiled in the Throne Speech. 
 
Even in light of the recent difficulties being experienced in the 
agricultural sector, two key initiatives have been undertaken. 
The first one is the Action Committee on the Rural Economy or 
ACRE, which was created to identify and recommend options 
to further diversify the rural economy and to create jobs. This 
Assembly will soon receive the final report of ACRE and their 
proposals. Those proposals will form the basis of my 
government’s action plan for rural revitalization. 
 
This government is also advocating a comprehensive national 
farm safety net program. The Saskatchewan proposal, 
developed with advice from our farm leaders, calls for the 
federal government to support the following measures: a 
meaningful insurance program, including both crops and 
forages, a crop sector revenue deficiency program that offsets 
the impact of international subsidies, and an enhanced 
margin-based program targeted at our trade-sensitive livestock 
sector. 
 
Additionally, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan’s looking to the 
future and is positioned to become a national leader in the 
production of renewable fuels such as ethanol. Ethanol has 
potential to further diversify our agricultural economy and help 
reduce carbon dioxide emissions into the atmosphere. This 
government will soon introduce a green print for ethanol 
production that will foster growth in the industry. 
 
Not to forget to mention, Mr. Speaker, the immense potential 
that Saskatchewan has and this government has through an 
opening of, during the time that we’re here, the Saskatchewan 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 83 

 

and . . . together with the Saskatchewan Film and Video 
Development Corporation, a new $11.5 million state-of-the-art 
film and video soundstage in Regina. The soundstage will 
enable our province to fully participate in international film and 
video production. 
 
Hope in the agricultural sector, hope in the video and film 
sector, hope in forestry and mining, hope in our economic 
development throughout this province, Mr. Speaker. And I’m 
glad to stand firmly behind the vision that would speak to the 
hopes and aspirations of the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — To have our province grow we must have a 
firm foundation, Mr. Speaker, and I won’t have time to talk 
about many of the initiatives that we’re proposing in putting 
forward before a student even enters the school system, such as 
the child action plan, the Kids First program. And I’m sure 
others will highlight those programs as well. 
 
But I’d also like to talk about what we’re doing in the area of 
education from K to 12. While provincial funding for 
kindergarten to grade 12 education increased by 24 per cent 
over the past four years, I’m also proud to say the government 
has responded to the innovation and dedication of our educators 
and the long-term needs of our youth. Building on the 
experience of community, school, and the innovation of 
Saskatchewan educators, the Role of the School Task Force 
developed the concept of SchoolPLUS. Our government has 
embraced SchoolPLUS that would integrate education and human 
services to ensure that our schools are able to respond to the 
particular needs of the community and all of our students. 
We’ve endorsed the concept of SchoolPLUS that will work with 
our province’s educators and human service agencies to ensure 
its implementation. 
 
In addition to this focus on education, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
point to this government’s CommunityNet program. 
CommunityNet is a broadband, high-speed, province-wide 
telecommunications network that will connect more than 800 
schools and regional colleges, including those on First Nation 
reserves, 310 health facilities, and 256 government offices. 
 
This government recognizes the potential that CommunityNet 
has for Saskatchewan in terms of improving educational, health, 
and government services in affected communities, and 
potentially economic opportunities. The potential of the future 
of the infrastructure that CommunityNet provides is endless, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
In keeping with the focus on K to 12 education, Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to celebrate the achievements of Buffalo Plains, in my 
constituency, Cupar and Indian Head School Divisions, and 
their efforts to join together and create one division. Thanks to 
their efforts, more than 5,000 students attending 22 schools in 
this new division will enjoy increased opportunities to learn and 
increased benefits from learning. 
 
These benefits would include improved library resources and 
greater access and support to technology through such things as 
volume purchasing, shared services, and support personnel. 
There’ll be expanded programs like music and band, improved 

support services in the areas of speech and language pathology, 
and French language instruction, and increased staff 
professional development at networking that will be supported 
by mentoring opportunities. 
 
So congratulations to all the boards, all the members of the 
board, the students, the staff, the teachers, who are involved in 
this innovative initiative. They began their work, Mr. Speaker, 
before there was any significant financial assistance in place. 
They recognized it was right to do so, and they moved ahead. 
 
Now with an offer of additional financial assistance, it is hoped 
that other school divisions will take up the advantage of this 
opportunity to amalgamate and to be able to offer their students 
the same advantages. 
 
My constituency, Mr. Speaker, has a number of mature families 
who have students that are entering into post-secondary 
education opportunities, and so I’d like to spend a few minutes 
talking about what opportunities would be available to them. 
 
In terms of post-secondary education, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
highlight this government’s desire to integrate education, 
training, and research opportunities, while creating jobs and 
economic growth in the process. 
 
(21:00) 
 
The knowledge corridor has sprung up as a result of the close 
proximity of the University of Regina, SIAST (Saskatchewan 
Institute of Applied Science and Technology), and the SIFC 
(Saskatchewan Indian Federated College) building now 
underway and soon to be occupied, and the Petroleum 
Technology Research Centre and Information Technology 
Building otherwise known as the Terrace. 
 
This will allow for such benefits as shared services and 
facilities, community recreational opportunities, academic 
program bridging initiatives, investment in research, and 
economic growth and job creation. Since the initiation of the 
research park in 1998 and the commencement of the operations 
in 2000, the provincial government has invested more than $31 
million towards the Petroleum Technology Research Centre, the 
Terrace, and other related infrastructure for tenants to carry out 
or support research and/or technology development. 
 
These and many other efforts are ever improving this province’s 
ability to educate our young people as well as link them with 
the private sector to ensure their participation in the futures of 
our province and their future successes here. 
 
Economic growth in Saskatchewan will continue to be led by 
the private sector and private investment. However public 
policy and government initiatives as well as the cooperative 
sector make up the second and third engines of our economy. 
They also serve as a catalyst to investment. Cooperatives can 
and have had a great impact in Saskatchewan’s economy by 
keeping profits in the hands of people who deserve it most: the 
Saskatchewan people. 
 
Our Crown utility corporations represent another competitive 
advantage in support of economic growth in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. They follow the same principle. They provide quality 



84 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

services and offer consumer and commercial rates that are 
among the lowest in Canada. They also keep head offices here, 
good jobs here, and profits right here at home, supporting local 
suppliers and providing dividends that help fund essential 
public services. 
 
Crown corporations also provide the opportunity to partner with 
private companies in attracting investment for new and 
expanded enterprises in the province. Many small businesses 
would tell you how they’ve benefited from the partnerships 
they’ve developed with our Crown corporations. A modern 
economy such as ours must ensure that workers and consumers 
are protected. 
 
Investments in infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, is an important part 
of both the economy and the quality of life in Saskatchewan. 
This government is in the midst of the single largest public 
infrastructure project in our history — $900 million will now be 
spent over the next three years to improve our highways. Maybe 
this will help the Leader of the Opposition’s efforts to get into 
Alberta more and more often these days. 
 
In my constituency of Regina Wascana Plains, I’m happy to 
highlight several major road initiatives including the resurfacing 
of sections of Highway 1 from Balgonie to Regina and from 
Pasqua Street to the west of Grand Coulee, the paving of 
Highway 364 from Balgonie to Edenwold, and the regional 
highways plan that will move Ring Road traffic further east 
resulting in less heavy truck traffic conflicting with people 
needing to get to work. Pilot Butte and Balgonie have received, 
respectively, 1 million and about $700,000 to address their 
water quality concerns and have been given dollars for a joint 
fire protection initiative. Investment in our volunteers in our 
communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Saskatchewan communities are enriched and strengthened by 
our volunteers. We have the highest rate of volunteerism in 
Canada that contributes to the growth and the prosperity of our 
province. Last year we recognized the volunteers in our 
community — the year of the International Year of Volunteers 
— and we give out the volunteer medal recipients each year. I’d 
like to congratulate those who are on the list from Regina — 
James Burnett and Jean Thomas. Mr. Burnett is the retired 
director of Education and a trustee of the Regina Public School 
system who is also known for outstanding volunteer 
commitment to his community. And Ms. Thomas has been 
active with the scouting movement, church activities, the 
Regina Food Bank, the seniors and war veterans, and musical 
groups just to name a few. 
 
I’m looking forward now to the volunteer sector initiative as it 
will impact on Saskatchewan. It will help us to forge new 
relationships with the volunteer sector to develop a portal for 
those groups who want to make and strengthen their volunteer 
base with the Government of Saskatchewan, and it will help 
them with the challenges that are now confronting the volunteer 
sector in this province. So I’m looking forward to the 
announcement of those initiatives in the days ahead, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Another top priority of our government is our commitment to 
accessible, quality health care. In carrying out our priority we 
have listened to the people from across the province about the 

services that matter to them and their families. Out of these 
discussions, the government has developed the action plan for 
Saskatchewan health care and in doing so we’ve provided a 
clear direction that will improve access to care, quality of 
services and, most importantly, the future of publicly funded 
health care in the province. 
 
I’m also interested, Mr. Speaker, during this Throne Speech 
debate, to hear what this Grow Saskatchewan plan will mean, if 
it were ever put in action in the province of Saskatchewan. I’ll 
be interested to listen if there’s anything to this plan beyond the 
opposition’s repeated gloom and doom that they shed day after 
day on the economic development prospects of this province. 
 
I haven’t heard anything new, Mr. Speaker, beyond the mantra 
of cutting taxes, privatizing everything that’s not nailed down, 
gutting the civil service, and spending more and more of our 
children’s future, Mr. Speaker. The jury is out. As the headline 
in The Wilkie Press says, “Is it Grow Saskatchewan or Gut 
Saskatchewan?” 
 
It seems, Mr. Speaker, that there are conflicting elements in this 
plan and there are not many nutrients that are needed to grow 
any province. Just ask British Columbia, Mr. Speaker; or just 
ask Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s the reason I continue to work toward the plan 
laid out before us in the Speech from the Throne. It’s the reason 
why I’ll vote against the amendment and stand in favour of this 
speech delivered by Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Well it’s 
always an interesting time to rise and to address the Speech to the 
. . . what we’ve just heard, where the Premier wants to go. And 
we’ll do that in a little while, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ll go 
through some of the things that they state, and we’ll work from 
there. 
 
First of all, I guess there’s one or two other things I should 
mention before we get into those specific details of how the 
province of Saskatchewan is being run and how it could and 
should be run. 
 
First of all, I think I need to take a minute or two and thank my 
family for their support, as those of us in this legislature know, that 
it takes all kinds of time to do the job well. No particular assigned 
hours. Individuals may come calling or give you a phone call at 
any time, day or night, wanting us to address and deal with the 
issues that they have on hand. 
 
And we have to show up at anything from ribbon cuttings — and 
we do have some of those in my constituency — to, you know, 
parades, sports facilities — all the things that happen in all our 
communities. We’re sort of expected to be there, and I think we 
should be there, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because people need the 
opportunity to meet us and to have us around and to talk to us. 
 
So with those kinds of time constraints on us, I do have to thank 
my family for their support, especially my wife, Arlene, who 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 85 

 

fills in on all the things that are sort of my responsibility at 
home and takes care of those when I’m not around. I have a 
new member of my family that isn’t a new member as such, but 
the support is a new support. I have a daughter of mine that’s 
working in Ottawa right now for one of the MPs (Member of 
Parliament), and she has a whole new insight into exactly what 
politicians do and the amount of work that they put into what 
they do. And it’s very interesting to get that kind of a support 
and understanding that’s out there. 
 
Anyways, first of all, I think I’d like to spend a little bit of time 
about my constituency, and then I may come back to that a little 
later on. I’m really quite proud of my constituency. The 
constituency of Rosthern is bounded by both Saskatchewan 
rivers and goes north to about halfway between Duck Lake and 
Rosthern, and then about halfway between Martensville and 
Saskatoon, and then has the boundaries of the rivers as the 
boundaries on the east and the west side. 
 
It’s one of the few constituencies in Saskatchewan that has 
grown. I think all members in this Assembly have received, 
after the census came back, the little reports on to what the 
population is in each of their constituencies. I notice, for 
example, in Regina, almost every constituency in Regina has 
dropped in population, which is amazing. After having hired 
500 more people last year and all the families that involves, 
you’d think this government could have at least kept their own 
town . . . kept the population up. 
 
But when I look at the constituency of Rosthern, it has grown 
more than any other constituency in Saskatchewan. And there is 
a couple of very definite reasons for that, and I think it’s the 
industrious, take-care-of-yourself nature of my constituents. 
They don’t put their hand out to government and say, “Can you 
do something for us?” They’ve done it for themselves. And you 
drive through that area, and you will see the dairies. You will 
see the chicken operations, the hog operations. You’ll see 
intensive livestock operations that you don’t have any other 
place in Saskatchewan. 
 
And there is one other unique feature that I think underlines 
why this happens as it does. That constituency has never once 
voted NDP. Never once. 
 
If you look at the constituents in Saskatchewan that are 
traditional NDP constituencies that’s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
where you’ll find the numbers have gone down. And I think it 
says something for the attitude that a free enterprise 
constituency has, taking care of themselves, taking care of their 
own, doing their own initiatives — it shows. 
 
Now someone was chirping across from the other side, don’t 
forget the influence of being close to Saskatoon. That’s right. 
But those dairies aren’t there because Saskatoon is there. You 
don’t find them outside of Swift Current. You don’t find them 
outside of Prince Albert. You don’t find them around Regina. 
They’re in that peculiar area of Saskatchewan and so the part 
that Saskatoon plays a part in is obviously the growth that you 
would see in three of our southern communities, particularly 
Martensville, Warman and Osler. Those have grown due to 
their proximity to Saskatoon. 
 
But so have all the rest of the communities. All the rest of the 

communities have grown, and some of those have essentially no 
link with Saskatoon whatsoever. It’s a great constituency, and 
as I said, they have never voted NDP in the political history of 
this province, and they never will. They never will. 
 
Every single poll but one went to the Saskatchewan Party last 
time, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Every single poll. And that poll I’ll 
make sure we win again. That poll is going to come back, and 
we will take them all next time. That’s because those 
individuals, Mr. Deputy Speaker, know how to take care of 
themselves and take care of their families. They have the 
initiative and the drive that is needed. 
 
Let’s take a minute or two and go through the Speech from the 
Throne. And some of the pages we’ll comment on and some we 
won’t, because there’s just nothing there. But others again we 
will. 
 
Page 1. An interesting line, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It says: 
 

Last summer, the Premier and his caucus traveled by bus 
throughout the province to hear the ideas, concerns and 
enthusiasm of Saskatchewan people — a process that will 
continue . . . 

 
That’s the infamous bus tour. And, Mr. Speaker, if in the 
morning when you get up and you listen quietly, you still hear 
the odd echo of laughter coming out of a few of the coulees of 
Saskatchewan, from people laughing at that bus tour. What a 
silly mockery of democracy that really was to load up this 
group across over there and chug across Saskatchewan. 
 
And they stopped in Rosthern. And where did they go? Where 
did they go? Did they go up and down and visit the businesses 
in the community? Did they ask the business people, are you 
employing more than you used to? How is business doing? No, 
they didn’t. 
 
An Hon. Member: — Where did they go? 
 
(21:15) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — They ran very quickly down to the 
newspaper office, got their picture taken, and another little 
group skippity-scampered down the street to the credit union. 
They figured, surely there must be some support over here at 
the credit union. Well I happen to know that virtually all the 
people in the credit union vote for parties other than the NDP. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — And so does the newspaper. And that was 
their visit. It didn’t take much longer than it took for me to say 
it, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the kind of visits they had all over 
this province. They ran into communities, said “Please take our 
pictures so people think we were around,” and then they were 
gone. They didn’t meet with the farming community; they 
didn’t meet with the business community. I don’t know . . . they 
didn’t drop in at any schools in my constituency. They just 
didn’t do anything. It was just run and hide, run and hide, just 
stick their head out and they were gone. 
 
And again we have some chirping from the other side, Mr. 



86 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

Speaker, asking what we did. Okay, in my constituency, in the 
Grow Saskatchewan meetings, we had a representative from 
virtually every town, every RM (rural municipality) council, 
from the division board, they came out there. We presented our 
idea and we asked them if they had some ideas, and we spent an 
hour to two hours with them. No photo op. We didn’t go 
running down to the newspaper and said, “please take our 
picture because guess we’re doing something. We don’t know 
what it is but we’re going to jump on the bus and do some more 
of the same.” 
 
Well that’s what they did all summer long. So what do we get? 
A whole page, the first page, Mr. Speaker in this Speech from 
the Throne. And it says, “the premier and his caucus travelled 
by bus throughout the province and got their picture taken.” 
And that’s about it. That’s about it. Not much else. No one is 
sure where they went or what they did. 
 
Page 2 . . . Someone over there again, and the sound from over 
there is interesting, said it must have really bothered me that 
they did that. Well no, they can drive any place in a bus they 
want to but don’t try and disguise this as a fact-finding tour. It 
wasn’t. It wasn’t. 
 
There is a very nice heading at the top of page 2. It says 
“Province of Opportunity.” I like that because it is a province of 
opportunity. Everyone in this legislature from both sides of the 
House, I believe, was probably born in this province. We were 
raised in this province. We love this province. We’re still here, 
which after having about half a century of NDP rule says a lot 
for what the 58 of us think of this province that we’re still here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Province of opportunity. The opportunities 
are here, Mr. Speaker. They’re here. They’re here in rural 
Saskatchewan, they’re here in our cities, they’re here in our 
tourist industries, they’re all over. They just need to be tapped 
and tapped in a way that’s going to be significant and bring 
those people from all over Canada and the United States that 
have left Saskatchewan, bring them back. 
 
In Ireland, Mr. Speaker, when they made some changes, they’ve 
actually had people come back from all around the world. And 
as you know, as being a school teacher yourself — and you 
know a smattering of history I’m sure — Ireland was basically 
noted for potato famines and exporting people. Good people all 
around the world. A lot of those people are now coming back to 
Ireland for the opportunity that’s there. 
 
We need to provide that opportunity in Saskatchewan to bring 
those people back from Ontario and BC and Manitoba and 
Alberta and from the States. But instead we’re moving them 
out. The census showed very definitely where they’re going. 
We just had a member from across there from the NDP who 
said, yes, we’re bringing them home. Well either the census is 
lying or he doesn’t know what’s going on. He must have been 
on the bus and I’m sure it was the back of the bus. If he’d have 
looked out of the front he’d have seen that many of the 
windows in small town Saskatchewan and the business places 
boarded up. 
 
I recently came back from Lethbridge and we came across from 

Medicine Hat and went through the area south of Leader, back 
through Leader along that particular area. Some of those towns 
had more stores that were boarded up than were open. That’s 
because of that sort of an attitude. When the census says, Mr. 
Speaker, that the population is dropping and that member 
across, the NDP member, can sit there and say, yes, we’re 
bringing them back. He seems to know something the census 
people doesn’t know; he seems to know something people in 
those small towns don’t know when they board up their stores. 
 
We drive down some of those areas and you have to look for 
miles to find a particular farm that’s being lived in. Totally 
different from my constituency, but it’s unfortunately the truth 
in much of Saskatchewan. But it is a province of opportunity 
and we have some ideas. When I presented those to the people 
in my Grow Saskatchewan meetings, they said that’s good. We 
believe that. We believe that. 
 
And we have the member from PA saying, what did you say 
then? Well if he’d have been in the House all day today, he’d 
have heard our leader get up earlier on this day and very 
specifically explain it to him. I have no intention, Mr. Speaker, 
of wasting good time telling him twice something that he won’t 
hear once. 
 
Province of opportunity. Here are some of the opportunities that 
are listed. Diversification and value-added processing in 
agriculture — definitely, definitely. Ethanol is one of those. 
Ethanol is one of those. There are groups all around 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, who are just waiting to go ahead 
and start something. They’ve done their plans; they had the 
people who know cattle; they had the land set aside; they have 
money set aside. What is this government doing? Are they 
providing an opportunity? Are they guaranteeing a market for 
some ethanol? 
 
All they would have to do is say okay, you people tell us how 
much ethanol you’re going to produce, and as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, an ethanol plant has to go together with a feedlot in 
order for them to become viable. We know that from the 
Pound-Maker experience. All they need to be told is that if you 
produce so many gallons of ethanol, we’ll make sure that the 
market is there. The government can do that very easily by 
dictating how . . . what percentage of our fuel has to be ethanol. 
 
But not this group of people. It’s a very simple idea. They’ve 
got the plans, they have the cattle, they have the land, they have 
the people. But are they going to go ahead and work with that 
idea of providing a market? No, not these people. 
 
If you can’t sell it down to the States, they couldn’t possibly 
imagine how we could use ethanol in Saskatchewan. But they 
will be starting a few of them, I’m sure. But they’ll have 
taxpayers’ money involved. And they’ll probably go like our 
potato schemes, or some other hare-brained schemes we’ve had. 
The NDP-CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) have 
had schemes for decades. It started off with a shoe factory, who 
knows when. Now we’ve got the potato factory. Did have, it 
went down, and some of us over there still think that it’s going 
to fly. 
 
So they could do something with ethanol if they actually 
wanted to. We presented an idea to them, the cattlemen out 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 87 

 

there who want to go ahead and have those feedlots, looked at 
our ideas and said excellent, that’s exactly what we need. But is 
this government listening? No, they were on the bus, but they 
weren’t listening — they weren’t listening. They didn’t pick up 
any of those ideas that were out there in rural Saskatchewan 
from the people who understand cattle. 
 
You’re going to have a bunch of these people out there, who 
know next to nothing about farming, are going to be the ones 
that are going to try and decide how ethanol should be 
produced. 
 
It says increased development of energy resources, including 
green energy. Okay, we appreciate green energy. We had the 
member from Greystone get up the other day and make quite a 
lengthy statement about his view of energy. And before we get 
into the green energy idea, he was totally against the production 
of uranium. 
 
Well about an hour ago we had the member from Cumberland 
get up and speak eloquently about the way things have changed 
up North and the jobs that were being provided for the people 
of the North. 
 
Now why doesn’t he get together with the member from 
Greystone and why don’t they decide. Are they going to put 
those people out of work that are working in the mines — the 
uranium mines, or aren’t they going to do that? 
 
The NDP has absolutely no idea what they’re doing out there. 
One member gets up on Monday and says, we’ve got great 
opportunity in uranium mines. The day before the other one 
gets up and says, oh we’re going to shut them all down. Doesn’t 
anyone over there know what they’re doing? Doesn’t anyone 
have any idea? 
 
I ask the question, Mr. Speaker, one hand went up. That’s our 
Finance minister who’s just run a deficit — just run a deficit — 
and he thinks he’s the one who knows what’s going on 
including green energy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I mentioned earlier on that we’d been on a bit of a trip to 
Lethbridge and it wasn’t for anything anti-Saskatchewan. It 
happened to be a swap meet for car parts, so we were bringing 
some things back to Saskatchewan. But anyways driving from 
Swift Current through to Medicine Hat and then down to 
Lethbridge there are those wind generators going — beautiful 
site, quiet. 
 
The member from Greystone should know it’s the best green 
energy available. Just quietly making their little spins. Going 
slow enough they couldn’t even hit a bird, as environmentally 
sound as possible. Now any taxpayers’ money from 
Saskatchewan in those plants? No. Are they providing green 
energy? Yes. Are they marketing it in Saskatchewan? Yes. Are 
they using SaskPower’s energy system, their power grid? Yes. 
 
But now all of a sudden this NDP government has decided they 
want to get into the game. Well let’s see how they’re going to 
play the game. How will the game be different? These wind 
charges that are out there, green energy, doing exactly what 
everyone thinks they ought to be doing are paying some 
$70,000 a year in taxes to RMs in property tax and in school tax 

— property tax and school tax. They’re paying access for the 
landowners to get to those particular sites at about $2,000 a 
piece. 
 
So the monies coming in to the people who are living there, to 
the school boards, to the RMs for their infrastructure, and 
they’ve got green energy. It just is a win-win program. And by 
the way, Mr. Speaker, I need to repeat no taxpayers’ money 
involved in this — no taxpayers’ money involved in this. 
 
So now we’re going to plan one and this is how the NDP is 
going to be planning it, so we need to pay attention to this. 
They’re going to be building some more of these things. That 
idea in itself is not bad. There is enough wind in southwest 
Saskatchewan to handle a lot of it. And that’s just wind that 
blows over from Alberta and from the oceans. 
 
However, they’re not going to be paying any money to the RMs 
for taxes that could go for RM infrastructure or for education. 
Zero. Absolute zero. The NDP’s Green Plan won’t be putting 
that money into schools or into infrastructure. What are they 
going to be paying to the landowners for access? Thousands of 
dollars? No, about two hundred. 
 
Now, are they going to have a market for this? Yes, Mr. 
Speaker, they have a market. Guess where they found it? Guess 
where they found it? Who’s going to buy this energy at an 
inflated price because wind energy does cost more? Who are 
they going to sell it to? They are going to sell it to the 
university, which is paid for with taxpayers’ money. So they are 
going to build these things with taxpayers’ money. Then they 
are going to sell it to an institution that’s being funded from 
taxpayers’ money and that’s supposed to be a grandiose plan. I 
doubt it. 
 
Now, to make it just one step worse, just one step worse, when 
another group wants to come in and build some more of these 
things without taxpayers’ dollars, pay the taxes to the RMs and 
the school and to the landowners, suddenly SaskPower has 
decided that you can’t sent it down our grid system. You’re out 
of the business. No more out-of-province people can come in 
here. And then we’ll build wind generators; green energy 
without taxpayers’ money. It can’t be done. No more 
investment. 
 
There’s some chirping across there but I can tell they’re 
confused cause they obviously shut that down. So we are still 
on page 2. We are still on page 2. There isn’t a whole lot more 
on that particular page so we will move on to page 3. We get 
into agriculture. 
 
We go on to page . . . 
 
(21:30) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. I would ask all members to . . . Order. I would ask all 
members to give the member from Rosthern their attention. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Truly I have so 
much to say and apparently so little time. It says that year 2001, 



88 Saskatchewan Hansard March 18, 2002 

 

one of the driest years in our history. It was the driest year. 
 
So then they go through what they’ve done for the agricultural 
scene. What have they done? Ten years ago, they tore up GRIP 
(gross revenue insurance program). For ten years they kept 
saying, we’re going to have a safety net. We’ll build a safety 
net. There is no safety net in place. 
 
They’ve got this crop insurance thing that they’ve been working 
on. No one seemed to want to sign up, so a few years ago they 
had an idea that wasn’t that bad. They put in spot loss for hail. 
It was a good idea. It did get a lot of people to sign up. So this 
year, they pulled it. So they’ve got the program that had a good 
feature in it. It created involvement. Now they pull that one 
good feature. 
 
These people across there, Mr. Speaker, have absolutely no idea 
of what agriculture is all about, have absolutely no idea how to 
build a safety net. Why hasn’t the Minister of Agriculture put 
together a safety net, gone to the other provinces, made it 
agreeable with them, gone jointly with the federal government 
and said, here’s a safety net, work together with us and we’ll 
get out of your hair. Instead he sends a fax once every month or 
two and says, please send us some money. And usually he gets 
the answer no. 
 
Last year he got some money to make up for the fact that he 
didn’t have enough to pay out the payments he had to make on 
some of the crop insurance. This year he doesn’t want to pay it 
back. And when it’s supposed to come out of this year’s 
payments, he says, someone’s reneging on their commitments. 
It’s the Minister of Agriculture who’s reneging on his 
commitments to the farm community. 
 
It says there’s a commitment not to permit unsustainable tax 
reduction return to massive deficits. Whose return is to a 
massive deficit? Half a billion dollars. Half a billion dollars this 
year. I’ve sat in this House for numbers of years when Roy 
Romanow used to get up and say, we’re never going to let this 
province get into debt again. His chair is barely cold. We have a 
new Premier, and he’s got us a half a billion dollars in the glue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — A half a billion dollars. And then the 
Minister of Finance used to get up and say, well we have this 
rainy day fund that’s out there. This rainy day fund. Well we 
told him there was no money in it. Then the university people 
who usually set up one of these mock budgets, tell their 
students, but don’t count on the rainy day fund because it’s 
empty. We knew it. The university knew it. 
 
Finally the Minister of Finance says, well check with our bond 
rating agencies. And the bond rating agency says there’s no 
money in it. He has no one else to turn to. A half a billion 
dollars in the glue from this Finance minister, from this 
Premier. 
 
This is not a Roy Romanow government. This would have not 
have happened under Roy Romanow, even though I didn’t 
support too many of the things that he’s put forward. One of his 
budgets I actually supported, but I don’t think this government 

with this group of NDP MLAs will ever present a budget that 
an opposition person will have any support for. I don’t think so. 
 
There is in this particular plan absolutely nothing that’s going to 
grow Saskatchewan — absolutely nothing. They’ve taken a 
fund that they didn’t have and spent it. That’s hard to believe, 
but you’ll have to ask them about that, Mr. Speaker. They put 
the province a half a billion dollars in the glue, some place we 
haven’t been in 10 years — in 10 years. 
 
And then the first two speakers that got up from the NDP side 
in favour of this thing thought they had to go back and talk 
about old debt. Well they should have gone back a little further 
and found out where the first $6.8 billion of debt came from. 
They don’t want to admit it. They’ve got about 25 per cent of 
this province convinced that it never happened. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the last election, which party got the most 
support from the public? It was the Saskatchewan Party . . . was 
the Saskatchewan Party. The NDP has almost never received 
the most votes. This is not a socialist province — it is not a 
socialist province. It’s unfortunately a bunch of capitalists that 
are too often run over roughshod by an NDP-CCF group that 
think they’re socialists. There is no democracy on that side and 
there is no socialism on that side. There’s just a lot of greed and 
power-hungry people. That’s all we have over there. 
 
Back to my constituency. I have to briefly mention a few other 
things that are going on in that particular constituency. We 
have, for example, two communities who’ve lost their rinks and 
they have to rebuild them because they are not safe any more. 
Any provincial money? No. We have two communities that 
have a real water problem. One is getting its water from 
dugouts and has done so for years. Now they’re pumping it 
from one dugout to another. Last year both of those went dry. 
They pump it from one well into the first dugout, into the next 
dugout. 
 
And what does this province have to do, what are they going to 
say they’re going to do? They’re going to test the water for 
water safety. Now that’s good. That’s good, Mr. Speaker. But 
after they’ve told all these villages and communities that their 
water is bad, what are they going to do? Absolutely nothing. 
These communities will still be pumping bad water from bad 
wells into bad dugouts to another bad dugout and be told 
they’re drinking bad water, but there’s going to be no money 
from them. No money for infrastructure. 
 
One of the things that, as we went around with our Grow 
Saskatchewan meetings, they kept saying: they’ve downloaded 
on us, downloaded on us. Our sewer systems, our water systems 
are in trouble and they’re not getting any help. 
 
We also have a number of other communities whose growth — 
this is unusual in Saskatchewan — but whose growth has been 
so rapid they’ve actually got difficulty with the growth 
problems, particularly schools. We have communities whose 
schools are full, literally bursting at the seams. They need some 
money to build some schools. Nothing coming from this 
particular government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s lots more that could be said. We could talk 
about the NDP promise of 30,000 new jobs. They’ve lost jobs. 



March 18, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 89 

 

We could talk about the balanced budget. Well we already did. 
 
Surgical waiting times. Well that would take a whole night to 
go through all of that. Longest waiting lists in Canada. Longest 
waiting lists in Canada in the province where Tommy Douglas 
created a health system. This group of people has messed it up. 
This group of people can’t control it. This group of people can’t 
think up a new idea. Tommy Douglas thought of a new idea. 
The idea has aged. It doesn’t work any more. We need some 
new fresh ideas from over there. They have none. They have 
none. 
 
One more thing. We had a promise in 1999 — 200 more police 
officers. In the first couple of years there was a surplus in the 
budget. Did we get those 200 police officers? No. We got about 
45, no 46 — 46 police officers in the first half of their mandate. 
Now that they’re half a billion dollars in the glue, where are 
they going to find the money for the other 150 that they have to 
provide — 155 cause the Minister of Justice likes to add up 
things like police officers that he doesn’t have? I don’t think 
we’re going to get them. 
 
I asked him today for a commitment for just 55 more this year. 
We didn’t get that commitment. We didn’t get that 
commitment. We need that. We’re not even discussing the loss 
of police officers to movement, to retirement, to all of those 
sorts of things. We haven’t even discussed those. So if we’re 
going to have some justice and people are going to feel secure, 
we need those 200 police officers. That was a good 
commitment. That was a good promise that was made back in 
1999. It just needs to be kept, Mr. Speaker, and they’re not 
keeping it. 
 
It’s a sorry tale what they’re doing to this province. People are 
leaving. They have created the car theft capital in North 
America, the crime capital in Canada, the longest waiting lists. 
 
Without a doubt, Mr. Speaker, there is no way I can support this 
particular Throne Speech, and I will be supporting the 
amendment. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:41. 
 


