















































Hansard: May 27, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1605 
 May 27, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Health to 
introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. Tonight I have with me 
Glenda Yeates, who is the deputy minister; Lawrence Krahn, 
the assistant deputy minister; Kelly Kummerfield, the executive 
director of human resources; Rod Wiley, the executive director 
of finance and management services; Duncan Fisher, assistant 
deputy minister; and Bert Linklater, who is the executive 
director of district management services. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and good evening, Mr. 
Minister. Good evening and welcome to your officials this 
evening. 
 
Mr. Minister, there are a varied number of questions that I have 
to ask you, but as usual, when I get up in estimates, I usually 
ask about specific issues related to my constituents and their 
health needs that they feel are or are not being met. 
 
Before I do get into them though, Mr. Minister, I wanted to talk 
with you a little bit about how it can be justified, for instance, 
that the new regional health district, the Saskatoon Health 
District, has nine appointees from Saskatoon, and three from 
three other health districts. And so in fact what it would equate 
to is having one only from Central Plains Health District, one 
from Living Sky, and one from Gabriel Springs. Those districts, 
in my view, are not being very well represented on that new, 
original board that’s in place right now. 
 
When we . . . I was at a meeting in Humboldt of the hospital 
advisory board a couple of months ago, and I brought up the 
issue. My concern was that if you don’t have an equivalent 
number of board representatives from each of the health 
districts, then of course it’s going to be very hard for, in this 
case for the surrounding districts, the ones surrounding 
Saskatoon, that are now part of the region, should be able to 
have proper representation, or representation rather that would 
give them a little strength, a little clout. 
 
And so I’m wondering why there was nine people, nine 
Saskatoon appointments, and only one appointment from each 
of the other three health districts, because we were told at that 
hospital advisory board meeting a few months before by the 
chairman of the health district that there would be most likely 
two at least from each of the districts surrounding Saskatoon 
which would really even things out or make things quite fair. 
 
He had his reasoning for coming up with that, and it sounded 
very much like Saskatoon in fact would be quite happy if there 
was equitable representation from each of the other three 
districts now in the region because there were a number of ways 

that they could in fact exchange services with those other 
districts, look at what services were in place right now, and 
meet each other halfway. But I was concerned about it because 
really if you have, as you well know, Mr. Minister, a board that 
is overly representative of one area of the new region, naturally 
they’re going to have the votes and they’re going to have the 
clout and so on when it comes to decisions to be made for the 
entire region. 
 
And so I’m asking why there is this imbalance as far as the 
Saskatoon region board. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. We had a 
number of challenges right across the province in trying to set 
the boards for the new regional health authorities, but just for 
your information, around this particular district — which 
includes Saskatoon, Central Plains, Gabriel Springs, and Living 
Sky — the total population of that new district will be 286,000. 
And the Saskatoon district will have about 240,000 of those 
people, which is about 84 per cent of the population. The way 
the board is comprised, they will have 75 per cent of the seats 
and the other areas will have 25 per cent. 
 
So Central Plains population, just for your information, is 
20,626; Gabriel Springs, 11,923; and Living Sky, 13,506; 
Saskatoon, 240,416, for a total of 286,471. So that’s part of the 
practical problem that was there. This is, as you can understand, 
one of the . . . well it is the largest new regional authority, but 
given the service area and the interrelationship of the various 
communities, it was thought that this would be the best way to 
organize this particular area. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I 
recognize only too well that the board members are appointed 
according to population. But I also understand, and I guess just 
about anybody would, that the allotment then of funding would 
also be allotted according to population. And if you bring that 
down into the lowest common denominator, that means that 
there will be favouritism in many ways that would . . . you 
know, that there would be money going for instance to the 
Saskatoon region, much more than there would to the outlying 
Central Plains and Living Sky and so on. And there was a lot of 
concern about that, and we were assured by the chairman of 
Central Plains that there would be an even apportioning of 
board members and that it wouldn’t be quite this lopsided. 
 
But now that that’s said and done, I guess there is not very 
much that can be done because this has been put in place. But 
we have for instance some of the RMs (rural municipality) 
around that are asking you to intervene and to make sure that 
some of those appointments are possibly rescinded until . . . to 
ensure that we get rural representation on that regional board. 
So I think that Premier Calvert has received a letter to that 
effect, and I would . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Just to remind the hon. members, 
they’re not to refer to members of the legislature by their proper 
name but rather by their title or constituency. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, yes, and I certainly do 
know the rules. I made a slip. The Premier has received a letter 
to this effect, and it’s not only from one municipality, but there 



1606 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

is a concern from a number of municipalities that the rural areas 
won’t have the representation that they so deserve. 
 
Mr. Minister, as you well know, for some years now the 
Humboldt district . . . Humboldt and district people have been 
looking forward to having a new integrated hospital unit. And it 
seems every year one stands and asks, you know, when will full 
approval be in place so that the construction of that hospital 
may take place. 
 
Could you please update me on the status of this situation. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The project at Humboldt is, as you know, 
an ongoing project and the people have been working at getting 
the local contribution, and the provincial contribution is part of 
what we’re looking at this year. But as you would know from 
what I’ve said about the total budget for this year, we do not 
have a huge jump in the amount of capital from the provincial 
side. And so we’re proceeding with the big projects which are 
in Melfort and in Weyburn. But some of the projects in 
Humboldt, we’re not moving ahead with them this year, but 
they’re in the planning process still. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, it seems to 
me that as far as the funding goes, Humboldt and district have 
had their funding and certainly have guaranteed the department 
that their funding is pretty well all in place. And you know, 
these people have constantly been working very, very hard to 
make sure that this project goes through. 
 
It seems as though there is one thing or the other that they hear 
that is going to delay the project yet again. And I just remind 
you, Mr. Minister, that Humboldt is one of the fastest growing 
places in the province, only one of the three cities that has 
grown or the three communities that have actually grown. And 
that’s because they are a very vibrant and dedicated community, 
and there is no doubt that with a growing city like that they’re 
going to be needing to have this in operation, this integrated 
health centre in operation without delay. 
 
I understand that there are funding problems for your 
government, but I’m wondering whether or not the greater 
delay here is because now we have formed a regional health 
authority which would be called Saskatoon Regional Health 
Authority, and whether the decision for this hospital is now in 
the hands of that board. Is that what we’re looking at, or is this 
sort of separate from board decision, and will your government 
be handling it? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t think that’s the correct surmise to 
make about what’s happening with the regional health 
authorities versus the health districts, because basically the 
capital funding, like the amounts required for the Humboldt 
project, are part of an overall province-wide plan. And so that 
that planning process is continuing, the kinds of things are still 
being included. 
 
Now practically on a province-wide basis and in light of our 
health plan for the whole province, we are looking at all of the 
different projects that are there, but we know for example that 
they’re well prepared in Moosomin, Swift Current’s working on 
a project, Preeceville. You know, we’ve got the Weyburn 
project going, Melfort. And there are a whole number of other 

ones — Ile-a-la-Crosse — different places that are all looking at 
what kinds of capital are available on a province-wide basis. 
And we have been basically trying to make the most effective 
use of the dollars that we have and set out a plan over a number 
of years. 
 
But in this particular year, it’s your friends from Melfort and 
Weyburn that have the bulk of the money. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Well thank you. I guess possibly to get into detail, 
asking you the specifics about why one project like that has 
been chosen over another would be something that I would 
choose to do maybe at another time when we aren’t . . . we have 
a lot more time actually to talk about that. 
 
Mr. Minister, I understand that Central Plains Health District 
had a clawback in funding in the year 2000-2001 from your 
department. I take it it was for operational expenses and it was 
to the tune, I believe, of $456,000. And I’m wondering if that is 
accurate and, if so, why was the clawback in place. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I would just like to clarify 
something. My understanding is that clawback was part of the 
money apportioned to St. Elizabeth’s Hospital — the operations 
of the hospital, not the whole — or maybe it was Central Plains, 
the whole district. I’m not too sure; this is why I’m asking. I 
would like to know more about this and why it happened. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. As you can 
tell, it’s not as straightforward a situation, and I’m not surprised 
that you had a hard time asking the question. Hopefully I’ll 
have a better time giving you the answer to what you’ve 
explained. 
 
Basically I think what happened, a couple of years ago there 
were some plans made in the Central Plains district — the 
whole district — around some savings that could be made 
within the district of just under $500,000. And they were able to 
accomplish that, those savings. So that then when they were 
setting the funding basis for the next year, they based it on the 
actual operating budget, which included the savings that they 
had been able to engender. 
 
So for example in this year’s budget for the Central Plains 
Health District, they effectively got a 6.3 per cent increase 
based on what they actually spent. But I’m sure that the people 
in the local area think, well it wasn’t really 6.3 per cent because 
it included that saving that they had from the previous year. 
 
And so it’s one where depending which side you’re looking at it 
from, you can feel either positive or negative about it. But 
practically for the whole system they were able to organize 
some things in a way that provided some savings for the district 
and for the cost of health in the whole province. And then the 
increase this year included that amount and a bit more so that it 
effectively it’s 6.3 per cent increase. But I’m sure from their 
perspective it was probably an increase closer to 2 per cent or 
something like that. 
 
So I’m not sure if that answers your question, but I think it gets 
at the issue that you’re raising. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister. There’s a 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1607 

 

lot of ways that the figures can be, I guess, explained. But the 
end result of all of this is this year Central Plains is running a 
$610,000 deficit. And so if I, just as a citizen or certainly as the 
MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for the people 
there, if I look at $456,000 clawed back because of their 
efficiency, I think people should be rewarded for efficiencies 
rather than have clawbacks like this and then not have a return 
or a favour returned to them when it looks like a deficit is in 
place. 
 
If we in fact have that money at this time, the 456,000, it seems 
to me that our deficit would be much, much less. It stands at 
610. There’s about a $200,000 difference there and so it could 
be that the deficit was only 200,000. 
 
What I’m starting to understand from people that are talking 
about the reasons that Sask Health may or may not do these 
things is because, you know, they may look at things like the 
district has reserves and so they can better afford to have 
clawbacks in place. That’s not in my estimation a very fair 
thing to do because the reserves are there as part of funding 
contributions from the people throughout the district and so on. 
For one reason or other that money has come from people in the 
area and most of it they are hoping will be projected towards 
their new integrated facility. 
 
So I just make that comment, Mr. Minister, and I’d like to have 
from your part if that $456,000 was allotted as part of the 
budget to Central Plains during that year and is it expected or 
would they expect that you would take money back — there 
would be a clawback if they managed very well? Because it just 
doesn’t make sense. By taking money back like that, it’s 
basically telling people that, you’re better off if you don’t 
manage your money well, because if you do we’re going . . . 
(inaudible) . . . a certain portion back. 
 
So I don’t know where the rationale comes in. The money was 
allotted to them. If the money had stayed in place, they 
wouldn’t have the deficit that they do today, and because the 
money was clawed back they do have this deficit, and that 
doesn’t bode very well for anybody for the future. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think there are two things that are going 
on here. On an ongoing basis, when a district proposes some 
adjustments where there are reductions in whatever they’re 
doing — and in this case $450,000 approximately on an 
ongoing basis is not included in their budget — well then that 
money won’t be funded to them on an ongoing basis. 
 
Now as it relates to this year and the kinds of figures that you’re 
talking about, basically the districts saw what kinds of 
allocations were there effective at budget date at the end of 
March, and they were required to submit their budgets by May 
15 — which in fact the Central Plains has done — and they’re 
now in discussion around how this budget will work. The goal 
is by middle to late June that we will have balanced budgets for 
all of the districts across the province, including Central Plains, 
and that we’re in that process right now. So it’s extremely 
difficult to answer your question but the hope is that we’ll get 
the right mix so that there is a balanced budget on an ongoing 
basis. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I think it was 

last year that the government or Sask Health did put in money 
for Living Sky and possibly one other health district to make up 
for their budget deficit. So I’m asking you now, just in view of 
your comments. I’m not really hearing an absolute answer but 
I’m wondering if the government is intending to do the same 
thing for all health districts that they did for Living Sky, and 
that’s to fill in the amount of deficit. And if not, why not? Why 
would Living Sky be one of the districts that received this kind 
of extra funding from your department when others did not? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think the issue here is about the 
accountability of the local district boards or, in the ongoing 
time, the regional health authority boards around the use of the 
funds. You are correct; this last year, there were some 
challenges, both for Living Sky and for East Central. 
 
And we basically said to all the districts, well look, you’ve got 
to manage within the money that you have. These two places 
were not in a situation where they could even borrow the money 
to make sure that they could meet their amounts at the end of 
the year, and so we did provide some assistance to them. But 
this is clearly not the plan for this year. We’ve said we’re not 
doing that any more. Part of the difficulty was that a year and a 
half ago, in March of, well, 2001 or 14 months ago, we were 
able to put some money in to try to get the funding around the 
base services to sort of match what was happening in a lot of 
the districts. Some of the districts thought maybe we would do 
that again this year, but we didn’t — only in emergency 
situation in two places. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Okay. Mr. Chair, I have one more question before 
my colleagues will take over. This question is again, Mr. 
Minister, in reference to the clawback that I was talking about 
just a second ago. If in fact Sask Health intended to do this 
clawback, would they communicate with the health district 
about the measure they’re taking? Would the health district 
know why you’re clawing back? And is . . . what kind of 
communication takes place between Sask Health and those 
health districts when these kind of actions are taken? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think practically what happens is the 
districts have worked through a plan about how they’re going to 
deal with the coming year, and they then say, well it looks like 
we can operate in this case about $450,000 less than we 
originally estimated. And that was done in a joint fashion with 
the department and the district so that then those expenses were 
then no longer an ongoing expense which would continue into 
the next year. And that would be communicated between the 
district and the department. 
 
Now one of the things in our Action Plan for Health which we 
introduced in December is that we are trying to move the 
budgeting process up so that people will get their figures much 
sooner, and clearly before the year begins. And we’re working 
towards trying to give multi-year funding targets so we won’t 
have these kind of questions between members in the legislature 
around, well how does this work? 
 
Because what you’ve pointed out is exactly one of the 
difficulties. It’s frustrating at a local level to try to meet targets 
when they seem to be short term and you don’t have a one- or 
two- or three-year perspective. That’s the same problem for the 
department and we’re looking at how we can improve that. 



1608 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I appreciate 
what you have just said is going to be happening and yes, some 
of your observations about dilemmas that health districts have 
had with not having their funding allotted at an expedient time 
as has been the case in the past. 
 
But what I’m really referring to here, Mr. Minister, is would a 
Chair of a health board have knowledge about the clawback, the 
specific clawback that I have mentioned? Would they have 
knowledge of that clawback happening or would they just all of 
a sudden get some sort of document from you saying that they 
are taking back $456,000? 
 
And I’ll tell you why I’m asking that, Mr. Minister, because at a 
specific meeting in Humboldt — specially . . . it was a meeting 
with the hospital advisory board — the Chair of . . . not the 
Chair, but the CEO (chief executive officer) of the district had 
mentioned that there was this clawback and there were 
questions surrounding why the clawback happened, and he said 
he didn’t know. 
 
So it seems to me that people need to have an explanation of 
what’s happening, why it’s happening, and then they can just go 
ahead and try to understand and know how to work effectively 
and efficiently towards their future. But there needs to be a 
clarity and a transparency about what is in effect happening 
with monies. 
 
And when you hear that, that someone doesn’t know in that 
kind of a position, it makes you wonder whether or not there is 
a misunderstanding somewhere or whether this was justified or 
it wasn’t, and I just don’t know. And that’s why I’m asking you. 
I want some clarity to come to me from the . . . from your 
department today. 
 
(19:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think the simple answer is that we 
set . . . have been setting each budget year each year, after we 
get the information from the Department of Finance of what are 
the resources available. So in the particular health district, they 
would hear on budget day — which is the day that we give 
them the figures — what the projected amount is for the next 
year. And it wouldn’t include the following year. 
 
Now they could make some assumptions possibly about, well, 
this might be the trend or whatever. But in fact each and every 
year it has been set. And one of the reasons that it’s been done 
that way traditionally, and one of the challenges that we have as 
we move forward into trying to give some multi-year funding 
amounts, is the volatility of the economy of Saskatchewan 
where some years we have a fair number of resources and other 
years we have some challenges. 
 
And I think that’s part of the . . . what’s reflected. But I think 
for the person who is trying to manage this in that particular 
area, they would have heard the amount on budget day and then 
they would have tried to figure out and explain it from there. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chair of Committees. And to the 
minister, welcome to his officials and good evening. I have 
some questions, not surprisingly, about the hospital facilities in 
the city of Swift Current and I hope we can have a bit of a 

discussion surrounding, surrounding that subject this evening. 
 
I guess I would start with a request that the minister outline 
whatever assessments the department has done in terms of the 
acute care facilities in Swift Current — specifically whether the 
department has identified a need for significant improvement in 
the facilities that are currently available there, especially in light 
of the fact that under the new restructuring Swift Current will 
constitute the largest centre in one of the health care regions. 
 
So I wonder if the minister could just outline for members of 
the committee the assessment the department has done about 
the facility in Swift Current that is currently there and the need 
for improvements. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The process as it works is that the health 
district assesses what kinds of facilities they have and then put 
together a proposal based on that assessment and other things in 
that community. And we know that the region or the health 
district has in fact submitted a proposal for a new facility which 
costs, I think, just under $50 million . . . is the proposal they put 
forward. 
 
The department assesses the proposal. It doesn’t go out and 
assess the actual buildings. But practically, they, you know, rely 
on the information that’s forwarded and work from there. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, I think 
that for some time the hospital project in Swift Current has 
probably been an issue that the department has dealt with. Not 
long ago there was a proposal for the renovation of the current 
facility there, and I think it was nicknamed, if you will. Option 
3B was a renovation option that the community had put 
forward. 
 
And I wonder if the minister . . . I think I am looking for some 
acknowledgement from the department, be it at the official 
level, maybe beginning back when option 3B was being 
pursued; some acknowledgement that indeed the facility in 
Swift Current is in need of improvements if not replacement. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think that there is some work being 
done around a fire upgrade at the facility right now, so that’s 
one small piece. But practically, there have been discussions 
back and forth between the district and the department, and one 
of the proposals was, I think as you call it, 3B, and the response 
was, well maybe take another look at that. 
 
And when they looked at that again, the district then came back 
with the bigger proposal of around $48 million, which is now 
where the discussion is focused. 
 
And it’s very much . . . I mean I think there are lots of very 
good, sound ideas in that proposal that makes sense for the 
longer term prospects of health care in that region, but 
obviously one of the issues is how do we get sufficient capital 
to do that kind of a project and what’s the timeline. Plus when 
you do a major sort of reorganization of how the facilities are 
set up in that particular area, it also takes a lot of planning to 
make sure you get the right mix of services, not just for 5 years 
but for 25 years. 
 
And so that’s I think where we are is in that kind of discussion 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1609 

 

phase. Two aspects: one is to make sure you get the right plan 
that makes sense for everybody; the other part of it is what kind 
of resources are available and in which kind of years are the 
monies going to be needed and how do we organize that. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Mr. Minister, I 
wonder then if we could turn and discuss very briefly the issue 
of funding, of capital funding. I think the local community with 
the support of the city and several local governments, I think 
the HealthCare Foundation as well of course, perhaps led by the 
district, have come together to make this proposal that you 
referenced in your comments for a new facility. And I think a 
phased-in facility was also being proposed in terms of acute and 
then long term. 
 
And I think, Mr. Minister, it would be useful if you could 
comment just for the record . . . I think the request . . . 
Attendant with that request was a request from that local group 
that the funding formula for acute care, currently at 65/35, 
change in light of the fact that it’s a regional hospital and will 
serve the region and fit into the provincial system. And I think 
they had requested that the funding formula be changed from 
65/35 provincial government/local funding to 90/10. 
 
And I wonder if you would just comment. I appreciate the fact 
that you’ve responded in your letters, but I wonder in the 
intervening time if there’s been any change in the government’s 
position, if they are looking at a more favourable — from the 
local community’s standpoint — a more favourable funding 
formula for acute care capital projects. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — At this stage the 65/35 plan is still the 
plan, and one of the challenges obviously is what amount of 
capital do we have in the budget, and you will see that we have 
an amount that’s slightly less than what we had last year in our 
Health capital budget. And as I said before, the biggest part of 
that is going to Weyburn and to Melfort this year. 
 
As it relates to the 90 per cent suggestion, 10 per cent, I suppose 
if we had lots and lots of money, well then that would be a way 
to do it, but we’re in a situation where we have to try to respond 
to the requests for capital from a number of areas. Both 
Saskatoon and Regina has projects that are urgent. Saskatoon 
— some of the things around the University Hospital and some 
of the things that are there. 
 
So what we’re trying to do is listen carefully to the various 
communities, try to work with the communities. And we’re 
continuing actually to work with the Department of Finance and 
others as we look at options for getting greater amounts of 
capital to be available because, practically, the new visions that 
communities are developing around the kinds of facilities in 
their community are very supportive of our long-term goal that 
we have in our action plan. And we’d like to have those two 
things come together sooner rather than later because it makes a 
big difference in how we provide the services. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I guess the concluding 
questions would still revolve around that funding formula that I 
would have; and, you know, the community has obviously 
received a response from yourself about the funding formula 
and I think . . . I can tell you that this group that’s come 
together, representing not just the city but the rural area around 

Swift Current, the rural governments and the district, have 
really, really placed a high priority obviously on a new facility 
for Swift Current, you know, certainly from the . . . primarily 
from the perspective of care, of acute care, and then down the 
road the synergy that would come with an integrated long-term 
care facility there at that site. 
 
And they’ve made it a big . . . they made it a high priority and 
they’ve continued to work on what might be doable, what might 
be workable, just to get it done. And I guess I would ask you — 
and I understand that this is speculation short of you having a 
proposal on your desk — but I wonder if you could give an 
indication at least of how the . . . of how you and the 
government might receive a request more along the lines of, 
you know, even 75/25. 
 
And like I said, I understand where I’m asking you to speculate 
a little bit, but we’re looking for an indication, some sign of a 
willingness to move, recognizing the importance of this facility 
and the fact that it will be a regional centre for that district. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well one of the challenges obviously in 
the whole provincial health system is how to get enough capital 
for a number of the projects. But we know from long 
experience that the capital isn’t the problem; it’s the ongoing 
operating costs and how that is part of the total system. And so 
one of the challenges we have is: well how do you mesh those 
two together? 
 
Well sometimes, and many times in fact, going with a new 
project actually allows for some of the coordination and the 
synergies that happen between long-term care and the acute 
care. And that’s why I say some of the projects are very much 
visionary; they look at the future. And so we would like to be in 
a position to fund more of these, but we have to work within the 
practical realities of the amount of money that we have 
available. 
 
So I guess I’m not one to say never. But I’m also one to say, 
well practically we have this 65/35 provision and that would be 
the normal course at this point. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. To the questions 
for the minister, I’d like to address a topic of youth addictions 
and I would like to just ask the minister what facilities that are 
available in this province for youth treatment and what ages can 
be treated under that plan. 
 
(19:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The Calder Centre in Saskatoon is the 
only in-patient service that’s strictly devoted to youth, a part of 
that. Otherwise there are community services in each service 
area, which is effectively in each of the new regional health 
authority areas, and that’s how the services are provided. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Could you tell 
me how many beds are dedicated at Calder for youth treatment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are 12 beds that are dedicated for 
young people. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. My concerns 



1610 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

really are around the fact that we had in this province last year 
3,300 calls for help from youth. And with 12 beds and a 
treatment facility in downtown Saskatoon, from information 
that I have received, it really doesn’t seem to be working. And 
with the number of 3,300 calls, I’m wondering how many youth 
that we actually admitted into youth treatment facilities and 
what the results of that treatment actually was. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I don’t have a specific answer to that 
question as to the number. And I assume when you talk about 
3,300 calls, those are calls to the addictions services 
province-wide that come from young people. 
 
Basically most of the services are provided through the 
community-based services because that’s often the most 
appropriate. But when they are needing to go into a residential 
situation, well then they go to the Calder Centre. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, the 3,300 
calls came from government figures that that’s how many called 
for help province-wide. 
 
And before I get into any more, could you tell me the ages of 
youth that would be admitted into Calder. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well it’s a bit hard to answer that one 
specifically, but your question is, at the Calder — in the youth 
side — what are the ages of the people? I don’t have a 
breakdown of the people and sort of what ages they would be, 
but most often the services we try to provide that in the 
communities across the province. 
 
But to give you an example, there are almost 20,000 services 
provided to 20,000 people across the province in all of the 
different 32 health districts. And so practically out of that whole 
situation most all of those services are provided through the 
community services in the different health districts. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Chair, to the minister, is there any 
plans in the Health department right now to provide a dedicated 
youth facility for the province of Saskatchewan for drug detox 
and drug rehabilitation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There isn’t any plan for any other facility 
besides the 12 beds that are at Calder at this point, because very 
clearly the treatment philosophy is to work with the young 
people in the community using the community services. So at 
this time there is no plan to build another facility. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, where I get a fair bit of 
information from is from some youth that have actually been 
addicted and have gone through recovery programs. And 
unfortunately for the . . . for those of us in Saskatchewan, they 
left the province to get treatment, which again is kind of 
shunning the whole problem. And that’s why when I look at the 
figure of 3,300 people that cried for help — and we slough it 
off and say that it’s done at the community-based level. 
 
Now individuals that I spoke to talked about rehab facilities as a 
in-patient two-week and as an outpatient simply does not work 
for youth. There’s a whole different methodology of treating 
youth addictions — and I think we’re all aware of that — where 
youth cannot be treated the same as adults. They have to have a 

whole different treatment program. 
 
Now it’s my understanding that we did have one in White 
Spruce that was extremely worthwhile because you’ve extracted 
your suppliers, if you wish, away from the patients. Now I 
talked again with people that have gone through the Angus 
Campbell in Moose Jaw, and Calder, and basically their words 
were, it’s a farce. 
 
So here we are ignoring cries of help from a whole bunch of 
young people in our society by just saying, well the treatment is 
at the local level or treatment is at the community-based level, 
where in fact these treatment facilities are not working for 
addicted youth. And that comes from some of the people that 
are addicted. 
 
The one individual stated that he did more drugs and alcohol 
while he was in the Calder facility than he did when he was at 
home when he had his problem. And another youth has stated 
that he didn’t even have to go out for his drugs at Calder; he 
could phone and have them delivered just like a pizza. 
 
So I think there’s something that’s really lacking within our 
system for drug rehabilitation for youth. The one youth that 
went through a cure in Calgary, it was a year-long youth rehab 
treatment 12-point plan — I believe there’s a 12-point plan. 
And my concern is that if we provide nothing like this for the 
province of Saskatchewan, that what are we doing, ignoring the 
issue? Or are we just driving these people out of the province to 
receive treatment out of province? And I think it’s maybe time 
that we had a look at what we can do to provide some service 
for our youth. 
 
And another issue, Mr. Minister, if you’d like to make a 
comment on it, is I think it’s age 13 . . . And why I ask you 
about ages, I think it’s — and correct me if I’m wrong — but I 
think it’s age 13 and below that they don’t go to these youth . . . 
that youth treatment facility in Calder or Angus Campbell as a 
matter of fact. 
 
And what happens, so I’m led to believe and again I stand to be 
corrected, but if they have a drug or alcohol problem of a young 
age — and we know that they exist, I mean there’s children at 
the age of 11 that actually have addiction problems — they end 
up, to my knowledge, in a mental health wing of a regional 
hospital or a hospital, and all we have to do is look at the stigma 
that’s put with going into a mental institution as a youth for a 
drug or alcohol related problem. 
 
And also, Mr. Minister, the cost as I understand it is 700-plus 
dollars a day in a health . . . mental health facility vis-à-vis a 
drug rehab facility that exists in other jurisdictions that cost 
about 100 to $125 depending on the facility itself. 
 
So I’m wondering if you’d like to make any comments on that. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think there’s a response I’d like to give 
at a general level and then on some more specific levels. These 
children who have these kinds of problems are a great concern 
for everybody who works with them, whether in the Health 
department, or the Social Services department, or the education, 
the school system. And there is no sense in any way of 
sloughing off these people. 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1611 

 

But I think there is a recognition, especially for the ones under 
13, 13 and under or 14 and under, that the place where you need 
to work with them is in their community setting because that’s 
where they’re going to have to live. You need to make sure you 
get the kinds of supports that are there. 
 
But what I would identify is that there are a number of 
initiatives that have been introduced in the last couple of years 
which attempt to deal with the longer-term issue, and it’s the 
Kids First program, where you identify those kids at risk around 
fetal alcohol syndrome and then work with the mother, the 
parents, family, and the siblings in that particular family to try 
to address some of these concerns early on so that they don’t 
become big problems when they hit their teen years. 
 
We also have the SchoolPLUS program which adds in-services to 
the education system in a coordinated way to help those kids 
where problems are identified early on. And clearly we continue 
to get suggestions around how to enhance this, and it sounds to 
me like you have some very good insights on some of the issues 
from various places. 
 
And so I appreciate your questions because they show a 
concern around a group of people, but also the whole range of 
people where there are issues. And we do have people working 
at this issue within the department and also within the 
provincial working group for trying to deal with basically the 
detoxification services for these younger people. 
 
So we’ll continue to work at this difficult problem. We’re trying 
to work at some of the preventive things. We’re trying to work 
at providing services when it’s identified in the school system, 
and we’ve got some services provided at the Calder Centre 
level for in-patient services. But the bulk of the services we will 
be providing across the province in communities through the 
health districts. And that’s how our system works. 
 
(20:00) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And I hope 
you agree that it is a great concern with yourself and 
specifically with me. 
 
One of the reasons again why I bring it up is because this total 
concept of community involvement does not appear to be 
working by the information that I’m getting. And the reason is 
the individuals are still very much involved with their support 
system that’s put them into the drug or alcohol situation. And 
this comes from people that are in the system. It’s not my wild 
statement or anything like this. This comes from them. So when 
we talk about a community-based system, conceptually it might 
sound fairly good. We’ll let them deal with it, but in fact if it 
doesn’t work, now what do we do? 
 
And I guess which leads to another question: what is the 
access? How does one gain access to the 12 beds that are in 
Calder, and what’s the waiting list for those beds, if in fact there 
is one? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Perhaps I should clarify what I mean by 
community services. These services are provided by trained 
addiction counsellors. And those are also the people who then 
would have the referral system to get people into the Calder 

Centre so that in every district or service area across the 
province there would be people who could do the assessments 
and work with the child and with families and the doctor and 
others who are involved to have the referral process go forward. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Minister, I understand that because 
that’s who again I talked to about the professionals within the 
system that are providing me with the information that say this 
system doesn’t really work. And it leads to another question. Is 
a youth detox facility in the province, could you tell me if there 
is such a facility, a detox facility for youth? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are a number of facilities across the 
province that provide detoxification services, but none of them 
. . . there aren’t any that are specific to youth. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Does the 
minister support the methadone treatment for youth addictions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The specific question is whether the 
methadone program, which we do have in the province, can 
also be extended to some 16- and 17-year-olds. Would that be 
your . . . I don’t have that specific information as to whether 
that’s provided. It’s my sense that it probably isn’t, but I don’t 
know that for sure. Practically, I think the methadone program 
works with some specifically licensed medical doctors who 
work with patients and that that’s how that system works. But if 
you wish, I could see if I could find that information for you. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I really would 
like to find that out because, again, professionals that I spoke to 
. . . and you can have professionals that are in favour of the 
methadone treatment and obviously there is others that are not 
in favour of it. And from my reading and talking to people, the 
methadone treatment really maintains an illness rather than 
promoting the healing and wellness. Now that’s obviously an 
opinion of some professionals and there might be others that 
would dispute it. 
 
But when we talk again with youth, if in fact youth are 
subjected to this methadone treatment, I would submit that it’s 
providing them with a continuation of their illness rather than 
providing the healing. And that’s where a lot of my questions 
are going, is I believe that we should have a treatment facility 
dedicated to youth, again with the community programs or the 
regional programs. 
 
I know I talked to one caregiver that said with alcohol and 
youth, if you succeeded in cutting a youth’s intake down during 
the two weeks of treatment from 12 drinks a day to 6 drinks a 
day, that’s successful. Well I disagree with that. That is not 
successful. 
 
And also it brings to question a couple of other, if you wish 
problem areas, is how can we as a society treat young people 
with alcohol if that’s what they’re having is an alcohol problem, 
because we know the laws in the province that they’re not 
supposed to be drinking under 18 years of age and yet we’re 
using it as a treatment for them in some cases. And the 
methadone would appear to me to be the same thing, even for 
adults, but for youth and alcohol it’s illegal. 
 
So I’m wondering if you would have any comments on that. 



1612 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well I think it’s clear that a methadone 
maintenance program is really about harm reduction, but not 
harm elimination, if I can put it that way. So one of the 
challenges is that we do support the use of methadone in trying 
to help opiate-dependent or addicted individuals to get off their 
dependency. And it becomes an important public health strategy 
because it prevents HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) and 
hepatitis C infections while assisting those using injection drugs 
to reduce their illicit opiate use, also reduces the needle sharing, 
and also criminal activity that’s associated with the addiction, in 
other words trying to get the resources to pay for the opiates. 
 
So continuous methadone treatment at adequate dosages is 
associated with reduced criminal behaviour and improved 
physical, social, and psychological well-being for some of the 
patients. And it is acknowledged that some people are on this 
program for a long period of time. But there are many who are 
helped in shorter periods of time, or even after longer periods of 
time, to get a lot of their other problems sorted out so that the 
addiction doesn’t overwhelm their life and they in fact can try 
to get their life organized so that they are no longer dependent. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I guess that’s very debatable, Mr. 
Minister, but I look forward to your answer whether youth are 
treated with this system or not. 
 
My final question, because other people want in, is you talked 
about Kids First program and I am wondering if you are aware 
of a program called Your Life: Your Choice. And I mentioned 
it to the Minister of Learning and to the Minister of Youth, 
Culture and Recreation in estimates to see if the system could 
be adopted and seeing as I got a long last question, I’ll make it 
quite long. 
 
The Your Life: Your Choice was recently chosen by the 
Canadian Centre for Substance Abuse as one of the best 
programs available for educating young people about alcohol 
abuse. And it’s basically at no cost. It’s a Web site. And I 
brought it up to the Minister of Learning and Minister of Youth 
to see what their position would be on it, having it instituted in 
Saskatchewan or connected. 
 
And I’m wondering if you’re aware of that and — if you’re in 
favour of the program — if you would discuss it with the 
Minister of Youth and the Minister of Learning to further 
advance it and hopefully incorporate it into a system and 
education in the province for youth. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well we would be happy to look at that. I 
don’t know about this specific program but I do know and have 
heard about programs that allow young people to do kind of a 
self-assessment of their own tendencies and uses of alcohol and 
then work on some of the issues that they might have. And this 
sounds like it might be something like that. 
 
So I’d be happy to take a look at that and see how it might fit 
into an overall program for the province. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair. I have a few 
questions for the minister this evening. 
 
First of all, Mr. Minister, do people in Saskatchewan who have 
cancer, do they pay for this treatment or is it covered under 

medicare? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As a general proposition the answer is 
yes, their costs would be covered. But there may be some . . . 
maybe an ambulance kind of ride here or there, or some part of 
some drug costs that might not be covered. But practically, 
most of the cancer drugs are covered. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, you were speaking specifically 
of drugs or were you speaking of overall care? Just for 
clarification. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well it clearly covers the hospital and the 
medical care, and so that would be the main parts that are 
covered. And under our system in Saskatchewan, people are 
registered with the Saskatchewan Cancer Agency. And then 
basically that’s . . . the fees are paid through that agency. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. So, Mr. Minister, do 
doctors in Saskatchewan, do any of them have priority for 
accessing treatment for their patients that have cancer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think on an ongoing basis the cancer 
doctors, through the Cancer Agency, end up having certain sort 
of spaces in the whole system for diagnostics for example. And 
that’s done on a regular basis just because of the fact that 
they’re . . . when something shows up at the cancer clinic, well 
then they need to go and get an assessment done very quickly. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, and how would these doctors 
access this priority space at the hospital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There’s just certain time that’s allocated 
to the Cancer Agency, and so I imagine they would have their 
staff say, well what’s the next time that’s available that’s 
allocated to the Cancer Agency, and then the patients would be 
referred to that spot. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And is there a 
payment for this service provided? 
 
(20:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically you’re asking if the patient pays 
or if the doctor pays? No, basically the doctors at the Cancer 
Agency I think are all on salaries and they work there, and that 
practically there may be some sharing of the money that we as a 
provincial treasury put into the Cancer Agency. They may end 
up sharing some of the costs back to the health district where 
they get the service provided. 
 
But there is no payment by a doctor or by a patient. It would be 
between the Cancer Agency and the health district and it would 
not basically be anything more than the fact that we have a big 
pool of money which is called medical care and a piece of it is 
identified with the Cancer Agency and they figure out the 
appropriate share between the two of them. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So, Mr. Minister, I’d like some clarification 
then. What you’re telling me is then that no money is 
exchanged between the hospital and the doctors that are 
represented by the Cancer Agency in order to have priority 
treatment at the General Hospital or other hospitals in 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1613 

 

Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There is no money that goes from the 
doctor to the health district. Between the Cancer Agency and 
the health district they might, I think, on a monthly or an annual 
basis try to allocate how many services are used so that the 
funding that they get from the provincial government which 
goes in the pocket to the Cancer Agency and an amount to the 
health district is shared appropriately. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — So, Mr. Minister, then what you are telling me 
that the Cancer Agency does provide funding to the General 
Hospital in order to receive priority treatment for their patients? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — No, I’m not saying that. What I’m saying 
is that in the organization of how the services are provided, the 
Cancer Agency has certain blocks of time which are allocated to 
them for use for their patients because many of their patients 
require urgent diagnostics. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — And do they pay for the service, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — We as the taxpayers of Saskatchewan pay 
for the service on behalf of the patients, and the doctors are the 
ones that decide when it’s used. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Minister, I had occasion this winter 
to call the department of nuclear medicine at the General 
Hospital, and I wrote to you about this. I received a letter back 
from yourself. And when I called to ask what the time frame 
would be for this person to wait for treatment because he was 
concerned about when he was going to get in, and I called to 
see how long of a wait he was going to have, I was told by the 
nurse at the department of nuclear medicine at the General 
Hospital that there was priority for the doctors at the cancer 
treatment. She was specific enough as to tell me there are 10 
doctors that have priority. And when I told her the name of the 
doctor that this gentleman was seeing, she told me that he did 
not have priority there, so he would have a longer wait. 
 
Would you like to clarify that for me, please? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Could you explain whether the doctor that 
you’re referring to is a doctor at the Cancer Agency or some 
other place or how does that work? 
 
Ms. Bakken: — I’d be happy to, Mr. Minister. This doctor is 
not a doctor at the Cancer Agency, but his patient had been 
diagnosed with cancer, was awaiting a test at the nuclear . . . 
department of nuclear medicine at the General Hospital. So he 
did have cancer, he had been diagnosed, he’d already 
undergone surgery, and was waiting for a further test. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well, I think the normal course would be 
that patients with cancer, the doctor who is not part of the 
Cancer Agency would work together with the doctors at the 
Cancer Agency to make sure that a person could have access to 
the block of time allocated for cancer patients. And that 
practically it sounds like there is some discussion or 
communication between the doctors that maybe should have 
taken place in this particular case. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Minister, upon contacting the doctor that 

was treating this patient, he was unaware of this arrangement 
and was quite astounded to find out that there were doctors in 
Saskatchewan who had priority — 10 doctors at the cancer 
clinic in Regina whose patients receive priority. And when I 
asked the question of the nurse at the nuclear medicine at the 
General Hospital how they happen to have priority, I was told 
that they paid for this priority. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Well basically, as I explained before, the 
Cancer Agency has agreements with both Saskatoon and 
Regina whereby there are certain time blocks that are allocated 
to the patients who are part of the people who are treated at the 
Cancer Agency, and those time blocks are accessed through the 
Cancer Agency and the particular doctors that are at the Cancer 
Agency. And that this is a long-standing arrangement that has 
developed over the years because of the concern around cancer 
and the fact that there are many times you have to move very 
quickly in your diagnostics. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. I understand 
completely the concern for cancer patients in this province and 
the need for access to timely treatment. 
 
However, it is unknown by the general public of this province 
that there are doctors that have priority and that, should you 
access those doctors, you will have priority for treatment and 
for testing. People do not know this and I do not understand 
how in a province where we are supposed to have free access to 
medical care that some are given priority over others just 
because they happen to access the right doctor. I’d like you to 
explain that to the people of this province. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I’m quite disappointed by the tone of your 
comments and by your muddying what the issue is here. The 
real issue is that when patients are identified by their specialists 
as urgent, they get access to the kinds of tests that are there. 
 
But there is also a special arrangement around the Cancer 
Agency, because practically most all of the patients who are in 
that situation require an urgent designation, that those patients 
then use the time that’s allocated for the Cancer Agency 
payments. And that’s a system that’s been in place for a long 
time and may be that some individuals haven’t understood that. 
 
But what they do understand is that when they are in an 
emergency situation or an urgent situation, then those kinds of 
things are done as expeditiously as possible. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Minister, I’m sorry that you don’t 
like my tone of voice. But, Mr. Minister, this is a very serious 
situation because people in Saskatchewan that are suffering 
from cancer and who are waiting treatment have enough stress 
without then being told that they are not a priority, that other 
people have priority because they happened to go to the right 
doctor. 
 
And if this is what this government is going to do, then I think 
they should at least have the courtesy to tell people in this 
province that this is how they access faster treatment, because 
that is exactly what’s going on. 
 
Because when I phoned the department of nuclear medicine I 
was told that there were some 400 requisitions on her desk this 



1614 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

day. She said I cannot possibly get to them all, and doctors from 
the cancer clinic have priority. 
 
Now I’d like you to explain to me how the people of 
Saskatchewan are supposed to know that there are doctors that 
do pay in this province to have priority for their patients. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Brenda, I . . . Excuse me. I apologize. But 
I have told the member opposite a number of times that what 
she’s just stated is not accurate because the doctors do not pay 
anything. We in Saskatchewan have set up a Cancer Agency, 
and this was done many, many years ago so that every patient 
who was diagnosed with cancer would have the full range of 
services to cover their particular very difficult disease. 
 
And so what we have done is over the years provided good 
service. It also has meant that we have very good records about 
all of the people in Saskatchewan who have ever had cancer — 
in fact some of the best records in the whole world — because 
of the specific nature of how we’ve done this. 
 
Part of what happens then is that specific arrangements are 
made for cancer patients so that they do have access to 
diagnostic services in a very timely fashion. And those 
diagnostic services are arranged through the Cancer Agency 
because that’s how we’ve set up our legislation in this province. 
 
Our goal is clearly to provide the best service possible for 
cancer patients, and that’s what we’ve done. And this particular 
concern that’s been raised here obviously is involving some 
kind of a discussion between the doctors that have been dealing 
with a particular patient. But practically, the whole system is set 
up so that those cancer patients have access to the kinds of 
services that they need on a timely basis. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Deputy Chair, I move that the 
committee report considerable progress on the estimates for 
Health and proceed to estimates for Highways and 
Transportation. 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Highways and Transportation 

Vote 16 
 
Subvote (HI01) 
 
The Deputy Chair: — I’ll ask the minister to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thanks very much, Mr. Vice-Chair. I 
have for officials here tonight Harvey Brooks, who is the 
deputy minister of Highways and Transportation sitting on my 
left, and on my right is Barry Martin, who is assistant deputy 
minister of operations. Behind Barry is Fred Antunes, and Fred 
is director of operations, planning, and business support. 
Directly behind me is Don Wincherauk. Don is assistant deputy 
minister of corporate services. Next to Don is Carl Neggers, and 
Carl is assistant deputy minister of policy and planning. We 
have Cathy Lynn Borbely who is in the back row, leader of 
budget development, and Mike Makowsky, manager of 
transportation, trade, and logistics who is sitting next to Carl. 

I also, while I’m on my feet, have some information — 
additional information, updates — to questions that were asked 
at the last sitting of these estimates, and I would like to make 
those available to members opposite. Thank you. 
 
(20:30) 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chair, and 
welcome, minister and officials. And that was my first question, 
by the way, was if you had that, and I thank you for that. I’ll 
have a chance to look at it a little later on. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I only have two questions that I would like to 
ask that I didn’t get to last time and it pertains to my 
constituency. And one is the construction project from Gull 
Lake on Highway No. 37. Could you tell me if that’s going to 
be repaired to a heavy-haul status — Shaunavon to Gull Lake? 
It’s Highway 37. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you. The section of highway 
that the member is referring to — Shaunavon to Gull Lake — is 
a highway that is being resurfaced and it is structural pavement. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The next 
question that I would have is the Frenchman River bridge on 
Highway 37 south of Shaunavon. And my understanding . . . 
and I hope you’ll correct me, but I understand that it’s not going 
to be built to primary standard weight or heavy-haul weight. 
Could you comment on the Frenchman River bridge, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — To the member, the bridge design 
actually is to carry much higher than limited loads. So it would 
be no problem because it also has to be able to handle permitted 
loads as well. So it’s designed to handle much heavier loads 
than what primary rates would be. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — I thank you, Mr. Minister. That’s all the 
questions I really have. That was a concern expressed by the 
local REDA (regional economic development authority) 
because that is, as you know, a primary route from south to 
north on our trade route, if you wish. And the concern down 
there was information that got to the local REDA was that it 
was not going to be to the primary weight standard, so it’s nice 
to have this on record that it is and will be capable of handling 
all the weights that are required for our trade from south to 
north. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Chairman. It’s a 
pleasure to welcome the minister and his officials to the House 
tonight to consider the estimates for the Department of 
Highways and Transportation. 
 
And I must apologize for not having been available to 
participate in the last round, but I understand that our deputy 
critic did a fairly decent job of asking questions as it related to 
airports. 
 
And we may want to get back to some of those issues raised in 
the previous session, but for tonight I’d like to pick up from 
where the member from Wood River just left off. 
 
He asked about the primary weight capabilities of the new 
bridge that’s anticipated for No. 37 south of Shaunavon. But it 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1615 

 

has come to my attention that heavy loads coming out of Swift 
Current and destined for Shaunavon have been permitted to 
travel down Highway No. 4 as far as Cadillac and then west on 
No. 13 Highway to the Junction No. 37, and then south on 37 
into Shaunavon. 
 
And I’m wondering if that permitting arrangement says 
anything about the capability of the bridge on Highway 37 
north of Shaunavon, between Shaunavon and Gull Lake. What 
is the condition or the status of that bridge in terms of its 
weight-bearing capability? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for the question. It’s 
important to note that we have about 850 bridges in the 
province. And the assistant deputy minister has a phenomenal 
memory and knowledge of our roads and bridges, but that 
specific bridge is not . . . detailed information is not available 
on that tonight, but we can get back to the member on that and 
provide him with information as is available on the bridge and 
its capacity. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Through the Chair to 
the minister, can we assume, given the fact that heavy loads 
have been permitted for Shaunavon from Swift Current down 
No. 4 and across No. 13 and eventually into Shaunavon, can we 
assume from that particular permitting arrangement that there’s 
questions about whether or not the bridge will handle any 
significant overweight loads? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — No, we couldn’t assume that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Then, Mr. Minister, what would be the purpose 
of permitting those trucks and why would they be specifically 
required to head down No. 4 Highway and eventually back 
through 13 to Shaunavon? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — We’d have to check into that, Mr. 
Deputy Chair, and just see if there is further information. But I 
wouldn’t want to assume on any front that there is this reason or 
this reason. But we will check into it and get back to the 
member with the information. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I’m 
belabouring this point just a little bit is that if we’re going to 
spend a considerable amount of money resurfacing the 
pavement from the bridge approximately to the community of 
Gull Lake so that traffic can move pretty freely on there and so 
it can be considered a good road for industrial purposes, then if 
the bridge does not meet standards, the money spent on that 
road will not be used as effectively as it might be. 
 
And I think that we may want to look at the capability of the 
existing structure crossing the Swift Current Creek at that point 
to make sure that it is capable of handling the kinds of loads 
that the highway is being constructed to handle. Mr. Minister, I 
would appreciate that information when it becomes available. 
 
The other area I want to delve into this evening, for the sake of 
the public record, is some of the new technologies that the 
department is looking at, some of which the department has 
contracted for. And I think the subject of new technologies has 
been discussed at some length in this session in previous years, 
but there is one particular new technology that I’m more 

familiar with than others, and I understand that the department 
has now signed a contract for the development of this new 
technology through experimental application. 
 
The contract I’m talking about is the one with Scientific 
Pavement International. I think there’s some good opportunities 
that present themselves. 
 
I don’t want you to consider this line of questioning as 
antagonistic or anything else, but I would like on the public 
record some description of what the department has contracted 
for, possibly the length of the contract, the amount of money 
involved, and some of the projects that will be undertaken as a 
result of this particular programming. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you for the question. There are 
actually a number of pieces involved in the work with 
Pavement Scientific International, PSI. The contract that is . . . 
that we’re working on with PSI is a five-year contract with 
variable lengths. The length of road is determined in the annual 
contract, and we’re looking at somewhere between 50 and 100 
kilometres per year for these roadways and, over the five years, 
a guarantee of a minimum of 350 kilometres. 
 
I think it’s also very important to note that this is not new for 
our department in terms of the work that we’re doing with PSI, 
but we actually have an ongoing relationship, which has been 
developing over a period of four years, and there have been a 
number of test strips done already. 
 
It’s our understanding that with the development work that is 
going on, the experimentation work that is going on, that PSI 
will be able to, over the long haul, provide us with highways at 
less cost and hopefully with highways that will last longer and 
will be able to stand up under the kind of loads that our 
economy demands from them. 
 
(20:45) 
 
I think it’s also important to note that Dr. Curtis Berthelot, who 
is the principal of PSI, provides the engineering standards and 
plans for the PSI work. And they also supply the cementatious 
material, the Terracem for the projects, but actually road 
builders are doing the building of the road using those products 
and building according to Dr. Berthelot’s design. 
 
For this year we have projects at Dysart on Highway 22 and on 
the Calder access already confirmed. And we believe that . . . I 
think that’s about 50 kilometres that will be lined up for this 
year. 
 
So we look forward to working further with Dr. Berthelot and 
hopefully to building highways for less money that will last 
longer and be better highways. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Are you in a position 
with the eight of your technical people there to describe the 
process? Can you give us some indication of exactly how this 
process is achieved and what benefits are derived by 
undertaking the process? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Deputy Chair, recognizing that the 
member opposite got to sit through — and he noted in our last 



1616 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

estimates when he was here; he got to sit through the whole 
technical presentation by PSI including the engineering which 
was rather dazzling, he explained — he’ll have some clear idea. 
But I think to put on record some of what this process is, that 
there is an analysis done of the soils on the road. And then 
based on that analysis of soils, a particular blending of cement, 
kiln dust, fly ash, and Portland cement will be put together, and 
that will be brought in tank truck to the site where it will be 
used. The powder will be laid out on top of the roadbed, and 
then it is blended into the roadbed by the contractor with 
basically what is a huge rototilling machine, grinds it in. That is 
then compacted. It gives about roughly a 300-millimetre layer 
of hard cementatious material that provides a very good base 
for our roads. 
 
Now, I’m sure that depending on the blends, we might see some 
variations there. But we’re also looking at a variety of different 
ways of completing the road surface as well, including just 
applying a seal coat to that base. And all of these tests that 
we’re doing will give us the best idea of how to build the best 
possible roads in Saskatchewan. 
 
I think if there is any . . . if the member has any more detailed 
concerns on this, we can seek to provide further technical 
briefing for him on the process or for other members that might 
be interested in that. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, that wasn’t a trick question. It 
wasn’t intended to be a trick question. 
 
But as I understand it, there are some very clear advantages to 
the system that’s been developed by PSI, and one of course is to 
stabilize the base of the road. But I guess the other real 
advantage, as I understood it, was to be able to reuse existing 
material. 
 
The process in vernacular is described as building down as 
opposed to building up. And we’ve seen the consequences of 
the designs that require building up. Of course you’ve got a 
narrowing of the road surface and a loss of some shoulder 
capability. But is that not in many respects one of the primary 
benefits of this new technology is that it will make complete use 
or reuse of existing material there and save us the cost of having 
to locate good gravel supplies and the crushing and the 
transporting of that gravel to the job sites? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, that whole concept of building 
down is important because it can eliminate some of the need to 
regrade and add new materials in. It uses the existing materials 
that are there in the roadbed when you lay the powder out over 
top — the cementatious material overtop — and grind it in. It 
avoids having to haul new sand, new gravel into the site. So it 
can be a real benefit from that side as well. 
 
I would like to add also, the member referred earlier to other 
technologies that we’re using. And I’d just like to bring into the 
record a number of those. 
 
Another project that we have in partnership with Saskatchewan 
Government Insurance and International Road Dynamics — 
IRD — is looking at new early warning devices that could 
potentially reduce accidents with wildlife. Currently nearly half 

of all rural traffic accidents involve wildlife. So we have some 
high hopes for that technology as well. 
 
IRD is also developing an automated truck monitoring system 
— ATMS. This is a four-year initiative to create an automated 
system to track trucks in the transportation partnership program 
for compliance. And we have some hopes that that will really 
help in terms of our trucking program. 
 
The University of Regina is studying the environmental impacts 
of road de-icers. This project is receiving some national 
attention and has potential to influence national standards 
regarding the usage of these materials. 
 
And a further project undertaken by Department of Highways 
and Transportation staff is examining the benefits of using 
asphalt binders on high volume roadways. This research may 
lead to improved pavements that can withstand heavy truck 
traffic loadings and help preserve the primary highway network 
in better condition. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, you stole some of my thunder. I 
was going to some of those other new technologies a little later. 
And I didn’t want to get into a lengthy discussion about them 
because, as I recall, I covered a lot of that ground with one of 
the previous ministers on new technologies. 
 
But the one you mentioned first, the one with the wildlife 
warning system I think might be very advantageous, especially 
in this province where so much money and so many near-fatal 
accidents are caused by wildlife interfering with traffic, or the 
other way around depending on your perspective. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’d like to go back to the PSI arrangement that the 
department has in existence right now. As you mentioned, the 
contract is for five years, hopefully a minimum of 350 
kilometres. You mentioned that you have about 50 kilometres 
designated for this year. And if I understood you correctly that 
50 kilometres will be primarily or singularly Highway No. 22. 
 
Did I understand you correct? And if so, what is your long-term 
plan? Have you laid out objectives and possibly other test areas 
for the remaining four years of the project? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes we do have a long-range plan. We 
have a number of candidate roads that have been identified — 
those are the thin membrane surface highways and those will be 
dealt with under the Prairie grain rain . . . Prairie Grain Roads 
Program primarily. And the candidates, the actual selection of 
the candidate roads will be done when the analysis in terms of 
availability of gravel, sand, etc., and what the conditions are in 
those particular roadways are determined. 
 
But we do have a number of candidate roads identified and a 
long-range plan as to how the . . . how this PSI technology will 
be tested and used. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Without going into detail, Mr. Minister — I 
won’t ask you to specify every road — but I think there are a 
number of candidates that I could refer you to in case you run 
short of possibilities. 
 



May 27, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1617 

 

Mr. Minister, would you detail for us the financial arrangements 
that this particular contract entails? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — I didn’t mention in my earlier answer 
that, along with those particular sections that I mentioned, that 
there are a number of other strips. There’ll be 3 or 4 kilometres 
on a variety of highways throughout the province that are being 
. . . where PSI’s product is being used and their technology is 
being used as well. 
 
I think it’s important to emphasize that the arrangement with 
PSI is a research partnership and we don’t actually have dollar 
figures mentioned. The reality is that we are in this partnership. 
We are using Dr. Berthelot’s knowledge as a consultant in the 
building and developing of this technology and its use, and with 
PSI on, every analysis brings a different mixture to that 
particular road site. And so the costs of Terracem that PSI 
delivers are paid for based on what the configuration would be 
there. 
 
And finally in terms of dollar value, the actual roadwork is done 
by contractors and they bid on the contract like any other road 
contract. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Minister, in terms of the technology that is 
being tested and tried in Saskatchewan, the arrangement that 
you’ve talked about might be adequate for public information 
purposes, but there must be some cost associated with this type 
of a project. Now I understand Crown Investments Corporation 
is involved to some extent. Would you feel free to elaborate on 
the involvement of CIC (Crown Investments Corporation)? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes. I think it’s very important to note 
that right off the bat that CIC does have a forum in which 
questions can be raised about their relationships. The reason 
why I say first off is because we’re engaged, Department of 
Highways and Transportation is engaged in a research project 
with PSI, and what we want to do is help develop this 
technology which is a benefit for our roads. We want to 
showcase that technology for Saskatchewan and for the world. 
 
But in terms of any kind of further commercial relationship that 
PSI might have with any branch of government, that’s outside 
of our jurisdiction and therefore I can comment no further on it. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Mr. Chairman, through you to the minister, I 
think we’ll let that issue lie there for now. It’s not that I don’t 
have interest in it but we will try and develop a line of 
questioning in an appropriate venue at a later date. 
 
Mr. Minister, last year the Department of Highways and 
Transportation introduced amendments to The Saskatchewan 
Railway Act. And I would like, from your perspective, an 
evaluation of how effective those amendments have been and 
whether any progress has been made in terms of short-line rail 
activities in this province in the intervening year. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Deputy Chair, to the member 
opposite, just a note that the amendments deal with the 
short-line in Saskatchewan. The only rail we have jurisdiction 
over of course are those which are wholly operating only within 
Saskatchewan. 
 

The amendments that are being put forward are intended to help 
us have a seamless system that will connect in with the national 
railroads as well, and it’s really to bring our system up to date 
. . . or our regulations, pardon me, up to date with the current 
system. And since a lot of these developments are quite new, 
it’s important, it’s timely, and we are engaged in significant 
consultation with the operators in the province, and we look 
forward to bringing in amendments and regulations which will 
help to continue to develop a good, solid short-line industry in 
this province. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, my understanding when the 
amendments were brought in before the House last year was 
that, as you explained, you wanted to dovetail the existing 
Saskatchewan legislation with federal legislation so that it 
would be a seamless applicability. 
 
But nevertheless, I recall fairly clearly at the time that there 
were provisions in that particular legislation that we on this side 
of the House argued pretty strenuously would not encourage the 
development of short-line railways in a capacity or in a way that 
would be very beneficial for the province. And I’m just 
wondering whether our arguments, frankly, have been shown to 
be the case at this point. Can you point to any additional 
short-line railway development activity that has happened in the 
intervening year? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Yes, with regard to the short-line 
railroads, Mr. Chair, there are a number of very, very interesting 
developments that have happened since the amendments were 
first brought forward and discussed. And what our overall . . . 
the overall goal of our government is to make sure that there is 
good rail access for communities around the province, and the 
Act was designed to encourage that. 
 
Since that time there’s been significant discussion, proposals 
brought forward for a number of alternatives. And in that 
process, one of the other things that has happened is that the 
national railroads, particularly CN (Canadian National), has 
realized that maybe it’s not such a good idea to abandon all the 
lines. They’ve come on board in relationship with the Prairie 
Alliance for the Future. 
 
On Turtleford line, there are discussions there about leasing, 
and so we’ll be providing lines there, access for the 
communities along the Turtleford line. And also we’re finding 
similar discussions happening with Cudworth, in that area. 
 
And so with the bringing forward of the Act, I think there has 
been a number of very key pieces of provision of service that 
have come into place, or development of provision of service 
that have come into place, that might not have happened were it 
not for the amendments coming forward. 
 
So we have hope that we will see even more expansion where 
communities are committing to having substantial haul to their 
pickup sites on the short-line rails. We know that it’s possible 
for them to get together to make a short-line rail viable. And 
what we’re hoping is that with the amendments and the 
regulations, we’ll have a system that will really encourage 
continued use of rail in this province and may even see the 
potential for new developments in grain handling that are 



1618 Saskatchewan Hansard May 27, 2002 

 

significant for producers that will bring better returns to them. 
 
And so we have some significant hope that the work that’s in 
progress will be a benefit to producers throughout the province 
and we’ll see some long-term successful short lines and some 
increased activity by the national railroad system as well. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Chairman, 
through you to the minister, we’re aware of roughly half a 
dozen short-line operations in the province at this time, and I 
have no doubt that there are potentially additional operators 
who may want to come or existing short-line operators who 
may want to expand their opportunities. 
 
I know your department also provides some support to groups 
and communities that are looking at achieving a short-line 
facility for their area. Can you tell me tonight, are there any 
abandoned . . . currently abandoned short-line . . . 
 
(21:15) 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. Could I have the committee’s 
attention. We’re having difficulty concentrating on the 
speakers. The sound level is getting pretty high, so it’s really 
hard for the speakers to be heard. So I’d ask the committee 
please to come to order so that we can hear the speakers and the 
minister. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman. Could the minister 
delineate for us tonight any new opportunities, any currently 
abandoned areas of trackage that might be resurrected as a 
result of the department’s current activities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, we do have to operate 
under all the federal guidelines here for class 1 railroads. One of 
the . . . I think a very positive thing that has happened is that 
CN declared a moratorium on abandonments, and we have seen 
an real extreme slowdown on abandonments. It’s been just 
partial, a couple of CP (Canadian Pacific Railway) 
abandonments. 
 
With the level of activity in discussion that we’ve seen in the 
past year and the potential that we’re seeing for producer 
loading and the enthusiasm that there is for that, it’s the 
expectation that even the class 1s . . . and I think we’ve seen 
evidence with CN. And I would expect that CP is seeing the 
potential will also be re-looking at some of its activities. 
 
And I think we’ll see some continued work with our 
regulations. And with the work of the communities, we’ll see a 
continued emphasis on trying to make sure that as much branch 
line as possible remains open and hopefully even some of those 
pieces that were abandoned in the past will prove viable and 
will be brought on board again. So we do have some hope. 
 
We’ve seen indication from CN who had the wisdom to make 
the moratorium, that now they are re-looking at some of those 
lines and going, yes, we can make this work, and they’re 
re-engaged. So we’ll look forward to CP gaining some of the 
same insight and making some similar decisions to come back 
on board. 
 
But in terms of any kind of significant abandonment since this 

process began, we have not seen significant abandonment, 
maybe small portions. But it’s our hope that producers in the 
areas will make commitments to haul significant enough to 
impact on the delivery points, and hopefully we’ll see more 
activity and more development of short-line. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. The reason I’m 
developing this line of questioning is that I have in front of me 
the ministerial statement made by yourself concerning the 
purchase of the Government of Canada hopper car fleet. 
 
And at that time you were discussing the farmer rail coalition 
and their efforts to try and purchase cars and that the 
department was, according to your statement, in support of that 
and had given some strategic support to the coalition in their 
attempt to put a bid together. 
 
And it would seem to me that to make that kind of a purchase a 
practical effort, we would really want to make sure that those 
cars could reach as many farmers at their points of delivery as 
possible. So of course it would make sense that rail-line 
abandonment be set aside if it’s at all possible, or that effort be 
encouraged, and that short lines be encouraged to also take up 
more activity in the rail sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now having told you that though, I’m wondering: where does 
the support that you have, your department, for the Farmer Rail 
Car Coalition group, where does that lie vis-à-vis the 
Saskatchewan Grain Car Corporation? Is there a competitive 
element there or is there a co-operative element there? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Chair, the farmer rail car 
corporation is doing a tremendous job at putting together a 
proposal to purchase the cars — the hopper cars — from the 
federal government. And the Saskatchewan Grain Car 
Corporation is working co-operatively with them since the 
objectives of getting cars to producers wherever we can reach 
those producers is certainly part of our overall goal and 
objective. 
 
And we believe that through supporting the Farmer Rail Car 
Coalition in their bid attempt we will see cars made more 
accessible without the additional cost that might happen if they 
were held by another carrier. And so it’s our hope, it’s our 
work, trusting that we will see better service for producers 
through this process, and it will be done in co-operation with 
Farmer Rail Car Coalition through our grain car corp. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:27. 
 


