















































Hansard: April 25, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 993 
 April 25, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of constituents of Carrot River Valley concerned about the 
exorbitant increases in long-term care fees and the petition 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And this petition is signed entirely by the residents of Hudson 
Bay. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to 
present a petition of great concern to the people of this 
province and I read the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And these are all signed by people from the community of 
Yorkton, the Deputy Premier’s hometown. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of people from the 
Humboldt constituency who are gravely concerned about the 
exorbitant fee increases for long-term care services. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
town . . . or the city, rather, of Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise this 
afternoon on behalf of my constituents to present a petition 
expressing their concerns about the long-term care rates. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 

long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Tisdale, Melfort, and Pleasantdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Dubuc, Yorkton, Melville, and Saltcoats. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, the petition I present is signed by people 
from Yorkton, Langenburg, and Good Spirit Acres. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with fee increases for 
long-term care services. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the community of Foam Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
stand to present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Estevan. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by citizens of Estevan and Lampman. 
 
I so present. Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition regarding long-term care fees in the province. 



994 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2002 

 

The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the immediate . . . immediate reconsider the exorbitant fee 
increases for long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Foam Lake 
and Sheho. 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition today. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
with citizens concerned about the exorbitant fees being charged 
for long-term care: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increase for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
this afternoon from citizens who are very concerned about the 
long-term care home fee increases. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good 
people from Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also would like to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the increase in 
long-term care home fees. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 

long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Shellbrook, Parkside, and 
Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too 
have a petition of citizens concerned about the home care fee 
hikes. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by citizens from Yorkton and 
Theodore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to present a 
petition on behalf of citizens concerned with the proposed 
massive increase in long-term care fees. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Southey and Cupar. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the 
long-term care service increase prices. And the petition reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by folks from North 
Battleford and they all live in one home. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise today on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are 
becoming outraged with the long-term care services fee. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 



April 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 995 

 

And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good citizens of 
Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 18, 24, 31, and 32. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Private Members’ Bills 

 
Clerk: — Mr. Brkich, as Vice-Chair of the Standing Committee 
on Private Members’ Bills, presents the fifth report of the said 
committee which is as follows: 
 

Your committee has duly examined the undermentioned 
petition for private Bills and finds that the provisions of 
rule 64, 65, and 68 have been fully complied with. 
 
The petitions are: 
 
From the Conference of Mennonites in Saskatchewan in the 
province praying for an Act to amend its Act of 
incorporation and to change its name; 
 
From the Sunnyside Nursing Home in the province of 
Saskatchewan praying for an Act to amend its Act of 
incorporation and to change its name; 
 
And from the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities in the province praying for an Act to amend 
its Act of incorporation. 
 

Mr. Brkich: — I move the motion, seconded by the member 
from Regina Wascana Plains: 
 

That the fifth report of the Standing Committee on Private 
Members’ Bills be now concurred in. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 34 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for SaskTel: (1) how many 
telephone lines are there in the province that are subject to 
the surcharge for 911 service; (2) what was the total 
revenue from the surcharge levied against all telephone 
lines in the province for 2001; (3) what was the total cost of 

providing the 911 service in 2001. 
 
With similar questions for projections for the year 2002. 
 

I so present. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. And 
it’s certainly my pleasure today to introduce a group of 
students, some of who are on a youth exchange here today. 
They are seated in the west gallery. They’re from the Ituna 
School, 25 grade 8 and 9s, and from Clair, New Brunswick. 
And one of the students is on the floor here as well. 
 
The YMCA (Young Men’s Christian Association) and Heritage 
Canada funds exchange opportunities for youth groups from 
across Canada. And the group from Ituna was in New 
Brunswick in February and now the group from New 
Brunswick is here in Saskatchewan this week. 
 
And just to talk about what their major objective of the program 
is, Mr. Speaker, it is the development of linkages between 
students from different parts of Canada, fostering a greater 
awareness and understanding of the differences between 
communities as well as the commonalities shared by Canadians 
with different backgrounds. 
 
So I would ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
welcoming the students from Ituna and from New Brunswick. 
Bienvenue. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of 
the Government of Saskatchewan it’s my honour to rise today 
to introduce to you the members of the . . . and to the members 
of this Assembly, this year’s recipients of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal, their friends, their family, their guests who 
are here to help celebrate today. And as you know they will be 
introduced individually a bit later on. So if I can ask the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming everyone here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
join with the minister in welcoming the special volunteers who 
are going to be recognized today. 
 
I would also like on behalf of the Saskatchewan Party official 
opposition to welcome all of their friends and relatives and 
those whose purpose in being here is to extend their best wishes 
to the honourees this day. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a few rows of active volunteers who’ve been invited 
to hear the Premier’s statement. 
 
Time does not permit for me to introduce them individually 
when we have so many special guests here today, but most are 



996 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2002 

 

seated in your gallery and one is celebrating very important 
parentage today as well. And I would ask them to stand and be 
recognized this afternoon and ask members to welcome them 
here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Because 
volunteers are such an important part of the work that we do in 
Culture, Youth and Recreation, a number of public servants 
have chosen to attend today in the west gallery from the 
department. And they are — I’ll ask them to stand as I call their 
names — Sandhya Padmanabh, Chelsey Krepakevich, Trina 
Thomson, Helen Petrovitch, and Dawn Gustilov. And welcome 
them to the Assembly today. Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Blackstrap Regional Recreation Association 
Volunteer Awards 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, the Blackstrap 
Regional Recreation Association recently held its annual 
volunteer recognition awards banquet and annual general 
meeting in Asquith. During the evening, many of the 
outstanding volunteers that live in our communities were 
recognized. 
 
These are the people who ensure our many culture and 
recreation programs are run effectively. For members with 
children, I am sure that you can recall evenings and weekends 
being involved in sports such as baseball, soccer, and hockey. 
These are the numerous programs that would not be possible 
without the assistance of these volunteers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Blackstrap Regional Recreation Association 
received many nominations in the various categories. On behalf 
of our members, I’d like to congratulate all volunteer nominees 
and recipients of the following categories: sport category, 
Charles Chappell of Asquith; recreation category, Marg Down 
of Asquith; youth category, Tara Procyshyn of Colonsay; 
community achievement, Colonsay, for project Operation Fast 
Freeze; community achievement honourable mention, Allan, 
and project Operation Big Chill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’d like to congratulate all of these nominees 
and recipients. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

100th Birthday Congratulations 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
members of the Assembly, and guests. Signe Margaret Jensen 
was born 100 years ago today, on April 25, in Sweden. Signe 
immigrated with her family to Kinistino, Saskatchewan, three 
and a half years later. 
The journey to their homestead in Kinistino involved a 

one-month-long voyage on boat to Halifax. From Halifax they 
travelled on train to Montreal and cattle train to Melfort. Signe 
remembers in Kinistino there were no railroads or roads — only 
bush and sloughs. 
 
Everyone worked hard at home and after two years of school, 
Signe went to work at the age of 12. Over the years, Signe has 
worked in various homes in Kinistino, peeled potatoes at the 
Kinistino Hotel, and even helped deliver a couple of babies. 
Many Kinistino residents will remember her working in the 
laundry at the Jubilee Lodge. 
 
She was married for 26 years and later cared for her parents in 
their senior years. Two of her sisters and two of her brothers 
have passed on, but her baby brother, at 85 years old, still 
resides in Melfort. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Signe is one of the brave souls who came to our 
country, endured hardship, worked hard to make a life here, and 
helped to make Saskatchewan what it is today. 
 
It is with delight that I ask the Assembly to join me today in 
congratulating Signe Margaret Jensen on her 100th birthday. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Members of the Assembly and guests, 
I know that members on both the sides of the House are quite 
. . . It’s quite reassuring to members on both sides of the House 
to have you applaud their statements. However, I would ask that 
for the remainder of the proceedings that you would refrain 
from participating in any manner in their proceedings. 
 

Cumberland House Maple Syrup Production 
 

Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. One 
of the joys of being an MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) is the opportunity it gives us to travel the province 
and continually discover just how amazingly diverse it is and 
how enterprising our people are. No matter where you go, 
there’s something new to learn. 
 
For instance, when I was in Cumberland House this past 
Sunday, I learned that in the Cumberland Delta, there are over 
one million maple trees. 
 
The member for Cumberland tells me the people have been 
tapping the trees for decades — maple syrup and bannock on 
the trap line. And now there is an active commercial maple 
syrup operation in Cumberland House. 
 
Joe Glaves produces Cumberland House Pure Maple Syrup. 
The word pure is in the name because there are no pesticides in 
the forest and no artificial chemicals are used in the boiling or 
filtration process. Something that cannot be said, I’m told, 
about the industry in Eastern Canada. 
 
Joe has four workers who call themselves the Cumberland 
House sapsuckers. They are: Cyril Goulet, Hugh Deschambault, 
Clarence Chaboyer, and Tyson Carriere. 
 
Thanks to the skilful mud driving of Gary Carriere, we found 
them tapping maple trees in the bush. They harvest about 



April 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 997 

 

40,000 litres of sap from which they will produce 1,000 litres of 
syrup. 
 
You can buy it either through the Nipawin Figure Skating Club, 
or you can drive across the wonderful new bridge on Highway 
123 to CJ’s Restaurant in Cumberland House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is economic diversification with a 
distinctively Northern Saskatchewan flavour and I am proud to 
have seen this forest and the trees. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Fox Valley High School Sports Teams Excel 
 

Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, athletes 
from southwestern Saskatchewan are receiving recognition at 
the provincial level even when they don’t finish in first place. 
 
The Fox Valley senior boys curling team consisting of Ryan 
Deis, Brendan Myers, Wade Martin, and Jared Brusky as well 
as their coaches were recipients of the sportsmanship award at 
the provincial curling championships in Hudson Bay this past 
month. The team is to be commended for its exceptionable 
sportsmanship displayed both on and off the ice. 
 
As stated by Brian Matheson, the executive director of the 
Saskatchewan High School Athletic Association, not only did 
the senior boys curling team do well and its coaches — as far as 
sportsmanship is concerned — but so too did the parents, the 
fans, and the entire school. And now the whole community of 
Fox Valley can claim pride in this achievement. 
 
As well, Mr. Speaker, 23 members of the Fox Valley 
Badminton Club recently competed in the provincial 
championships held here in Regina. Outstanding performances 
from Shane Dirk and Janice-Rose Reinbolt resulted in them 
winning their age class aggregate titles. 
 
Shane achieved the triple crown, winning the singles, doubles, 
and mixed doubles in the under 19 category. Janice-Rose won 
two gold plus a silver medal to claim the age category 
championship for 12 and under. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the local Fox Valley Badminton Club has been 
active for the past 18 years and continues to excel at the 
provincial and national levels and I’d like all members today to 
acknowledge this fine accomplishment on behalf of this small 
southwestern community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mayor’s Community Volunteer Awards 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On this day when 
we are recognizing seven exceptional volunteers, during this 
week when we acknowledge the invaluable work of all 
volunteers, I wish to draw the Assembly’s attention to another 
group of volunteers who were honoured last night in Regina. 
 
Eight notable local citizens were presented with the Mayor’s 
Community Volunteer Awards at Regina’s 12th annual Vital 
Link dinner held at the Hotel Saskatchewan. These awards were 

begun by the Regina United Way and were joined with the 
Mayor’s awards program in 1991. 
 
Given special notice last night were the following: the 
distinguished volunteer award went to Barb Butler, a 
constituent and a friend. Another constituent, Krishan Kapila, 
was recognized for cultural diversity. The youth award went to 
D. J. Rodie; arts to Ken Holzer; community development to 
Margaret Willette; recreation award went to Brian Machuk. All 
other members . . . All Regina members will applaud Reverend 
Bob Gay, given the human service award, and Brian Saip 
received the sports award. 
 
Our congratulations and recognition to each of these 
outstanding award winners. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Sask Party Kindersley Constituency 
Nomination Meeting 

 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Party is very excited about the upcoming 
by-election in the Kindersley constituency. As a matter of fact 
we are so excited we decided to hold our nomination meeting 
twice. 
 
The Kindersley nomination meeting will be held this coming 
Tuesday, April 30. The deadline for both nomination and 
membership sales have now passed, and I’m very pleased to 
announce that we have five fine candidates in the race — the 
largest number of candidates ever in a Sask Party nomination 
contest. 
 
The candidates are Jason Dearborn, a local area farmer; Allan 
Kerpan, a former Reform MP (Member of Parliament); Mavis 
Mulder, who works for the Bible college in Eston; Erhard 
Poggemiller, the mayor of Kerrobert, and Verna Thompson, a 
well-known weekly newspaper publisher. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m also pleased to announce that in the past two 
weeks these candidates have signed up over 500 new Sask Party 
memberships in the area. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — So we’re looking forward to a very exciting 
nomination meeting this coming Tuesday. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I urge the Premier to call the by-election as soon 
as possible so the residents of Kindersley can continue to have a 
strong representative in the Assembly here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, but even better yet, I would urge the Premier to 
call a general election so all people in Saskatchewan can have 
strong support and representation under a Saskatchewan Party 
government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Early Childhood Intervention Week 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to take 



998 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2002 

 

this opportunity to bring the attention of the House that this is 
Early Childhood Intervention Week. We recognize the 
dedicated women and men who, as home . . . who, as home 
teachers/therapists, with the support of community boards, 
provide in-home, early intervention services to children from 
birth to five years of age. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the early identification of children with physical 
challenges and the provision of home-based support services to 
the family reduces family stress, prevents the removal of the 
child from the family, improves parenting skills, and most 
importantly, helps families provide a positive start in life. 
 
Mr. Speaker, early childhood intervention workers help build 
the foundation for a healthy Saskatchewan. Providing kids a 
good start means better performance in the education system 
and active contributing citizens in the future. 
 
Our administration is proud to contribute to the funding for 
almost 600 spaces, including an additional 108 in last year’s 
budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we as a government seek to ensure that the needs 
of children with developmental delays and their families are 
well served. We know that this is money well invested in our 
future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all members of the House will wish 
to extend their thanks to the dedicated employees and board 
members who work with the children and their families to make 
Saskatchewan a better place. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Increase in Long-Term Care Fees 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Minister of Health. The NDP’s plan to take 90 per cent 
of the gross income of long-term care residents in the province 
has outraged senior citizens and their family members. But the 
fee increase doesn’t just affect senior citizens. 
 
Ken Stevenson is a quadriplegic who lives in long-term care but 
works full-time for the Department of Education. His annual 
salary is $51,000 a year, so right now he pays the maximum 
monthly long-term care fee. 
 
But as of October 1, the NDP’s plan to take 90 per cent of his 
gross income will see his fees jump by 138 per cent to over 
$3,700 a month. Unfortunately for Ken, this is over $500 a 
month more than his take-home pay. After his employment 
deductions and union dues are taken from his gross monthly 
income, his take-home pay is $500 less than what his long-term 
care fees will be done under the NDP’s new plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how he expects Ken 
Stevenson to live under the new fee structure? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind everybody 
that we are contributing as Saskatchewan taxpayers $337 
million towards long-term care that affects 8,900 people. 
 
What I am really disappointed about, Mr. Speaker, is that the 
Leader of the Opposition and his party would raise this question 
about this particular individual in a press release and in this 
House without giving any information to me, without asking 
that person to go to the Department of Health with his new 
information to have it assessed under the new . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Out of consideration for our special guests 
that are here today, I’m going to ask members to show special 
restraint while other members are speaking. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I have said day after day, 
there are ways in which individuals’ particular situations will be 
assessed and reviewed to make sure that the program does 
allow for people to continue to live in the kind of way that they 
have. What we are doing . . . And I would ask the member 
opposite to remind those people who contact him to make sure 
that they get the proper information before they make a big fuss 
of it in a press release and in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
becoming apparent that these are not exceptions to the rule, that 
there are in fact thousands of so-called exceptions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ken Stevenson became a quadriplegic at the age 
of 16 after a tragic accident. Yet he finished school, attended 
university — he earned a degree. He is employed full-time and 
is a contributing member of our community. To take 90 per cent 
of his income to pay for his long-term care is unfair and it is 
absolutely wrong. He has other expenses. He enjoys a full life. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New Democratic Party) government has 
repeatedly tried to pass off the increase in long-term care fees as 
an increase that only affects wealthy seniors. But we know that 
also low- and middle-income people are being hit. In fact they 
are being hit the hardest. And now working disabled people like 
Ken Stevenson are seriously and negatively affected by the new 
fees. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain why the NDP want to 
take 90 per cent of Ken Stevenson’s income just because he 
spends his non-working hours in long-term care? And will he 
explain why the NDP want to take 90 per cent of every 
long-term care resident’s income? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Health and 



April 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 999 

 

all of the people on this side of this House do respect the 
individual situations of people. And one of the ways that we do 
that is we allow them to sort these kinds of issues out directly 
with the health district and with the Department of Health. And 
so I think it’s very inappropriate for that member to raise this 
question like this in this particular situation. 
 
What I will say is that particular case will be reviewed and dealt 
with. What I remind the member is that we have a system 
whereby those people who can’t afford to pay for their care — 
it’s covered. And we’ve asked for a contribution from some of 
those people who have more income to contribute towards that 
cost. Even the people who have income beyond the maximum, 
they still will end up with a subsidy from the system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker. I don’t understand how that 
minister thinks he can justify taking 90 per cent of anybody’s 
income, regardless of the situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ken Stevenson in fact did write to the minister. 
He wrote to Saskatchewan Health about his situation. He says, 
and I quote: 
 

My only option would be to quit working which would 
only make things worse for both myself and the 
government. I would be without a job and the government 
would be paying an even larger share of the rent. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I find it unbelievable that the NDP would put 
people like Ken in the position of having to quit their jobs 
because they can’t afford long-term care and continue to work. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the minister keeps saying the people that have 
concerns with long-term care fees increases should just contact 
his department and they will see what can be worked out. Well I 
ask the minister: what’s he going to work out for Ken 
Stevenson? How will the NDP make a difference in Mr. 
Stevenson’s take-home pay and his new long-term care fees? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Ken Stevenson and people like him may be forced 
to quit their jobs. How is this building independence? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this government has a long 
record and we’re very proud of all of the programs that we have 
that allow for building of independence. They go everywhere 
from the Saskatchewan Aids for Independent Living, or SAIL, 
which covers many people . . . It also deals with all of the 
different programs that we have within Health, Social Services, 
Education, other places. 
 
What I will say very clearly is that Mr. Stevenson’s situation 
will be reviewed. And I remind everybody this change takes 
place October 1. We will have a chance to review some of these 
very specific situations where there are younger people with 
long-term care concerns. And we will make sure that it doesn’t 
affect his ability to work or his ability to live. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, what we are doing here is making sure 
that the taxpayers’ dollars — and these are Saskatchewan 

taxpayers’ dollars, $337 million — are being used effectively. I 
remind everybody that we are presently covering 76 per cent of 
the cost of long-term care and under the new program it’ll be 74 
per cent of all of this cost. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I think it’s 
becoming very obvious that the budget was put together hastily, 
the government was short of cash, and they had to look for 
every possible source. I don’t think that the Minister of Finance, 
I don’t believe the Minister of Health considered people like 
Ken Stevenson when they put this crazy plan together. I don’t 
think they considered the fact that low-income seniors who 
make less than $20,000 would see huge increases in their 
long-term care fees. Mr. Speaker, simply they were hasty and 
they were inconsiderate and they made a horrible mistake. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government, if it had a conscience, could do 
the right thing. It could say, we made a mistake, we’re going to 
reverse this decision, we’re going to protect people like Ken 
Stevenson — who’s not an exception, who’s not a rarity, Mr. 
Speaker but who represents many, many people in 
Saskatchewan that have been unfairly dealt a terrible blow by 
the NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier stand up in the House and reverse 
his decision to take 90 per cent of Ken Stevenson’s paycheque, 
leave him with nothing, and people like him with nothing to 
live on? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — We have heard the Minister of Health 
say very clearly in this House today that any individual 
circumstances will be addressed by he and the Department of 
Health and the district which will serve that individual. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the case is: for every individual in 
long-term care in this province, we consider them to be an 
individual circumstance, and they are dealt with as an 
individual. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition gets up day 
after day in this House with complaint and concern. Fair 
enough; that’s part of his job. But also part of his job is to stand 
in this House and say to the legislators and say to the general 
public, what would he do. Now the fact of the matter is . . . The 
fact of the matter is, we are . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Fact of the matter is, we are subsidizing 
long-term care 74 per cent of all the costs, even under the new 
plan. The fact of the matter is, we have increased spending for 
long-term care by $10 million in this budget. The fact of the 
matter is, we have increased spending to the Department of 
Health since 1999 from $1.6 billion to $2.3 billion. 
 
I ask, Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Opposition to stand in this 
House and explain how his commitment in the last election to 
freeze funding for health would allow him to do the kind of 
things he asks of us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1000 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2002 

 

Financial Support for Agriculture 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, had 
the Premier been listening, he would have heard members on 
this side of the House tell them more than once what the 
Saskatchewan Party would do is reverse the fee hikes back to 
where it was. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister 
of Agriculture. Yesterday, the minister and the federal 
Agriculture minister, Lyle Vanclief, met. Western farm groups 
are seeking $1.3 billion and the minister was going to ask or 
request Lyle Vanclief also to do the same. 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how did the meeting go? What 
new funding was he able to secure for the farm families in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is a very interesting 
question coming from the members opposite because, on this 
side of the House, Mr. Speaker, we’re on record, Mr. Speaker, 
about asking and working with farm groups and farm producers 
and farm organizations — this government and this ministry — 
for months and months now to see if we can develop a new 
farm plan, Mr. Speaker, and also additional farm money. 
 
And when we asked the members opposite and the departed late 
Mr. Boyd from this House, he told us in March that he would 
have an agricultural plan from the Saskatchewan Party. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s now April and we haven’t seen . . . we haven’t 
seen one word from the Saskatchewan Party about the new 
Saskatchewan Party ag plan. Not one word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we travelled the province, Mr. Speaker, and we put 
together a Farm Support Review Committee package which 
was sent out to all Saskatchewan farmers in the province and 
they worked on this document, Mr. Speaker. And you know 
who’s absent from any contributions or conversations to this? 
Only one party that didn’t make one contribution to what we’re 
doing for farmers in Saskatchewan — that’s the Saskatchewan 
Party. Not one word on ag policy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, I would like to remind the 
minister that I too have a copy of that document. And if this is 
so important to the government — if this committee was so 
important — let’s just read recommendation no. 1: 
 

Crop insurance should increase the available level of 
coverage from the current maximum while maintaining 
spot loss hail. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — How much did they listen to their own 
recommendations from their own committee? 
 
Mr. Speaker, once again it looks like the federal Liberals are 

turning their backs on the Saskatchewan farm families. But the 
NDP must accept some of the blame. When Ottawa sees the 
NDP cutting its own farm funding, like the $17 million it took 
out of spot loss hail coverage, it makes it that much easier for 
the federal government to abandon its responsibilities. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all agree that Ottawa has responsibilities to the 
farm families. But it’s pretty hard for the NDP government to 
make a case when they’re pulling money out of crop insurance. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why are both the federal and provincial 
governments abandoning our farm families? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, we have a history on the 
other side of the House, of the members opposite, Mr. Speaker, 
on the other side of the House misleading Saskatchewan people. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, you should take a look at the crop insurance 
program. Every cent of the investment that we put in the crop 
insurance program in the past, we put right back into the 
program again, Mr. Speaker. And not only that, we’ve added 
another $14 million into the crop insurance program this year. 
That’s what we did, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House — 
not abandoned it, but put it in. 
 
And I hear from the member opposite what she thinks should 
happen across the country today and where there should be 
additional money, Mr. Speaker. And I quote from a November 
article, of which the member opposite said this, Mr. Speaker, 
when asked about what should happen with federal funding. 
And it says this, quote: 
 

Harpauer also suggests that there should be no more federal 
dollars coming at this time. “I’m giving up on the federal 
government.” (Mr. Speaker, is her comment.) 

 
So the member opposite stands up today, Mr. Speaker, and says 
we should be asking Ottawa for more money on this side of the 
House when she’s running around Saskatchewan telling 
Saskatchewan farmers and people we don’t need any more 
money from Ottawa, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Mr. Speaker, since the Minister of 
Agriculture has no thoughts on the question, I would like to 
redirect my questions to the Premier. 
 
I remember listening to the Premier’s speech in the NDP 
leadership convention and I remember him saying, I will not 
rest until Ottawa provides more support for farm families. And 
that was nearly a year and a half ago. And he’s been very quiet 
on the issue ever since. 
 
Mr. Speaker, much of Saskatchewan is facing extremely dry 
conditions this year. And how do the NDP governments 
respond? By raising crop insurance premiums and cutting 
coverage. Mr. Speaker, what happened to the Premier’s 
province . . . promise? Why has he abandoned Saskatchewan 
farm families? 
 



April 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1001 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I want to assure the 
member opposite I haven’t been resting the last year. The fact 
of the matter is if we’d have had a little bit of co-operation — 
just a little bit of co-operation — from the opposition in the 
Saskatchewan legislature, our voice would be that much 
stronger. 
 
Recall what happened about a year ago, Mr. Speaker. There was 
a unanimous presentation taken, not from this House but from 
this province, led by the Minister of Agriculture, led by farm 
groups across Saskatchewan. We were even accompanied by 
the then Agriculture critic from Kindersley who was there. 
 
Who was the one, who was the one person to go south on the 
unanimous position taken by this province and its producers? 
The member from Kindersley. And it’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And, Mr. Speaker, it’s being repeated 
again this year. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in October of the year 2001 I prepared on behalf 
of every premier in Canada a report to the Prime Minister and 
to the federal government describing the situation facing 
Saskatchewan producers, Canadian producers, caught in the 
international subsidy war, caught in the international subsidy 
war. 
 
Now the good news is, Mr. Speaker, at last a group of the 
federal Liberal MPs have come exactly to the same conclusion 
— that our producers need bridge financing to get us through 
this subsidy war. And if I may say, Mr. Speaker, I would 
appreciate it if the member from North Battleford would use his 
influence to move the federal Liberal government as best he 
could. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, yesterday all of the annual reports — well almost all 
of the annual reports — for Crown corporations were tabled 
including SaskTel’s. And SaskTel’s story was pretty clear. 
When SaskTel sticks to its core function of providing 
telephony, telephone services to the people of the province, it’s 
okay. And when it strays away from that in various adventures 
around the world, it gets into a little trouble. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we know that the NDP through SaskTel have 
invested $20 million in a dot-com, an Internet company based 
in Atlanta, Georgia called Retx (Retail Energy Transaction 
Exchange). But unfortunately yesterday the NDP did not release 
an annual report or a separate statement on their investment in 
Retx. 
 
The question to the minister is this, Mr. Speaker: why didn’t the 
minister release an annual report or a statement about the 
taxpayers’ investment in Retx? And secondly, how much have 
taxpayers lost as a result of this NDP investment in Atlanta, 

Georgia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
want to refer to, I think what summarizes and answers the 
question quite nicely, of a CBC (Canadian Broadcasting 
Corporation) interview yesterday, I believe it was, that Wally 
Lockhart, a professor of government policy and commerce, who 
is an expert at the University of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
Here’s what he says. He says, Mr. Speaker, that: 
 

I think what they’re doing (referring to SaskTel) right and 
some may agree or (some may) disagree (Mr. Speaker) 
with this is that they are diversifying their business. (He 
says) You talked about the Saskatchewan Party being 
opposed to not sticking to the core phone business. But I 
think SaskTel is making its profits because it’s operating 
like a business and it’s diversifying, getting into wireless, 
getting into Internet and getting into those other businesses, 
even security. (He says) And because they’re operating like 
a business, I think they are making more profits. 

 
Mr. Speaker, is that member opposed to SaskTel making profits 
and delivering services across this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — What the Saskatchewan Party is opposed to, Mr. 
Speaker, is this NDP government putting the interests of a 
money-losing dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia ahead of senior 
citizens in the province of Saskatchewan. That’s what we’re 
opposed to, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s another investment the government has in 
another dot-com, in a state at least close to Georgia. It’s a 
dot-com in Nashville, Tennessee, and the company is called 
tappedinto.com. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government tabled no report for its investment 
in tappedinto.com, which is about 3.8 million. So, Mr. Speaker, 
the question is, why was there no annual report tabled detailing 
this investment on behalf of taxpayers? And how much money 
did tappedinto.com in Nashville, Tennessee lose for this 
government and Saskatchewan taxpayers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I want to read a 
subsequent quote that I think answers this . . . that I think 
answers this question, Mr. Speaker. This member is against 
SaskTel doing any sort of diversification, Mr. Speaker. He says 
they should stick to their core business, Mr. Speaker. But he 
won’t tell the people of Saskatchewan what those core 
businesses are, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Here’s what Wally says. He says: 
 

If we go back to SaskTel example, if they should stick 
(just) to the phone service I’m not sure (that) they would 
. . . (have a) viable . . . business. They’ve got to diversify. 



1002 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2002 

 

They’ve got to see where technology is going, where the 
industry is going and either move with it or have a 
questionable survival. 

 
And that’s exactly what that member wants, Mr. Speaker — a 
questionable survival for our Crowns so he can sell the Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, if the minister has read the 
annual report of SaskTel — he’ll have had to have dug quite 
deep into the report — but page 42, and specifically note 4 on 
page 42 of the SaskTel annual report, does talk about four 
investments including tappedinto.com and Retx.com. The other 
two investments, Mr. Speaker, by the way, is a company called 
Craig Wireless International and Soft Tracks Enterprises. 
 
Now the report doesn’t say how much each company lost, but it 
does seem to point out that between the four of them, the NDP 
lost 12.5 million taxpayers’ dollars last year — $12.5 million, 
Mr. Speaker. More than enough, more than enough to cancel 
the NDP’s attack on seniors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so the question to the minister is this: why are 
money-losing dot-coms in Tennessee and Georgia, why do they 
have a higher priority for this NDP government than seniors 
and long-term care patients in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I can’t believe that this member is 
actually going back to this issue again. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the investments that SaskTel have made have 
overall netted profit for the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker — over $150 million, Mr. Speaker. And . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, and in an interview 
yesterday, Mr. Speaker, in response to the tabling of the Crown 
reports, here’s what that member said. He said: 
 

The four major Crown corporations (referring to SaskTel) 
arguably did a pretty good job in difficult times this year. 

 
Now he stands up in the legislature and says they didn’t, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and here’s in an interview with John Gormley this 
morning on John Gormley Live. Here’s what he says — 
referring to these core Crowns . . . or to these Crowns, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

We want to do a review of those. An intensive blue-ribbon 
panel, a six month review, that looks at the return they’re 
providing to taxpayers. The jobs they create . . . the 
services they provide. But (and listen carefully, but) that 
doesn’t ideologically bind us to the status quo forever. 

 
Mr. Speaker, very simply, sell. That’s what he means — sell. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the minister says he 
can’t believe that we’re going back on this issue. I can assure 
him, Mr. Speaker, and all of his colleagues that we will be 
going back to this issue, this issue of this government investing 
tax dollars outside of the province while they put it to seniors 
and long-term care patients. We’ll be on that issue until they 
change, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — And if they won’t change, Mr. Speaker, if they 
won’t change, then we’ll be on that issue until the government 
changes, Mr. Speaker, after the next election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, to the end of last year, 
it looks like from the very little bit of information on these 
investments in the annual report, that the NDP’s invested 17.3 
million in Retx. That investment according to this information 
is now worth about 10 million. They’ve invested 10 million in 
Craig Wireless; it’s worth 4 million. They’ve invested 5.3 in 
Soft Tracks; it’s worth 3.2 according to this statement. And the 
NDP have pumped $3.8 million into tappedinto.com. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the only thing the NDP are tapped into in the 
province of Saskatchewan is taxpayers’ wallets, Mr. Speaker. 
That’s what they’re tapped into. 
 
And so the question is this. For these investments, these four 
investments, the government has lost $12 million, more than 
enough, more than enough than their attack on seniors will 
generate. Will the minister stand up and indicate to seniors and 
long-term care patients why this government is putting the 
interests of dot-coms in the United States against their interests? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that 
member I think raises a valid point about investments, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s fair. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, please — and to the people of Saskatchewan 
— listen to the insanity of the argument. SaskTel made $157 
million — made, made, bring it back to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s a benefit to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
I would ask him to explain to the seniors of Saskatchewan, if 
they did not have that $157 million, what would be the 
repercussions. He says, they wouldn’t do it, they wouldn’t do it, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to say as well . . . I refer to an article of The Globe and 
Mail. It talks about Canada’s 100 largest pension funds who lost 
money last year — the first time in 22 years. And you know 
what? All of our Crowns made money. That’s an incredible 
record when you compare that back with the private sector. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I want to close by saying . . . Mr. 
Speaker, I want to close by saying that our Crowns do a very 
good job for the people of Saskatchewan. We will continue to 



April 25, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1003 

 

invest, Mr. Speaker, and diversify to ensure that our Crowns are 
strong and stable and bring revenues back to Saskatchewan so 
that we can provide the very services that those members 
demand of our government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Saskatchewan Voluntary Sector Initiative 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
later today in this House by honouring the seven Saskatchewan 
individuals who we will honour, we are honouring thousands of 
men and women and young people who comprise 
Saskatchewan volunteer sector. 
 
Volunteers in our province enhance the quality of life we enjoy. 
Volunteers contribute to the economic and the social well-being 
of our province. Volunteers make possible the vast range of 
services and programs that are available throughout our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as you well know, the Saskatchewan voluntary 
sector has an awesome record of achievement. 
 
Saskatchewan has the highest rate of volunteerism of any 
province in Canada — 47 per cent, Mr. Speaker, of our 
residents and citizens volunteer on behalf of their neighbours 
and their communities. 
 
And Saskatchewan’s not-for-profit organizations for sport, 
culture, and recreation — Sask Sport, Sask Culture, and the 
Saskatchewan Parks and Recreation Association, have about 
12,000 community groups as their members — that’s 
community groups, Mr. Speaker. And in addition, our province 
has more than 5,000 incorporated charities. 
 
It therefore, Mr. Speaker, gives me great pleasure today to 
announce the Premier’s Voluntary Sector Initiative. 
 
The Saskatchewan Voluntary Sector Initiative will help our 
community of volunteers to sustain their achievements. It will 
establish a framework to support the further building of 
relationships with government. 
 
It will also help us to better understand how this partnership is 
already working, both in action and in role, and to support the 
voluntary sector in the development of policies and programs. 
 
I’m pleased to announce that the MLA for Regina Wascana 
Plains will Chair the initiative’s steering committee. 
 
I’m equally pleased to announce that the MLA for Cumberland 
and the MLA for Saskatoon Idylwyld will also serve as 
members of that steering committee. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the committee’s first priority is to develop a 
framework to guide provincial government interaction and 
participation with the voluntary sector. 
 
The Voluntary Sector Initiative will help build capacity in our 
voluntary sector. It will help build a stronger volunteer 

community. 
 
This initiative will help equip our impressive army of 
volunteers and their organizations to fulfill their missions. By 
working together with the voluntary sector, our government will 
help raise the profile of Saskatchewan’s volunteers. We will 
increase the awareness of the value of voluntary sector activities 
to the overall well-being of all of our citizens. 
 
I expect, Mr. Speaker, that the committee will have completed 
their work on the voluntary sector framework by the end of this 
year. 
 
The Voluntary Sector Initiative is good news for our many, 
many volunteers and their organizations, and in my view, it is 
good news for the people and province of Saskatchewan. 
 
As the famous anthropologist, Margaret Mead, once said, never 
doubt that a small group of thoughtful, committed people can 
change the world; indeed it’s the only thing that ever has. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our volunteers prove her point. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
thank the Premier for forwarding a copy of his statement to the 
official opposition upon announcing the formation of the 
Saskatchewan Voluntary Sector Initiative. 
 
As you know, Mr. Speaker, later today I will comment more 
fully on the positive impact that volunteers have had on the 
province of Saskatchewan. Needless to say, the value of 
volunteers is so great that they are an invaluable presence in the 
betterment of our province. That being said, I am most 
interested in the Saskatchewan volunteer sector initiative that 
the Premier has announced this afternoon. 
 
We all know that the work of volunteers is extremely important. 
Their work is important to government. Government cannot 
afford the cost of delivering the services provided in a spirit of 
volunteerism by thousands, in fact, by the majority of the 
people in the province of Saskatchewan. Their work is 
important to taxpayers who reap the benefits of the work that 
they freely provide in service to the people of this province. 
 
And in fact, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the work of 
volunteerism is important . . . volunteers is important to all of us 
because we have all experienced the benefits of the efforts of 
our countless volunteers over the course of Saskatchewan’s 
history and at the current time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, volunteerism extends far beyond the partisan 
nature of politics. And as the Premier acknowledged to the 
establishment of this committee and acknowledged that three of 
his colleagues will be serving in this steering committee, 
therefore, in the spirit of volunteerism, I would extend an offer 
that two Saskatchewan Party MLAs would agree to also sit on 
that committee should he invite them so that we can better do 
the work of marrying the work of governments and volunteers 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan. 
 



1004 Saskatchewan Hansard April 25, 2002 

 

It is said that it is better to give than to receive. We offer to 
give; I hope the Premier will offer to receive. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:30) 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 32 — The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I move that Bill No. 32, The Land Surveys 
Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 33 – The Land Titles 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move 
that Bill No. 33, The Land Titles Amendment Act, 2002 be now 
introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move we convert for 
debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — The Government Whip has requested 
conversion to debates returnable for question no. 137. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I stand today to table a 
written response on behalf of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Speaker: — Response to 138 has been tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, by agreement with the Official Opposition to 
recognize the Volunteer Medal Awards this afternoon, I move 
this House do now adjourn. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 14:32. 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 

 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 



 Volunteer Medal Presentation 1 
 April 25, 2002 
 

 

 
Dr. Jackson: — Ladies and gentlemen, would you please rise. 
 
Her Honour the Honourable Dr. Lynda Haverstock, Chancellor of the Saskatchewan Order of Merit and 
Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, and His Honour Mr. Harley Olsen. 
 
Your Honours, ladies and gentlemen, please join in singing the Royal anthem, God Save The Queen. 
 
Please be seated. It is a pleasure to welcome everybody, members of the Legislative Assembly, and 
guests to this seventh presentation of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal taking place in National 
Volunteer Week in Canada. 
 
Before we begin the proceedings, I would like to note the passing of a recipient of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal last year, Iris Maber, who passed away this week. 
 
It is now a pleasure to call upon our host, the Speaker of the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, the 
Honourable Myron Kowalsky. Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you, Dr. Jackson. 
 
Your Honour, Mr. Premier, Leader of the Opposition, members of the Legislative Assembly, ladies and 
gentlemen, and especially the medal recipients. On behalf of the members of the Legislative Assembly, I 
would like to welcome everyone here today. We especially welcome the seven Volunteer Medal 
recipients and their guests. 
 
This is the seventh year we have been honoured to hold the presentation of the Saskatchewan Volunteer 
Medal in this Assembly. 
 
This honour was created by the Legislative Assembly, so it is most appropriate that the members of the 
Legislative Assembly are taking an active part in the ceremony by presenting their constituents to Her 
Honour. 
 
These seven people are typical of the overwhelming volunteer spirit of the Saskatchewan people. It is a 
privilege to be here to honour these people. 
 
Volunteers are the people that get stuff done. In a democracy like ours, getting things done means 
co-operation and compromise. And through the course of their volunteer work, they develop 
relationships as they work with others and thus serve and provide an excellent role model for our youth. 
 
The recipients here today have been a significant part of building a better Saskatchewan and making this 
world a better place. 
 
So along with the members of the Legislative Assembly, I say welcome, thank you, and congratulations. 
 
Dr. Jackson: — It is now a pleasure to call upon Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor for her address. 
Your Honour. 
 
 
 



2 Volunteer Medal Presentation April 25, 2002 

 

Her Honour Dr. Lynda M. Haverstock: — Thank you, Dr. Jackson. 
 
Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, ministers of the Crown, Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, members 
of the Legislative Assembly, ladies and gentlemen, boys and girls. Well good, good afternoon. 
 
2002 is a special year for Canadians because this year our Queen celebrates the 50th anniversary of her 
reign. Her Majesty has stated that she hopes the Golden Jubilee, and I quote directly: 
 

. . . will provide a special opportunity to acknowledge all those who support and contribute to their 
communities through public service and voluntary endeavour. 

 
As our Queen’s representative, I offer sincere thanks and congratulations on her behalf to the seven 
outstanding individuals that we honour today. 
 
It is most appropriate that we celebrate voluntarism in this Chamber. As Canadians, we enjoy many 
freedoms, including the freedom to participate in our democracy. But what does that really mean? 
Democracy is not just about elections and campaigns; even the act of voting, while important, is but one 
small part of living in a democracy. 
 
Of far greater significance is the ability to participate freely and openly, and the willingness of our 
citizens to become involved through volunteering — to sit on boards of charitable and arts 
organizations, to organize and support local events, to take the initiative to become informed on national 
and international issues. 
 
Democracy is all of these things and more. It affords us rights, but it is driven by citizens’ determination 
to exercise those rights, and the power that stems from making choices and acting firmly upon them. 
 
One year ago, when we joined together in this most beautiful place, and this was to honour volunteers, it 
was in the presence of His Royal Highness the Prince of Wales. The Prince believes that volunteering 
helps individuals to develop valuable skills and to gain confidence, but in addition and more 
importantly, His Royal Highness says that volunteering helps people to, and I quote again: 
 

Realise the importance of the contribution they can make to their own community and that everyone, 
employed and unemployed, is part of the same society. 

 
And he’s bold enough, I must add, to say that volunteering is so important for every person that it should 
be compulsory. 
 
I wish to congratulate each honouree this afternoon: to you, James, Clayton, to Gary, Evelyn, Farrah, to 
Paul, and Jean. Your passionate devotion to important causes has made us a much better province, and 
you are tremendous role models for all of us. And I thank you for being so wise in the way that you’ve 
exercised your unrestricted freedom to choose. 
 
I also want to acknowledge at this time the love and support of family members and your friends, who 
have enabled these remarkable individuals to contribute in their remarkable ways. 
 
I’d like to close with a passage from Harold Kushner’s most recent book entitled, Living a Life that 
Matters: 
 
 



April 25, 2002 Volunteer Medal Presentation 3 

 

The path to a truly successful and significant life is through friendship, through family, and through 
acts of generosity and self-sacrifice . . . In affecting the life of even one person in a positive way, we 
make a difference in the world, and we prove that we do (indeed) . . . matter. 

 
So I’m pleased to bring greetings to this auspicious occasion on behalf of Her Majesty, Queen Elizabeth 
II, Queen of Canada for half a century. 
 
And I now invite the Secretary to present the recipients of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 
Dr. Jackson: — On behalf of the chairperson and members of the Saskatchewan Honours Advisory 
Council, it is my privilege to advise Your Honour, as Her Majesty’s representative in our province, that 
seven citizens have been duly selected to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal in this Golden 
Jubilee Year of Her Majesty’s reign. They are present today for this purpose and I shall read the 
certificate formally appointing them. 
 

In the name of the Crown in right of Saskatchewan and pursuant to The Provincial Emblems and 
Honours Act, James Burnett, Clayton Campbell, Gary Hyland, Evelyn Johnson, Farrah Mateen, Paul 
Ortynsky, and Jean Thomas have been awarded the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal for 2001 in 
recognition of outstanding volunteer service and exceptional community involvement in the Province 
of Saskatchewan. Presented at Regina, this 25th day of April, 2002. 

 
Signed, Joanne Crofford, Provincial Secretary; Lorne Calvert, Premier; Lynda Haverstock, 
Lieutenant Governor. 

 
God Save the Queen. 
 
Applause. 
 

James Burnett 
 
Dr. Jackson: — Jim Burnett is well known in our province both as a leading educator and as an 
outstanding volunteer. It has been in the Saskatchewan Lung Association that Mr. Burnett made his 
special mark in voluntarism. He served on the board for sixteen years and as president for nine years. He 
was also chair of the national board of the Canadian Lung Association. 
 
Mr. Burnett used his skills in education and public relations to be an articulate spokesman for the health 
causes championed by the Lung Association. Furthermore, he has served with the senates of both 
Saskatchewan universities, the United Appeal, the scouting movement and the United Church. He has 
worked with the Canadian National Institute for the Blind and the YMCA. James Burnett truly 
contributes above and beyond the expectations for a volunteer leader in the charitable sector. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Regina South, the Honourable Andrew Thomson. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Your Honour, it is my pleasure to present to you, Mr. James Burnett, from the 
constituency of Regina South to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 



4 Volunteer Medal Presentation April 25, 2002 

 

Clayton Campbell 
 
Dr. Jackson: — Clayton Campbell somehow finds time from his busy real estate work in The 
Battlefords to undertake a myriad of volunteer activities in the community. He persuaded his 
fellow-realtors to volunteer for the Meals on Wheels program. As Provincial Chairman of the 
Associated Canadian Travellers he led that organization in fund-raising for charities. He was 
instrumental in starting the North Battleford Sports Museum and Hall of Fame. 
 
Mr. Campbell has coached baseball and hockey, played an active role in local curling, and was chair of 
the 1986 Labatt Brier. On top of all that, he has served as chair of a special needs education centre, 
vice-chair of the school board, board chair of the regional college and a city councillor for North 
Battleford. No wonder he was named Battlefords Citizen of the Decade in 2000. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for North Battleford, Mr. Jack Hillson. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Your Honours, it is my privilege to present to you, Mr. Clayton Campbell, from the 
constituency of North Battleford, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Gary Hyland 
 
Dr. Jackson: — The name of the organization “Moose Jaw Arts in Motion” well describes its driving 
force, Gary Hyland. Indeed, Mr. Hyland is constantly in motion, starting, organizing, promoting and 
leading multiple cultural activities in the Moose Jaw area. He is the respected founder of the Moose Jaw 
Festival of Words. He was involved in the launch of Coteau Publishers, the Great Plains School of the 
Arts, Cine View Saskatchewan, Art School Saskatchewan and the Sage Hill Writing Experience. 
 
Mr. Hyland is Moose Jaw’s poet laureate. He has been involved in the Saskatchewan Film Board, the 
Saskatchewan Writers’ Guild, the Saskatchewan Arts Board, the City of Moose Jaw Centennial 
Committee, the Moose Jaw Cultural Centre Builders Committee, local theatre — and coaching minor 
hockey. He was a natural for Moose Jaw’s Citizen of the Year Award in 1998. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Moose Jaw North, the Honourable Glen Hagel. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you, Mr. Gary Hyland, from the 
constituency of Moose Jaw North, a recipient of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Evelyn Johnson 
 
Dr. Jackson: — During and since her career as a teacher in Estevan. Evelyn Johnson has dedicated 
herself to volunteer service in education and the arts. She served as president of the Estevan Teachers’ 
Association and worked diligently through the Early Childhood Association to make speech therapists 
available in schools. For fifteen years, she was president of the Estevan Arts Council and managed the 
Stars for Saskatchewan Concert Series. 
 
Mrs. Johnson organizes craft workshops, resident artist programs and an “art in the park” initiative. In 
the Quota Club she spearheads a campaign for the prevention of deafness and collects used hearing aids 



April 25, 2002 Volunteer Medal Presentation 5 

 

for needy people in the Caribbean. She is active in the Estevan Museum, UNICEF, the Canadian 
Federation of University Women, the United Church, and various choral groups. It has been said that 
Evelyn Johnson uses her heart, her head, her hands — and her feet, in dedicated service to others. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Estevan, Ms. Doreen Eagles. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you, Evelyn Johnson from the constituency 
of Estevan, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Farrah Mateen 
 
Dr. Jackson: — Farrah Mateen has accomplished a staggering amount of volunteer activity at a very 
young age. Under her leadership the Prince Albert chapter of Students Against Drinking and Driving 
became one of the strongest in the province. In high school she volunteered for the health board as a 
hospital visitor, for the winter festival children’s carnival and for the Terry Fox Run. She was Prince 
Albert Citizen of the Month, Miss Prince Albert and YWCA Young Woman of Distinction in her home 
city. 
 
Now a medical student, Farrah Mateen sits on twenty university committees at the University of 
Saskatchewan. She tutors university and secondary school students, coaches in the University Life 
orientation program for first year students, plays the pipe organ, performs tap dance, is an 
award-winning photographer and is in demand as a public speaker. At age 20, she is the youngest person 
to receive a Saskatchewan provincial honour. 
 
Applause. 
 
Dr. Jackson: — Now, Your Honour, Farrah Mateen resides part of the year in Prince Albert Carlton and 
part of the year in Saskatoon Greystone. So to avoid dissension in your Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I 
thought it only fair to have Ms. Mateen presented by both MLAs. 
 
So I now call on the Member for Saskatoon Greystone, Mr. Peter Prebble; and the Member for Prince 
Albert Carlton, the Honourable Myron Kowalsky. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you Farrah Mateen from the 
constituencies of Saskatoon Greystone and Prince Albert Carlton, to receive the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Paul Ortynsky 
 
Dr. Jackson: — Paul Ortynsky’s biography reads like a directory of Canora and area. This long-time 
pharmacist has served not only his profession but his town, cultural community and education. Mr. 
Ortynsky has been Mayor of Canora, chairman of the school board, president of the agricultural society, 
member of the housing authority and vice-president of the regional college. 
 
He has been active in the chamber of commerce, Red Cross, Heart and Stroke Foundation and Kiwanis 
Club. This veteran of the Second World War has played a major role in the Air Cadet movement. He has 



6 Volunteer Medal Presentation April 25, 2002 

 

been a member of the University of Regina senate and the council of the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons. He has held positions of leadership in the Ukrainian Professional and Business Association, 
the Ukrainian Canadian Congress, the Ukrainian Orthodox Church and the Canora Ukrainian Heritage 
Museum. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Canora, Mr. Ken Krawetz. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you Paul Ortynsky from the constituency 
of Canora-Pelly, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 

Jean Thomas 
 
Dr. Jackson: — Jean Thomas has deservedly received many awards for her forty years of continuous 
service to the scouting movement, where she has occupied numerous leadership positions and been an 
enthusiast for outdoor camping and jamborees. Mrs. Thomas has also played a key volunteer role in the 
United Church as organist, choir director, teacher and one of the first women elders in her congregation. 
 
Jean Thomas is well known for her musical talent. As accompanist and director she brings choral groups 
to entertain seniors at nursing homes in Regina. She has directed food bank drives. She has coordinated 
two hundred volunteers who provide income-tax services to students, seniors and needy persons. She is 
active in the Royal Canadian Air Force Association. Amateur de la culture française, Madame Thomas 
se plaît à promouvoir les relations avec la France et la francophonie. 
 
I call on the Member of the Legislative Assembly for Regina-Qu’Appelle Valley, the Honourable Mark 
Wartman. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Your Honour, it is my privilege to present to you Jean Thomas from the 
constituency of Regina-Qu’Appelle Valley, to receive the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
Applause. 
 
Dr. Jackson: — Your Honour, this concludes the presentation of recipients of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal for this year. It is now a pleasure to call upon the Premier of Saskatchewan, the 
Honourable Lorne Calvert, for his remarks. 
 
Applause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Dr. Jackson. 
 
Your Honours, legislative colleagues, ladies and gentlemen, and recipients of the Saskatchewan 
Volunteer Medal. 
 
As Premier of Saskatchewan it is my pleasure to congratulate the seven recipients of this year’s 
Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal. 
 
And, Dr. Jackson, if I may say, I’m sure on behalf of all of us how much we have appreciated the 
biographical précis that you’ve given of each of those who have received the award today. And, as Her 
Honour and I have just observed between each other, it is a humbling experience to listen to the work 



April 25, 2002 Volunteer Medal Presentation 7 

 

that has been accomplished by each of you in your community, in our province. 
 
Michael, however, I need to say there was one detail left out of one of the recipients’ biographies for 
which he should deserve another medal. One of our recipients today was the English teacher for the 
graduating class of 1969, Riverview Collegiate, Moose Jaw. 
 
Applause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And for that he deserves a medal. 
 
It is our view that these seven have given our province a very precious gift — a gift of their time and 
their talent; a gift to their communities, a gift to their neighbours, a gift to our province. And we 
recognize you today and thank you for that. 
 
Just about a month ago now an article appeared in the National Post in which the editors of the National 
Post entitled, “Saskatchewan: not the biggest, just the best.” 
And here is the writer’s opinion, Roy MacGregor: 
 

. . . where, we humbly ask (he says, in Canada), is the best place to live? 
 
(And) By this we mean more than the greatest number of shopping malls . . . 
 
We mean people: caring, concerned people who make the best neighbours and citizens, . . . who 
would be most likely to offer to help out in a time of need. 
 
The envelope, please. 
 
Congratulations . . . Saskatchewan. 

 
Applause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Friends, the most recent census of Canada indicated that between 45 and 47 per 
cent of all of our citizens volunteer, that 60 per cent of our citizens are involved in community 
organizations. 
 
A year ago we celebrated the United Nations’ International Year of the Volunteers. At that time, 
Minister Lorjé was our Provincial Secretary, and we thought an appropriate way to acknowledge the 
volunteers of Saskatchewan was through a small pin. I was proven wrong. When asked by Ms. Lorjé and 
the department how many of these pins they thought we should prepare, I said about 100,000. By the 
end of the year, we had distributed 550,000 volunteer recognition pins to the people of Saskatchewan — 
more than half of our population. 
 
Applause. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And so today we recognize seven very special of those volunteers and through 
them, and because of them, celebrate all of the volunteers of our great province. 
And just before I take my seat, I do want to acknowledge the members of the Saskatchewan Honours 
Advisory Council for their dedication — their continued dedication — and the very difficult task they 
have in recommending the recipients for this honour. 
 



8 Volunteer Medal Presentation April 25, 2002 

 

And finally my very, very personal congratulations to each one of you. Wear your medal with great 
pride in what you have accomplished, and in your province. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Applause. 
 
Dr. Jackson: — I would now like to call upon the Leader of Her Majesty’s Loyal Opposition, Mr. 
Elwin Hermanson. 
 
Applause. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Dr. Jackson. Your Honours, Mr. Premier, Mr. Speaker, colleagues 
in the legislature, especially the seven recipients of the Saskatchewan Volunteer Medal, your family and 
friends and guests that are assembled. 
 
This is a wonderful occasion in which the province of Saskatchewan can show its appreciation in a 
tangible way to representatives of thousands of people who, like the seven of you, have gone above and 
beyond what is expected in the way of giving of your time and your efforts to make Saskatchewan a 
better province. 
 
Saskatchewan has the highest rate of volunteerism in the entire country. And it doesn’t matter what 
community you go to in the province of Saskatchewan, it’s volunteers that make the wheels turn in 
every part of this province. And the seven of you are outstanding examples — in many different fields, I 
might add — examples of how our communities are better and stronger because of your untiring efforts 
to serve your fellow Saskatchewanian citizens. 
 
On behalf of the official opposition, I would particularly like to thank the seven recipients for their 
efforts and for being such outstanding examples that each of us can emulate and desire to follow. 
 
As a person in one Saskatchewan family, it’s hard to express how much volunteerism has meant to us. 
We have three children, all of whom participated in sports. And those sporting activities would not have 
happened had there not been coaches, had there not been drivers, had there not been people that kept 
organizations together and kept facilities in place — and for the most part did it on a volunteer basis. 
 
Our children would not have been blessed with the musical opportunities they had, had it not been for 
music festivals and the opportunities that availed themselves because people gave so unselfishly of their 
time to enrich our children’s lives. 
 
And as a family that attends a church, and recognizing the social fabric of our province and how it’s 
strengthened by the volunteerism through churches and other organizations — community-based 
organizations that make our province so much richer and so much stronger — I think I’m just one of 
many, many thousands of families in Saskatchewan that want to say thank you to those of you who 
represent the thousands of volunteers in our province. 
 
There is a Greek proverb that I think is very fitting for this occasion. And I quote: 
 

A civilization flourishes when people plant trees under which they will never sit. 
 
We are all benefactors of those who have gone before us and made our province better and stronger 



April 25, 2002 Volunteer Medal Presentation 9 

 

because they gave. And now we who are citizens of today have the opportunity to make our province 
better for those who will follow us. And there is no better way to accomplish this than by volunteering. 
 
To the seven of you, congratulations. And beyond that, to the thousands of Saskatchewan volunteers, on 
behalf of the official opposition, we say a very heartfelt thank you — keep it up. 
 
Applause. 
 
Dr. Jackson: — Ladies and gentlemen, the Speaker has asked me to invite you all, on his behalf, to the 
Speaker’s tea immediately following the ceremony, in the rotunda outside the Chamber and in room 218 
in the west corridor. And there you can meet the recipients of the Volunteer Medal and their families, 
the official party, and the members of the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Following the singing of the national anthem, would you kindly remain in your places for departures 
from the Chamber in the following order: first the viceregal party, then the Premier and the Leader of 
the Opposition, then the Speaker’s party, the recipients of the Volunteer Medal, the members of the 
Legislative Assembly, and other guests. 
 
Before we sing the national anthem, I would like to express on behalf of the recipients of the Volunteer 
Medal, the Saskatchewan Honours Advisory Council, and all the guests present today, our sincere 
thanks to you, Mr. Speaker, to the House leaders, and to all the members of the Assembly for making 
your time and your Chamber available to us this afternoon for this ceremony. Thank you very much. 
 
Applause. 
 
Dr. Jackson: — We will now rise and join in singing the national anthem, O Canada. 
 
Ladies and gentlemen, Her Honour the Lieutenant Governor of Saskatchewan, and His Honour, Mr. 
Olsen. 
 
 


