















































Hansard: April 16, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 771 
 April 16, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Long-Term Care Home Fees 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
rise again this evening and continue debate on the motion that 
was introduced this afternoon by the member for 
Melfort-Tisdale. And the motion reads: 
 

I move: 
 

That this Assembly call on the provincial government to 
reconsider its decision to address its own fiscal problems 
on the backs of the sick and the elderly by significantly 
increasing long-term care home fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to review a few of the things that I 
spoke about this afternoon and that the member for 
Melfort-Tisdale spoke about, for those listening tonight that 
were not able to be involved with the debate this afternoon. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, first of all we’d like to reiterate the part and 
the facts about the actual increase which amounts to 90 cents 
out of every dollar that the people have that they have to pay to 
the government in order to stay in long-term care after October 
1 of this coming year. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, for citizens of the province that have not yet 
received the information on this, I’d just like to inform them 
that as of today the fee in Saskatchewan — the minimum fee — 
is $828 a month, plus 50 per cent of income over $994 a month, 
for a maximum of $1,561 a month, leaving a minimum disposal 
income of $166. 
 
When we go into the new long-term care fees beginning in 
October, the minimum fee will remain the same at $828 a 
month; however, after that 90 per cent of the individual’s 
income over $994 a month can be taken from this person to a 
total maximum fee of $3,875 a month leaving the citizen — the 
elderly — only $166 of disposal income, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I cannot actually believe to this day — although I’ve known 
since the budget that this was happening — I cannot actually 
believe that the NDP (New Democratic Party) could be this 
cold-hearted to do this to the people of Saskatchewan, the sick 
and the elderly of our province — to actually impose this kind 
of a fee on them and to expect that the citizens of this province 
would somehow agree that this is an acceptable practice and 
this is okay to charge the sick and the elderly to care for them in 
their old age and when they can’t look after themselves to leave 
them $166 a month for extra income. That’s to pay for their 
drugs, other personal items that they need, and any other thing 
that they want to spend money on. If they want money to spend 
on their families for whatever reason, for gifts, this is all the 
money. 
 
I would like to ask the members opposite how many of them 
could survive on $166 a month. I think the answer would be 
none of them, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this budget was balanced in many various ways by 
some very creative bookkeeping and I went through these issues 
earlier on, Mr. Speaker: the $255 that was taken from the Fiscal 
Stabilization Fund of which there is no money there to take the 
dollars from; the $300 million that was taken from the Crowns. 
We do not know if there is adequate assets in the Crown or 
adequate dollars in the Crown to take $300 million. Mr. 
Speaker, did they have to borrow this money in order to move it 
into the General Revenue Fund? Mr. Speaker, the $90 million 
that was borrowed to put into the education capital tax. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, again we are looking at this and saying, in 
light of all of this, the sick and the elderly have been taxed now 
to help to pay for the deficit in this province and to help try and 
balance the books. 
 
Mr. Speaker, also on this same issue, I’d just like to mention 
that another way that the books were tried to . . . that the NDP 
has tried to add dollars to the budget and to work towards 
balancing it was that they increased the VLTs (video lottery 
terminal) in this province by 400. Again, Mr. Speaker, we see 
the NDP government trying to raise funds on the backs of 
addicted in this province. This is supposed to generate revenues 
of fifteen hundred million . . . $15 million, the direct 
responsibility of the member from Melville, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen the government has mismanaged 
this province so bad in the ’90s, Mr. Speaker, that we have now 
let . . . all the rest of the country has left us behind . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
I would just like to remind the member that the topic under 
discussion is the motion with respect to long-term care fees, and 
if she could relate her comments to that. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I would be 
happy to do that. I would like to read from a letter, Mr. Speaker, 
that was in my local paper, Weyburn This Week, and it’s written 
by a lady from Yorkton who is very concerned about the 
increase in long-term care fees. And so I’d like to read it to you 
as part of the record, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And the heading of the letter is called, “It could happen to you.” 
And I quote: 
 

October 1, 2002, could spell Doomsday for our senior . . . 
(citizens) of this province. (This) . . . is the day our 
government plans to implement their budget and to increase 
the fees of residents in long-term care anywhere from 0 per 
cent to 148 per cent depending on their level of income. I 
am talking about our spouses, our parents, and our 
grandparents, who have been the backbone of 
Saskatchewan and who in most cases, cannot speak for 
themselves. 

 
As of October 1, 2002, these residents will be required to 
pay $828 (Mr. Speaker) plus 90 per cent of their portion of 
their gross income between $994 and $4,380. 

 
And then in the letter the lady goes on to show the examples of 
how people that make $1,500, have gross income of $1,500 will 



772 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

then have to pay $1,283 to a maximum of, if you have $4,380 
income, you would pay the total of $3,875. And the letter goes 
on: 
 

Allow me to give you a typical example of a married 
couple, who through no choice of their own, have had to 
place their spouse in a long-term (care) facility. They have 
been married for 40+ years, have raised a family, worked 
. . . (hand-in-hand), paid their taxes, and saved money for 
their retirement. They have also lived at a time where the 
husband was the bread winner and his wife remained at 
home to care for their family, entering the work force after 
the children have left home. Suddenly, the husband 
becomes ill: his wife is unable to care for him, and after 
much emotional anguish, she has no choice but to place 
him in a long-term care facility. This has not been their 
dream for their golden years but they both must adapt as 
best as they can. 
 
Now let us look at the fees the husband must pay under the 
new proposed budget. The husband’s gross annual income 
is $58,000 and his wife’s is $20,000 for a combined total of 
$78,000. 
 
The husband’s fee will be based on half the combined 
income; $39,000 per year or $3,250 a month. Under the 
new budget, the husband will be required to pay $828 plus 
90 per cent of his income over $994/month. Based on this 
fee structure, he will be paying $2,856 per month or 
$34,300 each year. The bill does not stop here for there are 
additional costs such as prescriptions, incontinent supplies, 
personal items, etc. which amount to $350 a month or 
$4,200 a year. Now the total cost is $38,500. His gross 
income has almost been eaten up, however, he still has to 
pay income tax. 
 
His wife sees their income dwindling but she also has bills 
to pay — the same bills that she had when he lived at 
home. She is left in a situation where property tax, 
insurance, utility bills, house maintenance, etc., their once 
shared financial responsibility, rests solely on her 
shoulders. His wife has very little left to live on. 
 
Last year our province lost 13,000 income tax earners to 
other provinces. This budget is forcing couples who are at 
retirement age or who have retired — but who also pay 
income tax — to rethink their plans to remain in 
Saskatchewan if indeed the budget is passed. Can our 
government, because of their own mismanagement, 
continue to lose people who sustain the province’s 
economy? 
 
I have two questions to ask the government in 
Saskatchewan: 
 
1. Did you meet with seniors to hear their concerns before 
you brought down the budget? 
 
2. If you were to become ill, would your hospital costs be 
paid? Those residents in long term care who are ill, will be 
expected to pay for most of their care. Perhaps it is time we 
shared those costs. 
 

It is a sad day when the people being affected are the 
people who are at the stage of their life where they have the 
least ability to fight it or even understand the proposed 
change. Is this the government who professes to care for 
the elderly. I think not! 
 

End of letter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have also received a letter from an elderly 
woman in Yorkton and here’s what she has to say about the 
long-term care fee, and I quote: 
 

I have talked to many seniors who have spouses in nursing 
homes. They are truly frightful and feel so helpless to do 
anything about it. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, another elderly woman who — I cannot 
repeat the things that she said about this budget — who phoned 
our office. The budget is affecting people, Mr. Speaker, in ways 
that they never could have imagined in these years when they 
have saved for their retirement. They thought they were able to 
look after themselves and now this comes, put on their plate. 
They have no option; they have no choice. The government has 
delivered them this lot. 
 
And I’d like to refer, Mr. Speaker, to a letter from a woman that 
wrote to us on behalf of her parents, and I quote: 
 

My mom and dad’s combined income is just above the 
maximum, therefore they will have to pay $3,875 a month. 
A combined income of 52,500 divided by two is not really 
wealthy regardless of what this government defines it as. 
This monthly payment, along with prescription drugs and 
personal necessities for my dad, will take all of the money 
my dad saved in RRSPs and retirement funds. Another 
reality is that this budget proposes leaving $166 a month 
for drugs and personal expenses. My mom pays over $320 
a month for these expenses alone. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this woman writes: 
 

This government is now taking everything my parents 
worked so hard for. 

 
She indicates that her mother must also pay property tax, 
income tax, insurance, and other financial responsibilities to 
support herself. 
 
In her letter, Mr. Speaker, the woman urges the government to 
look upon this issue very seriously because it will result in even 
more people leaving the province. No one will want to retire 
here. This woman, the daughter, lives in Alberta and as you are 
aware, the maximum long-term care fee for seniors in Alberta 
as of January 1 of this year is $991.71 for a private room. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know what this woman is thinking. She is 
thinking, I would be better off to move my parents to Alberta, 
where she could be closer to them and where it would be much 
cheaper for them to live in long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, so in the end we won’t just have a mass exodus of 
young people from our province but we will also be forcing 
seniors out of our province because they simply cannot afford 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 773 

 

to stay here. Mr. Speaker, the young people that have left, now 
their parents will leave, and possibly their grandparents will 
follow if they are still able to. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve talked to many people and one thing that I 
have heard retired people say, when they find out about the 
long-term care fees, is that I have lived here all my life, I have 
paid my taxes, I have been a good citizen, and because I saved 
for my retirement and I can look after myself, I am being 
penalized by this government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are saying, well I won’t be paying 
because I will be leaving. This is the choice that this 
government has left with these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also have a letter from a gentleman from 
Saskatoon, and I’d just like to read a few quotes from it. And 
the heading of the letter is, “Budge hit will drive seniors west.” 
And it’s actually an article in The StarPhoenix, and he writes: 
 

Most of Saskatchewan’s retired teachers and government 
workers are already receiving their pensions in Calgary or 
Victoria and won’t be returning to face this tax. 
 
While the province needs to increase its population, the 
government has added one more reason not to come here to 
seek a place to retire. Not only will we tax your income, as 
most provinces do, but we will take 90 per cent of the 
remainder in fees when you can no longer speak up for 
your rights and have to rely on (the care of) others . . . 
 
. . . it is an overwhelming assault. 
 
Who will be next if we stand by and allow the government 
to go through with this? Maybe it will decide to confiscate 
the income of widows over 70, dentists who made more 
than $40,000, or any farmer who has bucked the trend and 
shown a profit. 
 
It is a time for change in attitude and government. The only 
alternative is to give up and move west, grandparents in 
tow. 

 
Mr. Speaker, that is a sad commentary of how the people of this 
province are feeling because of the way this government has 
treated the elders and the seniors in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, generally it is the individual who determines what 
he or she can or cannot afford. But in Saskatchewan the 
government wants to make that decision for people. In 
Saskatchewan the government wants to play Big Brother. In 
Saskatchewan the NDP thinks that it can manage taxpayers’ 
money better than the individuals that earn that money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, because of this attitude, it is chasing people to 
other provinces. Mr. Speaker, people are voting with their feet 
and it isn’t even election day yet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people simply cannot afford to stay in this 
province. It’s not that they don’t love their province; it’s not 
that they don’t want to be here; but they cannot afford to stay 
here any longer. And this is just one more way that these . . . 
this government is downloading onto the people of our province 

and asking them to pay for their mismanagement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d just like to tell you a little story about a 
gentleman that we met when we were doing the Grow 
Saskatchewan meetings. And it just shows how people love 
their province and they would like a way to come back here if 
they could. 
 
He was a man that had lived in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and 
he moved to Calgary. And he came back here about three years 
ago, and he worked here, and now he’s contemplating whether 
he should go back. Actually he’s from the constituency of 
Indian Head-Milestone. And he said, well you know, I really 
believe that people would like to come back to Saskatchewan if 
they had a reason. And he said, if you took all the ex-Saskies 
and put them in McMahon Stadium in Calgary and said, who 
wants to go home, that 90 per cent of the people would stand up 
and say, yes. And Mr. Speaker, it is our obligation as people 
that are elected to the legislature of the province of 
Saskatchewan to encourage them to find ways to make them 
want to come back to Saskatchewan where they can have good 
opportunity and a good future for their families. 
 
(19:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with this latest move by the government of 
increasing fees for long-term care, we just see one more reason 
why people are deciding either to leave Saskatchewan or not to 
return. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is another . . . one more letter from Yorkton 
that we received, and I would just like to quote a few lines from 
this. And I quote: 
 

Our drug bill necessities — eye care, dental care, drugs, 
and over-the-counter supplies — run between 6 and $7,000 
per year. We have been hard-working citizens all our life 
and therefore have been highly taxed to support the many 
social programs and others that, in many cases, have been 
highly mismanaged. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this couple is very disappointed in the 
government’s fee increase to long-term care. They don’t feel 
that it is fair, and they feel that they have already paid more 
than their share throughout their lifetime. 
 
The government tries to justify these fee increases by saying the 
increases only affect those who can afford them. What a cruel 
joke, Mr. Speaker. It affects thousands of people — not only 
those who are in nursing homes who have to pay, but it also 
affects all their families who have to become responsible to 
help offset the costs that they will now not be able to pay 
because of the increase in fees and the small amount of dollars 
that are left for them for disposable income. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who is this government to tell people what they 
can or cannot afford? What choice do the people have if they 
require a high level of care like level 3 or 4? They do not have 
the option to go into private nursing homes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In my constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, Mr. Speaker, we 
have excellent private care homes. In the city of Weyburn, we 
have three that I can think of: one run by Nancy Pulfer, one by 



774 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

Susan Grohn, and one by Heather Haupstein. They run 
absolutely excellent private care homes. And I hate to say, Mr. 
Speaker, what would have happened to the people that are in 
their homes had the government . . . The government decreased 
the number of beds that were available in publicly funded 
long-term care, Mr. Speaker, and people went into private care 
homes. If these private care homes had not been available these 
people would have had no place to go, Mr. Speaker, so I 
commend these young entrepreneurs in the city of Weyburn and 
throughout the province who have taken the initiative to open 
private care homes and to serve a much need of care that the 
elderly in our province needed. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the only real choice that many people have is 
to go into level 3 or 4 because in some private care homes that 
level of care is not provided. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when they find now that they cannot 
afford this care, they are going to have to make a choice of 
whether they can afford to stay in this province or whether they 
can leave. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we find and our . . . the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale spoke of this earlier and said that the maximum 
long-term care fees in Manitoba are $1,860 a month and in 
British Columbia the maximum is $1,500 a month. And so we 
see, Mr. Speaker, that Saskatchewan is not competitive with our 
neighbouring provinces on long-term care fees. So, Mr. 
Speaker, we are wondering why is Saskatchewan the only 
province in Western Canada that cannot compete on the level of 
fees that are charged in the long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government wants to play chance with the 
people of this province. I guess if we all know the game 
Monopoly where you went around the board and you, you could 
land on chance, you could land . . . or take or get a chance or 
you could play community chest. And I think that’s really what 
this government . . . it’s been a while since I played that game 
but you always wanted to land on chance or community chest or 
get to go by go free. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, this government seems to be playing this game 
with the people of the province. And it’s a sad commentary on 
what’s . . . where this government has come to. They’ve 
mismanaged and wasted millions of dollars and now they are 
simply extending their hands deeper into the taxpayers’ pocket 
and asking them to put more dollars towards balancing the 
budget in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province are getting tired of 
these tricks and they shudder every time the Minister of CIC 
(Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) makes 
another announcement. And they shudder every time the 
minister of Economic Development makes another 
announcement. And they shudder every time this government 
unfolds another budget because they know that somehow, 
somewhere, this government will pick off another group, 
another age . . . age segment, another level of government, 
another industry that will have to be taxed to pay for their 
mismanagement. 
 
Once again they will download the cost and try and find a way 
to find dollars to balance their budget, Mr. Speaker. Someone 

has to pay for this mismanagement. Sadly, Mr. Speaker, this 
budget not only used all kinds of creative bookkeeping but they 
also turned to the seniors of this province and asked them to pay 
$7.4 million out of their hard-earned savings to try and help to 
balance the books in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government has reached a new low — 
balancing the books on the backs of the sick and the elderly. 
The people of this province, Mr. Speaker, and I might say in 
every corner of the province — in the cities, in the towns, in the 
rural areas — are asking one question, Mr. Speaker, and that is: 
when is the next election? Believe me, the people of this 
province are saying it cannot come soon enough. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting, and my colleagues, the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale who has brought forth the motion 
today asking this government to reconsider what they are doing 
to the seniors of this province. Ad we are committed, should we 
become government, to hold the line on long-term care fees. 
 
We believe the citizens of this province, the sick and the 
elderly, should be treated with respect and dignity and they 
should be able to keep their hard-earned dollars that they have 
worked a lifetime for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I submit that I will be seconding this motion and I 
encourage the members opposite to get up in their place tonight 
and to debate this issue and to tell the people of Saskatchewan 
why they raised the fees, why they increased them to $3,875; 
why they left the people of this province with $166 disposable 
income. 
 
I want them to explain to the sick, to the elderly, and long-term 
care, to the families of those people who are worried, who do 
not know how they’re going to keep their family in long-term 
care. I want the NDP government of this province to explain to 
the people of this province how they can justify this move. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
enter into the debate tonight about long-term care and I’m going 
to dispense with the artificial indignation and the self-righteous 
rhetoric because I do have a great respect for the seniors of this 
province. I want to bring some clarity to the debate and I’m 
going to provide some facts to you and through you to the 
members of the Assembly and the public who are listening 
tonight. 
 
Without these facts it’s difficult for the people of Saskatchewan 
to have a true assessment of long-term care and the issues 
surrounding this, which I wrote myself — this speech. Thank 
you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
There’s also the danger that scaremongering tactics such as 
we’ve heard in the last two speeches — and talk about masters 
of misleading information. Some people could find themselves 
living in poverty. Can you imagine someone saying that? This 
would be harmful to some individuals and their families as they 
worry unnecessarily about how this may affect them or their 
families. The truth is no one living in long-term care lives in 
poverty, and I’m going to speak about that in a few minutes. 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 775 

 

That said, Mr. Speaker, the first thing I want to talk about is 
long-term care and the Canada Health Act. Certain core services 
guaranteed under the Canada Health Act must be fully paid for 
by both levels of government — the provincial and the federal 
— services like hospital and physician care. And I think we all 
understand that. For other additional provincial health services 
not included in the Canada Health Act, like drug coverage, 
home care, and long-term care, there is a shared cost between 
provincial and federal governments and citizens. 
 
The 2002-2003 provincial budget for long-term care is $337 
million. That’s the provincial budget for long-term care. This is 
an increase of 10 million over last year’s budget, or 3 per cent. 
 
The government currently subsidizes 76.4 per cent of long-term 
care costs and the accommodations in long-term care. With the 
current fee increase, the government will still subsidize 
long-term care by 73.9 per cent. The decrease of 2.5 per cent 
will be picked up in the increase in the long-term care fees. 
With the addition of the revenue collected from those fees, and 
the provincial share of long-term care, the 2002-2003 budget 
for long-term care is $445.5 million. 
 
Mr. Speaker, none of us like to pay more for services. With the 
rapidly rising cost of health care, which is 6 to 8 per cent a year, 
it is increasingly difficult to subsidize at our current rate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the average monthly cost of a nursing home bed is 
approximately $4,018 per month, per person, or $48,210 per 
year. We will be asking residents in long-term care to pay a 
greater share of the actual cost of their care, up to a maximum 
of $3,875 per month. 
 
Now this is an important paragraph in my speech tonight, Mr. 
Speaker, for people to listen to. Long-term care residents pay an 
income-tested residence charge. The fees are calculated based 
only on income, not assets like homes, savings, land. And the 
members from Melfort and from Weyburn have talked tonight 
about people losing their savings. This is wrong. The fees for 
long-term care are calculated on income only. 
 
Under the new fee structure, the minimum fee will remain the 
same, $828 per month, and there will be a new maximum of 
$3,875 per month. This new maximum will reflect more closely 
the full cost of providing long-term care. Low-income residents, 
who comprise one-third of the residents in long-term care, will 
continue to pay the minimum without change. The government 
is committed to continue to provide a publicly subsidized 
long-term care system for individuals based on assessed need. 
 
Tonight I also want to talk about the services long-term care 
facilities provide. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in my previous position as SUN (Saskatchewan 
Union of Nurses) president, associate minister of Health, and 
minister responsible for Seniors, I’ve travelled extensively 
around the province and visited the vast majority of long-term 
care facilities or, as we more commonly call them, nursing 
homes. Having a first-hand look at the range of care and 
accommodation was very informative and it was useful in my 
various roles. 
 
However, I’ve recently had a more up-close-and-personal 

experience as my father just entered a nursing home. As his 
daughter, it is very reassuring to know that my dad is safe, well 
cared for, and content. The care provided in the home is 
excellent and extensive. My dad is in Sherbrooke where they 
have adopted the Eden model of care. There is a real 
commitment to making the residents feel that they are at home. 
There are pets on the premises and a homey atmosphere with 
plants, music, and comfortable furniture. 
 
Not only is there the obvious benefit of accommodation and 
home-cooked meals, there is also housekeeping, laundry, and 
maintenance services. On top of these benefits, there is the 
important aspect of personal care and safety — assistance with 
dressing, bathing, personal grooming, and just getting around, 
be it by walker, wheelchair, or hands-on support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the availability of nursing care at the homes is 
something else that is included in the monthly fee calculation. 
Registered nurses, registered psychiatric nurses, licensed 
practical nurses, special care aides, health care aides, and daily 
living attendants provide professional nursing care, supervision, 
and assistance to residents on a 24-hour basis. 
 
There are also physiotherapists, recreational therapists, and 
occupational therapists to help each individual resident achieve 
and maintain their maximum mobility and activity. The 
important of socializing and recreation is also stressed. 
 
As you can see, much of the care in nursing homes relates to the 
activities of daily living. The monthly fee, plus the government 
subsidy, includes all operating costs for the facility and enables 
residents like my dad to live comfortably. My parents could 
never afford this kind of care if left to pay for or even organize 
this on their own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, prior to October of 2000, people were finding that 
in some cases the spouse of a resident that continued to live in 
the community did not have enough money left to pay for 
essentials. To address this concern, involuntary separation is 
now offered as an option. Involuntary separation is a term used 
to recognize those situations where married couples live in 
separate dwellings for reasons beyond their control — for 
example, one spouse lives in the community and the other lives 
in a nursing home. 
 
In this case, a couple may choose this involuntary separation 
designation for the purpose of determining the fee that will be 
charged. It’s very important to note that choosing this option 
does not change a couple’s marital status. They are still 
married. This option is of benefit when the resident of the 
nursing home has a lower income than his or her spouse in the 
community. This option is offered to the couple, including 
common-law couples, when it is to their advantage in terms of 
calculating the charge for the resident in the nursing home. The 
Department of Health can be contacted for further information 
on this option. 
 
(19:30) 
 
What this means to spouses is that they can still live in their 
home in the community. Again, I stress this option is only used 
when it is to their advantage to achieve the lower fee 
calculation. And they still remain married. 



776 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

It’s also important to be aware of the income tax implications of 
living in long-term care. The monthly fee can be claimed as an 
annual medical expense on the income tax return. There’s also a 
seniors’ tax credit of $750. In 2002, that significantly benefits 
senior citizens when calculating their provincial income tax. I 
want to say to all seniors, make sure you’re getting all the 
income tax benefits you are entitled to, and there’s two 
StarPhoenix articles, one on April 8 and one on April 15 by Terry 
McBride that are useful to read for seniors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, another concern of long-term care residents and their 
families is the cost of drugs. Medication costs in long-term care 
are in addition to the monthly fee. However the Saskatchewan 
drug plan provides assistance to those with the lowest incomes 
and/or those who are having high drug costs in relation to their 
income. Application forms can be obtained from any pharmacy or 
by calling the drug plan. And I think this is useful to repeat 
because even my own family didn’t know this. Application forms 
can be obtained from any pharmacy. 
 
Finally, Mr. Speaker, I would like to briefly talk about my 
experience with the seniors in this province. My riding of 
Saskatoon Eastview has the highest percentage of seniors in the 
country. I’ve had the pleasure of meeting with many of these 
wonderful people. I am constantly impressed by their vigour, their 
enthusiasm, and their optimism. The seniors organizations of this 
province are also a formidable force, and I have great respect for 
their dedication to enhancing the lives of older persons. 
 
I want to thank the members of the Provincial Advisory 
Committee of Older Persons for their contribution to the Minister 
Responsible for Seniors on government policies that address a 
broad range of seniors issues. I want to thank all of these people 
for making my job as minister responsible for Seniors so 
memorable. I also want to encourage all seniors in the province to 
continue to contribute their valuable experience and insight to 
policymakers. 
 
With all of that said, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to: 
 

Amend the motion by removing all words after “Assembly” 
and replace with the following: 

 
encourage the government to continue its long-standing and 
ongoing process of reviewing all fees and charges not 
included under the Canada Health Act, including long-term 
care home fees. 

 
This amendment is seconded by the member from Saskatoon 
Nutana. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I wanted 
to join with my colleague, the member from Saskatoon 
Eastview, in the debate that has come about as a result of the 
members’ opposite resolution. And what I want to talk about is 
the whole issue of the sustainability of our health system. 
 
As members will know, health costs in this province have risen 
by over 50 per cent since the mid-1990s. And members will 
know that when we came to government in 1991 our health 
budget was about $1.2 billion. Our health budget now, Mr. 

Speaker, is in excess of $2.2 billion. So we’ve seen in essence a 
growth in health spending in this province by over $1 billion in 
the last decade. 
 
Governments across the country have recognized this fact and 
in fact in the fall of 2000 I believe . . . or the fall of 1999 I 
believe, there was a first ministers’ meeting with all the 
premiers wherein the federal government was encouraged and 
convinced that they needed to add more to health spending 
across the country in the way of the Canada Health and Social 
Transfer. And what we began to see was the federal government 
getting back into funding a portion of health care in this 
country. 
 
But I can tell the members of the House and the public that 
today the federal government only pays for about 14 cents on 
every dollar spent on health care in Saskatchewan and across 
the country. And we now have the Romanow Commission 
which is dealing with the whole issue of how we sustain a 
publicly funded, publicly administered health system in this 
country. 
 
And there have been various proposals that have been put to the 
Romanow Commission and the Fyke Commission about how 
we pay for this — how we pay for this. Our position as a 
government is that the Canada Health Act needs to be 
supported. We believe in a publicly funded and a publicly 
administered health system. We do not believe in two-care . . . 
or two-tiered health in this country. And in fact we know that 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, who went on quite a 
diatribe before we broke at 5 o’clock, talked about this being 
two-tier health care. 
 
Well what I want to say to the member opposite is if she 
understood the principles of the Canada Health Act she would 
know that the Canada Health Act applies to hospitals, doctors, 
and nurses, and there’s a whole basket of services that 
governments are presently providing that fall outside of the 
Canada Health Act. And long-term care is one of those services, 
along with ambulance care, home care, drug care, 
physiotherapy, chiropractic care, and so on and so forth, but the 
members opposite don’t know that. And they like to think that 
they’re the government in waiting in this province, but they 
don’t even understand the Canada Health Act. 
 
Now what I want to say to the members opposite is that they’re 
going to be waiting an awful long time, because when their 
Health critic and their deputy Health critic — which I really 
question — but when their Health critic and their deputy Health 
critic don’t know that long-term care falls outside of the Canada 
Health Act and is not considered part of the publicly funded and 
administered health system in this country, they really do need 
to learn a lot before they can ever expect to be government in 
this province. 
 
Now what I want to say to the members is that, as I’ve said, 
since the mid-1990s, health spending in this province has 
increased by over 50 per cent. And when you think about the 
amount of money that the federal government is putting into 
health care in this country, at one time when the federal 
government ponied up to the plate in the late 1960s, about 50 
cents of every dollar we spent in this country came from the 
federal government. That’s no longer the case. And more and 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 777 

 

more services have been added to the department of health 
spending all across the country, including long-term care, 
ambulance care, chiropractic care, home care, and 
physiotherapy care, as well as the drug plan. And when you 
look at the increases in spending across the country, we know 
that health spending is starting to elbow out other kinds of 
initiatives that are important to the long-term health of Canada’s 
citizens. 
 
Now as I’ve said, there are certain core services guaranteed 
under the Canada Health Act that governments fully pay for and 
there are other services that are not covered by the Canada 
Health Act, such as drug coverage and long-term care, that 
citizens are asked to pay a portion of. 
 
Now currently residents receiving long-term care pay on an 
income-tested resident fee. And to calculate the fee 
Saskatchewan Health combines the minimum fee of $828 with 
50 per cent of any income or earned interest the resident has 
above $994 a month. And currently the maximum fee is $1,561 
a month. And what that means, Mr. Speaker, is that you can 
have citizens whose incomes are 50 or 60 or $70,000 a year in a 
long-term care facility and they pay a maximum of $1,561. And 
based on the current resident fee, the standard resident fee is 
$828 and residents retain a minimum disposable income of 
$166 for personal supplies, drugs, and so on. 
 
And what I find so interesting about this debate is that this has 
been the case for low-income residents for years and not once 
did the members opposite ever raise, on behalf of those 
low-income residents, the fact that they paid $868 and only had 
an extra $166. But they have no difficulty now raising this fact, 
but they didn’t raise this fact before the events of the budget 
that the Minister of Finance brought down. 
 
Now what I want to also say is that we know that presently the 
fee schedule is going to be revised as of October 1, 2002, and 
for those citizens who pay the current $1,561 per month, they 
will see their resident fee go up and this new maximum will 
reflect more closely the average cost of providing care. 
 
And while the member from Eastview says the average cost is 
about $4,000 a month, we know that there are long-term care 
homes in this province where it costs much more than that to 
provide care — $5,000 a month or $5,500 a month — and those 
long-term care facilities tend to be the much smaller facilities 
located in some of our rural communities. 
 
We’re going to continue to use the current formula where 
residents will pay the minimum fee of $828 plus a percentage of 
their income above $994 and this percentage is going to change 
from 50 per cent to approximately 90 per cent. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, these people will complain. But you know 
the opposition is famous for misinformation. Let me give you 
an example. 
 
Last week in the House we had members of the opposition say 
that the minister responsible for Sask Water was going to put 
municipal leaders in jail if they did not provide proper water. 
He did not say it. 
 
This week, this week what the members opposite are trying to 

say in this House is that if you have money in your bank 
account, like a savings account; if you have GICs (guaranteed 
investment certificate), treasury bills, mutual funds, a farm, a 
house, that that’s going to be taken away from you as a result of 
this fee increase. And I call that scare tactics that the opposition 
have become famous for. It’s simply not true. 
 
The Minister of the Environment did not say municipal leaders 
would be put in jail and, and . . . Well you know what? Listen to 
the member from Weyburn-Big Muddy, and what she talked 
about was that people’s savings were going to be taken away. 
And that’s simply not true. It’s an untrue statement. And I can’t 
go any further than that. I can’t call it something else. But it’s 
not true. 
 
But people’s incomes will be looked at, based on their income 
tax form. What will be taken into consideration is their old-age 
pension, their Canada Pension; if they receive the OAS (old age 
security); if they receive income from the credit union or the 
bank in the way of interest; if they receive a teacher’s pension 
plan and so on. But the Government of Saskatchewan is not 
going to make our senior citizens cash in their bank accounts, 
cash in their land, cash in their mutual funds. The money is 
saved for their children’s inheritance, Mr. Speaker. We’re not 
doing it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, day after day we hear this sort of thing 
misrepresented. And no doubt we’ll see a petition in the House 
calling on the provincial government not to take away our 
senior citizens’ assets. And I want to put it on the public record 
tonight that no one will be taking away their bank account, their 
savings, their mutual funds, their farm, or their house, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(19:45) 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, in this budget we’re spending 
$337 million on long-term care. And that’s an increase of over 
$10 million, or 3.07 per cent over the last provincial budget on 
long-term care. As well for a long time, in the province of 
Saskatchewan, long-term care facilities or nursing homes have 
collected resident fees. And they collect about $108.4 million, 
bringing the total funding for long-term care in the province of 
Saskatchewan to $445 million. 
 
Currently the Government of Saskatchewan, through the 
taxpayers, subsidizes 76.4 per cent of the care and 
accommodations in long-term care facilities. And with their 
current fee, the current fee increase, the subsidy will be 73.9 per 
cent of the cost of providing long-term care. I think that’s 
important for people to understand. 
 
Now I note that the members opposite laughed and giggled and 
shouted and hooted when the member from Eastview talked 
about involuntary separation. And I want to make this point. It’s 
not a laughing matter. But you were . . . but the members 
opposite were laughing, Mr. Speaker, and I find it unacceptable. 
 
Up until October 2000, Mr. Speaker, there was no recognition 
. . . And this happened in the good old Tory days that some of 
these members will remember, like the member from Weyburn 



778 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

who was a big Tory supporter; the member from Estevan, big 
Tory supporter; the member from Swift Current, big Tory 
supporter; and the list goes on; and the member from Thunder 
Creek, big Tory supporter. 
 
They will remember this. When they were in government in the 
1980s, if you were a married couple living — and one of you 
was in a nursing home and the other one was in their own home 
— your total income was taken into consideration. And as a 
result of a resolution at SAHO which came in 1996 . . . SAHO, 
the Saskatchewan Association of Health Organizations, called 
on the province of Saskatchewan to recognize involuntary 
separation by virtue of the fact that someone had to be in a 
nursing home. It does not mean their marital status changes — 
not at all — as the members opposite would like us to believe. 
What it means is that if the person in the nursing home has a 
smaller income — and this is particularly important to that 
spouse who’s living not in the nursing home — then only that 
person’s income is recognized for the purposes of the long-term 
care fees. 
 
Now the members opposite says my nose is growing. My nose 
is not growing, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Because the members opposite continue to 
put on the public record things that are not true. And I would 
say if anybody has long noses in this place it’s the members 
opposite. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Now, Mr. Speaker, we responded to the 
SAHO resolution and we also responded as a result of 
complaints from families where the spouse of a resident 
continued to live in the community but they didn’t have enough 
money left. And I can tell you that it was under the watch of the 
member from Eastview that this designation was created to 
assist those spouses living in the community. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s no 
question that none of us enjoy increasing the long-term care 
fees — none of us enjoy it. But when I listen to the members 
opposite, here’s what they’d have us do. They want more 
money for crop insurance. Spend more money, they say. They 
want more money for long-term care. They want more money 
for highways. I heard the member from Wood River say more 
money for highways. They want more . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — They want more money for highways. They 
want more money for long-term care. They want more money 
for crop insurance. They want tax cuts, Mr. Speaker, they want 
tax cuts. The list is endless. 
 
Let’s go through Hansard. Every day in question period they 
ask our ministers — more money for municipal government, 
more money for infrastructure for water, more money for K to 
12, more money for the universities. We heard today they want 

us to fund the detox centre in Saskatoon, which we’re going to 
do. They want us to fund the YWCA (Young Women’s 
Christian Association). 
 
But they want us to cut taxes. And when you are in a situation 
where revenues are falling, revenues are falling as a result of 
world economic conditions, as a result in changes to oil and gas, 
as a result . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would just 
bring to the member’s attention that the focus of the debate has 
to do with long-term care and other fees, and if the member 
would relate her remarks to that. 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Mr. Speaker, I was getting to my point. But 
somehow you can’t look at any kind of ways to raise additional 
revenue to provide important public services. That’s 
unacceptable. Well I don’t know how you square this circle. I 
do not know how you square this circle. They say, they say cut 
taxes, spend more, and leave government services — they stay 
the way they are, which I don’t believe, which I don’t believe. 
 
And all we have to do is look at what they’re doing in British 
Columbia, and the core services review. That’s all we have to 
do is look there, and that will tell you what these people will do 
if they ever become government. And what they’re doing there 
is they are contracting out home care services. They’re 
contracting out long-term care services. They’re contracting out 
the kitchens. They’re contracting out the laundry. And what it’s 
all about, Mr. Speaker, it’s a cheap wage policy so that women, 
mostly, who work in nursing homes, work in home care, can 
work for minimum wage instead of 13 to $14 an hour. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — That’s what this operation over there is all 
about. That’s what it’s all about. It’s about cheap wages, and 
let’s not worry about those poor people that are already poor in 
nursing homes and only have $166, but let’s worry about those 
120 people that earn over $50,000 a year in income. And I say 
to the members opposite, that is wrong, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think I’ve said quite enough on this subject, and 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It has been moved by the member for 
Saskatoon Nutana that we adjourn debate. 
 
The division bells rang from 19:53 until 20:03. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 29 
 

Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Lautermilch Serby Melenchuk 
Cline Sonntag  
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 779 

 

Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
 

Nays — 12 
 

Krawetz Draude Gantefoer 
Wakefield Stewart  
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. The Clerk will 
proceed. 
 
McMorris D’Autremont Bakken 
Weekes   
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order, please. Order. 
The Clerk will proceed. 
 
Hart Allchurch Huyghebaert 
 

Motion No. 4 — CommunityNet 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. They’re talking 
about it in Estevan, and Bienfait, Lintlaw, and Rockglen, and in 
about 187 other locations in Saskatchewan, and they support it. 
 
What are they saying, Mr. Speaker? Please encourage 
government to continue its leadership in expanding Internet 
services to our schools, our communities, and government 
offices by CommunityNet. This is why I am happy to rise today 
and move the motion on the CommunityNet program at the end 
of my remarks, Mr. Speaker. 
 
In this increasingly interconnected world we live in, knowledge 
and access to it has become an essential component to the lives 
of all our citizens. As a result, we as a proactive government 
believe that Internet should be considered a public utility 
service in the same way as basic telecommunications services, 
water, and electricity. 
 
Continuing in Saskatchewan’s tradition of being an advocate of 
universal and affordable access to essential services, the 
CommunityNet program has been launched. Mr. Speaker, prior 
to the advent of CommunityNet, only eight communities 
received high-speed Internet services. Today there are 
approximately 46 centres, all of which receive their Internet 
connections at rates equal to those offered in Regina and 
Saskatoon. Moreover, it is estimated that under the current 
CommunityNet plan, residents and businesses in over 100 
communities will ultimately receive access to broadband 
service offerings. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, these community-based service offerings 
will cover approximately 70 per cent of the population of 
Saskatchewan. With additional work in coordination with 
SaskTel and other Saskatchewan companies such as Wavecom, 
a business case is being developed that could potentially 
increase this coverage to 95 per cent of the population of this 
province. 
 

It begs the question, Mr. Speaker, how is this accomplished? 
Well prior to the advent of CommunityNet, there were no 
telecommunication service providers in rural Saskatchewan that 
provided high-speed services. As a national broadband task 
force noted, it was unlikely that market forces would result in 
high-speed service to small rural and remote communities for 
the foreseeable future. 
 
As a result, Mr. Speaker, this government decided that SaskTel 
and that the Saskatchewan Communications Network would be 
used as the delivery arm for CommunityNet. This organization 
of public sector entities into an anchor tenant for advanced 
telecommunication services allows for us the planning and 
implementation of the best network design province-wide — in 
other words, a holistic approach as opposed to building in 
response to separate customer demands on an ad hoc basis. This 
critical mass to rationalize advancing infrastructure in rural 
Saskatchewan and the extension of social, educational, and 
economic opportunities to even the smallest Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
In fact, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the national broadband task force 
has noted that Saskatchewan’s unique CommunityNet model of 
amalgamated demand throughout the public sector is one of the 
most advanced approaches in the world. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, you may be wondering, how does it work? 
Well the CommunityNet concept is based on co-operation 
among all players in the public sector such as education, health, 
libraries, and executive government to form one anchor tenant 
that pools its resources to achieve a common goal and attain 
high-speed telecommunications access for the public sector and 
all Saskatchewan citizens. The Saskatchewan way, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
While the connection of a local school or health facility to 
CommunityNet does not guarantee that everyone in that town 
will receive access to high-speed Internet, by connecting public 
facilities in rural areas the costs for commercial high-speed 
access to the residents and business of the communities is 
dramatically reduced, making them comparable to those in 
urban centres. 
 
Although, Mr. Deputy Speaker, CommunityNet will extend a 
provincial high-speed communications network and Internet 
access to over 366 communications, 839 educational facilities, 
379 health facilities, 86 First Nations schools, and 249 
government offices. The overall cost to the public sector of 
CommunityNet will be $70.9 million over the next six years. 
Schools, health facilities, libraries, and other public service 
entities will not be required to pay any additional connection or 
usage costs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a proud tradition of the CCF (Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) and the NDP to bring services to 
all members of society. CommunityNet is no different. It’s 
connecting those citizens to the future. It’s connecting our 
province to the future. 
 
The tradition and the values that led us to rural electrification 
have brought us to the installation of information infrastructure 
across the province, better enabling the delivery of health care, 
education, and other community services. 



780 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

Not only this, Mr. Speaker, but this program enables the 
empowerment of individual people and businesses to gain 
access to a world of knowledge. 
 
So don’t just take my word for it, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look at the 
weeklies. 
 

CommunityNet connects (to) Melville. Melville today 
celebrated its recent connection to CommunityNet, 
Saskatchewan’s public sector high-speed network . . . 
 
All of Melville’s schools now have high-speed capabilities. 
In the next few months, remaining public institutions will 
receive high-speed Internet connections. (March 13, 2002.) 
 
Westview celebrates historical moment. Estevan school the 
first to connect to CommunityNet . . . Estevan School 
Division chairwoman Shirley Batters noted how Estevan 
educators are already fully involved in developing and 
delivering distance education products to schools in other 
communities . . . 
 
Batters said the school divisions now have untold access to 
learning sources and on-line courses and that leads to 
post-secondary learning opportunities (second to none). 

 
La Ronge, Missinipi News, February 15, 2002, from the reporter 
Dallas Hicks: 
 

La Ronge celebrated its connection to CommunityNet 
today. CommunityNet is the province’s public sector 
high-speed Internet service linking public institutions in 
three hundred and sixty six communities . . . All of La 
Ronge’s schools now have high-speed Internet. Remaining 
public institutions (there) will be hooked up in the next few 
months. 

 
Here we are, from Saskatoon, and Neil Herland says 
“Something revolutionary is happening, not only here, but in 
other places across the province. And in this case, they’re going 
to point out what’s happening in Strasbourg, Saskatchewan. 
 

It’s still a small quiet prairie town, so small the locals don’t 
bother giving the first three digits of their phone number. 
But two months ago Strasbourg caught up with Canada’s 
biggest cities. The local school got high-speed Internet 
access and it’s having a profound effect on students. This 
physics class used to be taught using books and a 
blackboard. Now science concepts are illustrated by 
visiting Web sites and clicking on animation sequences. 

 
(20:15) 
 
And Lorne Gottselig, a teacher in Strasbourg, says: 
 

Getting high-speed Internet in every school is an excellent 
idea because it creates a level playing field, you know, 
what a teacher does in Regina or Saskatoon could be 
translated over to a teacher that teaches in rural 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Good news for rural Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 

And the list goes on and on and on as we begin to connect our 
students and our communities and our government through 
CommunityNet. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I support this motion, and I would now like to 
move the motion before the Assembly: 
 

That this Assembly encourage the government to continue 
its leadership in expanding Internet services to schools, 
communities, and government offices throughout the 
province by the CommunityNet program. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair of 
Committees. I’m very pleased to rise in my place today to 
support the motion put forward by the member for Regina 
Wascana Plains in support of the CommunityNet initiative. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think this is an interesting motion for a lot of 
reasons. One, it deals with technology; it deals with the future 
of Saskatchewan and I think it also is a very good delineation 
between the philosophy of the government on this side versus 
the philosophy of the opposition on the other side. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the government on this side believes that there has 
to be a partnership between many different industries, between 
private industry, between public industry, and between the 
co-operative sector. Mr. Speaker, this government has provided 
all sorts of benefits and worked with private industry to make 
Saskatchewan a better place. 
 
The members opposite seem to not want to recognize the tax 
cuts that have been brought in and the relationships with 
business because they want to accent the negative. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve also been very supportive of the 
co-operative industry and the credit union movement. And what 
that has to do with the Internet, Mr. Speaker, is that it gets to the 
point of dealing with government and what government has to 
do within those three partnerships. It’s like a three-legged stool, 
and I’ve already commented on the first two legs. One is the 
co-operative and credit union sector, the second one is the 
business one, and the third one is public investment into 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now we believe on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, that it’s 
important to invest in technology. I am born and raised in rural 
Saskatchewan. Everybody in this House knows that. People in 
Loon Lake know that, in the area. And during the bus tour, it 
was interesting that one of the mayors introduced the caucus, 
saying that one of the plants that we had, one of the mayors that 
we planted many years ago, referred to me as a rural MLA 
(Member of the Legislative Assembly) even though I represent 
Saskatoon Sutherland. 
 
Now the CommunityNet initiative, Mr. Speaker, is a way to 
bring rural Saskatchewan into the 21st century. One of the 
problems that Saskatchewan has faced is that it’s a land-locked 
province, that to move its product to market is very difficult. 
And access to information is also difficult. With CommunityNet 
and with high-speed Internet throughout the province in all the 
areas that we’re putting high-speed Internet in, it removes that 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 781 

 

barrier for trade for Saskatchewan residents. 
 
It doesn’t matter where a business sets up when we have 
high-speed Internet and we have CommunityNet. We are not 
paving the roads so that you have a better way, a smoother ride 
to your cottage. We’re paving the roads so that industry can 
transport its goods for economic development. We’re not 
investing in CommunityNet so that members can download 
hockey scores quickly or look up stocks. We’re investing in 
CommunityNet and high-speed Internet so that there can be 
businesses located in rural Saskatchewan so that location 
doesn’t matter any more, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet is being invested all over the 
province, Mr. Speaker. It’s our access to Information Highway, 
to e-business and e-commerce. Mr. Speaker, by investing in 
CommunityNet, we are giving advantages to our young people 
in rural Saskatchewan, so that they can have jobs there. 
 
Now the problem, Mr. Speaker, with the opposition is that one, 
they don’t believe in government involvement in the industry. 
They don’t believe in government. I would say that they don’t 
believe in government, period; that they believe government is 
a way of interfering with business. 
 
And we talked about Alberta envy, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Now, 
Mr. Speaker, they would not want to have us involved in 
CommunityNet or high-speed Internet but the demand in the 
population is very high. 
 
Now one of the things that they wouldn’t believe in is 
cross-subsidization either, and yet that’s one of the things that is 
actually benefiting a lot of the residents in their constituencies. 
By blending all of the public sectors into one client 
CommunityNet, we are able to achieve volume discount 
pricing, and the cost of CommunityNet of bringing services to 
provincially funded public facilities in rural areas is of course 
more expensive than doing it in urban centres, but the price will 
be basically the same. 
 
The government has used SaskTel and the Saskatchewan 
Communications Network as the delivery arm for 
CommunityNet because these Crown corporations already have 
facilities and exist, which they wouldn’t under the plan of the 
opposition, and which could be built on in all areas of the 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the opposition seems to want to get in 
the way. Their philosophy wants to get in the way of what’s 
best for their constituents. They don’t want to have STC 
(Saskatchewan Transportation Company) because that is 
against their philosophy, yet it benefits their constituents. And 
now they don’t want to have CommunityNet even though it 
benefits their constituencies. So I’m pleased to support the 
motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now CommunityNet unique model of amalgamating demand 
through the public sector has been described by the national 
broadband task force as being one of the most advanced 
approaches in the world. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s areas in Saskatchewan that have 
CommunityNet and high-speed Internet when areas of Calgary 

don’t even have high-speed Internet. And yet it’s so much better 
in Calgary. 
 
Saskatchewan is presently working with SaskTel and 
Saskatchewan companies such as Wavecom to develop a 
business case for services that could potentially provide 
offerings to 95 per cent of the population of the province, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s progress, Mr. Speaker. Altogether 
CommunityNet will extend the provincial high-speed 
communications network and Internet access to over 366 
communities, 839 educational facilities, 379 health facilities, 86 
First Nations schools, and 249 government offices. 
 
The overall cost to the public sector of CommunityNet will be 
$70.9 million over the next six years. Schools, health facilities, 
libraries, and other public service entities will not be required to 
pay any additional connection or usage cost. Now that’s an 
important point, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because in Alberta, their 
attempt to deal with this — for the schools that are lucky 
enough to get this — they have to pay a monthly fee. In 
Saskatchewan they are not going to need to do that. 
 
Now I won’t go into all the technical details, Mr. Speaker, 
because it is getting late in the evening, but here are some 
quotes of CommunityNet connecting to Moose Jaw. 
 

Moose Jaw today celebrated its recent connection to the 
CommunityNet, Saskatchewan’s public sector high-speed 
network. 
 

Quote: 
 

Social Services Minister Glenn Hagel and Labour Minister 
Debra Higgins jointly participated in a Moose Jaw school 
event for the $71 million broadband telecommunications 
network. 
 
All of Moose Jaw’s schools now have high-speed 
capabilities. In the next few months, remaining public 
institutions will receive high-speed Internet connections. 
 
“By linking our communities to each other and to the 
future, CommunityNet will have significant benefits for 
people across Saskatchewan,” Hagel said. “This network is 
our province’s on-ramp to the information highway, giving 
our citizens and students fingertip access to better 
educational opportunities, improved health care and more 
public services.” 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is in contrast to the opposition’s tour of 
Saskatchewan recently and the lack of people that showed up 
there. And we talk . . . we hear every day, Mr. Speaker, about 
their plan to Grow Saskatchewan. 
 
I think, Mr. Speaker, their plan is all wet, Mr. Speaker. They 
want to have spending on health care. They want increased 
spending on roads. They want high-speed Internet in their 
community, but they don’t believe in the program. They want 
spending in education, but they don’t know where the money’s 
coming from. They want to cut the taxes so low that they’re not 
sustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of Grow Saskatchewan, I think their motto 



782 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

should be groan Saskatchewan, based on the weight of the debt 
that Saskatchewan residents will be carrying if their plan is ever 
implemented. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, there is also an issue here about Alberta 
envy, Mr. Speaker, that when you compare the CommunityNet 
in Saskatchewan versus the plan for Alberta, Mr. Speaker . . . I 
think it’s called SuperNet. I think that also is indicative. I mean 
they have SuperNet; we have CommunityNet. I mean ours is 
more friendly and it just seems to be something that we want to 
be involved with, whereas SuperNet, I think it’s a lot of sizzle 
but not a lot of steak, Mr. Speaker, although I like Alberta 
steaks, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Why would Saskatchewan want to wait for the Alberta model 
when we’re already two years ahead of them, Mr. Speaker? But 
we don’t hear the opposition talking about that, Mr. Speaker. 
Mr. Speaker, Alberta will be building their main 
telecommunications backbone over the next two years; 
Saskatchewan already developed an equally robust network. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, taxpayers in Alberta will be spending a total 
of $362 million over the next five years — $362. Now do the 
members opposite remember how much it’s going to cost in 
Saskatchewan? Well I’ll remind them, Mr. Speaker — $71 
million. That’s the difference. 
 
That’s the plan of Alberta, is to spend $362 million to ensure 
hospitals and government departments have high-speed access. 
Saskatchewan’s only spending $71 million and Saskatchewan’s 
including all of the schools as well. In Alberta, schools will be 
required to pay for monthly access from their own budgets, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, here’s a quote from a recent member of the 
opposition that deals with SCN (Saskatchewan 
Communications Network). It goes like this, quote: 
 

I know I have a number of taxpayers and citizens of this 
province ask me why does Saskatchewan need to have its 
own television network . . . 
 
But I guess where the citizens and the taxpayers are coming 
from when they look at the number of channels available to 
the average person, particularly those persons subscribing 
to some of the satellite services that are out there, of course 
then they ask the question why are we spending over $7 
million to have another TV station out there. Could you 
please comment on that (Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Minister) . . . 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet has already ensured that the 
residents and businesses in 237 communities will receive 
high-speed access. Guess how many in Alberta, Mr. Speaker? 
Thirty-five, 35 communities are guaranteed high-speed access. 
How many in Saskatchewan? Two hundred and thirty-seven. 
 
The remaining small centres will only receive services if a 
private sector company can build a business to pay the rate for 
accessing SuperNet. What does that mean, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker? This means fewer communities will receive services 
over time in Alberta. 
 
Now how does that . . . how do they square that circle, Mr. 

Speaker, where the opposition talks about how it’s so much 
better in Alberta, yet here in Saskatchewan we’re getting 
accolades from all across Canada bringing in high-speed 
Internet and CommunityNet. 
 
Alberta has signed a contract with Bell Intrigna as the prime 
contractor for the building of SuperNet. Bell Intrigna will build 
a separate extended area network that in many cases duplicates 
existing infrastructure owned by TELUS. This is in effect 
building a duplicate highway system. Now I ask, Mr. Speaker, 
how is that effective, efficient use of taxpayers’ money? I don’t 
think so, Mr. Speaker. The overall cost could be well over $400 
million. 
 
(20:30) 
 
And then it’s up to the market forces to determine if any 
services will be provided to businesses and residents in that 
community. 
 
Now I’m all for business. In fact, there are many businesses in 
my constituency. I work very closely with businesses. I know 
that we need to have good, strong businesses in the community 
to pay the taxes and employ the people and that’s why this 
government has done all of the things that it has done in the last 
12 years to support businesses growing. 
 
But the members opposite don’t seem to realize that there is a 
role for governments involved in the economy and that is, in 
this case, CommunityNet and high-speed Internet and into 
constituencies that are benefiting their own residents. 
 
Now I don’t hear members opposite standing up and saying, 
I’m opposed to CommunityNet; don’t bring it to my 
community. No they’re saying, well it should have been here 
sooner; I want digital cell service in my community. 
 
Well all they have to do is go to Alberta and find out that if 
their constituency was in Alberta they wouldn’t have 
CommunityNet and they wouldn’t have digital cell service. So, 
Mr. Speaker, there’s a difference in philosophy. 
 
Now members opposite are starting to say that Alberta’s a total 
flop and I tend to agree with them on this matter . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Just that point. 
 
Mr. Addley: — On that point yes, Mr. Member from Wood 
River. 
 
CommunityNet is a $71 million project over five years. This 
cost provides full access by schools, hospitals, and government 
offices to the Internet, plus security features, a data network, 
and site blocking for government offices. Alberta’s SuperNet 
just provides access to raw bandwidth rather than services such 
as the Internet. 
 
Now raw bandwidth is pretty good but we want more than just 
raw bandwidth, don’t we, members? We want high speed 
Internet, we want data network, and we want site blocking for 
government offices. Altogether, CommunityNet will extend this 
provincial high-speed communications network and Internet 
access to over 366 communities, 834 educational facilities, 310 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 783 

 

health facilities, 86 First Nations schools, and 256 government 
offices. Schools, health facilities, and other public service 
entities will not be required to pay any additional connection to 
user charges. 
 
To date Alberta has connected six communities. Even with 
SuperNet, parts of Calgary still do not have access to 
high-speed Internet. CommunityNet has already connected 70 
per cent of all the schools in Saskatchewan, 45 per cent of 
health care facilities, and 100 per cent of First Nations schools. 
 
And by the way, Mr. Speaker, I think this is indicative. Alberta 
has no planned connections to First Nations schools. I think 
that’s a sad reflection on wealthy Alberta not connecting to 
First Nations schools. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard comments that have been 
reported in the media, just last month on CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) from Strasbourg saying: 
 

It’s still a small quiet prairie town, so small the locals don’t 
bother giving the first three digits of their phone number 
(Mr. Speaker). But two months ago Strasbourg caught up 
with Canada’s biggest cities (and they exceeded Canada’s 
biggest cities and they’re even beyond Calgary). 

 
Now the member from Wood River is asking where is this 
coming from. This is a quote from CBC Radio, Mr. Speaker. 
 

The local school got high-speed Internet access and it’s 
having a profound affect on students. This physics class 
used to be taught (by) using books and . . . black board . . . 
science concepts are (now) illustrated by visiting web sites 
and clicking on animation sequences (sort of like the 
animation that’s coming from the opposite side, Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
(Now) The Saskatchewan Government is investing millions 
of dollars to bring high-speed Internet to the classroom. 

 
Now, members, we have educators on this side of the House, 
Mr. Speaker, and we know that investing in education pays 
dividends well down the road, and this CommunityNet will pay 
dividends down the road for Saskatchewan for many years to 
come. 
 
Now just some headlines from some news releases. 
 

191 Communities To Receive SaskTel High Speed Internet. 
 
There’s a long list of communities that are listed starting with 
Abbey, Aberdeen, Bjorkdale, Blaine Lake, Carnduff, 
Caronport, Craik, Kipling, Preeceville, Willow Bunch, ending 
in Zenon Park. There’s dozens of communities. Now members 
want me to read it all, but I’ll forgo that for the time being. 
 
CommunityNet . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Give us a couple more. 
 
Mr. Addley: — Oh, you want a couple more. Okay, I’ll give a 
couple more, Mr. Speaker. Okay, Abbey, Aberdeen, Birch 
Hills, Bjorkdale, Blaine Lake, Borden, Briercrest, Broadview, 

Buffalo Narrows — it sounds like a song, Mr. Speaker — 
Burstall, Cabri, Candle Lake, Canwood, Carievale, Carlyle, 
Carnduff, Caronport, Carrot River, Central Butte. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, this is not a list of the communities that will 
be voting NDP next time, although that is true. This is actually 
the list of people that will be receiving CommunityNet in the 
future. Central Butte, Chaplin, Christopher Lake, Churchbridge, 
Clavet, Climax, Coleville, Colonsay, Consul, Coronach, Craik, 
Creighton, Cudworth, Cumberland House, Cupar, Cut Knife, 
Dalmeny, Debden, Fox Valley, Francis, Gainsborough, Glaslyn, 
Goodsoil, Gravelbourg, Grayson, Green Lake, Grenfell, Gull 
Lake, Hanley, Harris, Hazlet, Herbert, Holdfast, Ile-a-la-Crosse, 
Imperial — you know, this seemed like a better idea at the 
beginning, Mr. Speaker — Ituna, Kelliher, Kelvington, 
Kenaston, Kennedy, Kincaid, Kinistino, Kipling, Kyle, 
Lafleche. And it goes on and on, Mr. Speaker — I think I’ll end 
that — Turtleford, Meadow Lake, St. Walburg. A whole list of 
communities will be receiving this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
CommunityNet connects Yorkton. CommunityNet connects 
Melville. CommunityNet connects Kindersley. CommunityNet 
connects La Ronge. High-speed hits public sector. Shaunavon 
connects to CommunityNet. Shaunavon residents are lining up 
fast to get SaskTel’s new high-speed Internet service. 
CommunityNet connects North Battleford, Mr. Speaker. 
CommunityNet connects Estevan. And these are not just the 
communities that will be electing New Democrat members next 
time, Mr. Speaker. These are communities that receive 
CommunityNet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — CommunityNet, the broadband 
telecommunications network that will enable Saskatchewan 
communities to take a quantum leap forward in Internet access, 
was officially launched last May, Mr. Speaker. CommunityNet 
brings together provincial government departments and 
agencies and the public sectors of education and health. 
 
CommunityNet’s first phase will see the creation of an 
infrastructure to bring high-speed Internet to the schools and 
health centres in the communities in Saskatchewan. 
“CommunityNet represents a significant step in bridging the 
digital divide between rural and urban Saskatchewan regions,” 
the Premier said. It will provide better and faster access to 
educational resources for rural students and teachers and allow 
health practitioners in those areas to provide better care to their 
patients. In addition, CommunityNet will enable government to 
provide services to Saskatchewan citizens more efficiently and 
cost effectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I did a member statement last year on doctors 
looking at X-rays of patients hundreds of miles away from each 
other, and that wouldn’t be possible without CommunityNet. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet is not just a good idea so 
that students can download sports scores. This will provide an 
economic advantage, a hub for Saskatchewan businesses to 
connect. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know of a company that sells contact lenses over 
the Internet. It doesn’t matter what community in Saskatchewan 



784 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

that he does business with, Mr. Speaker. He can set up shop in 
any community in Saskatchewan that has CommunityNet and 
he will be able to access the world basically, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know this will be beneficial to the member 
for Rosthern and the member for Wood River, but from my 
perspective it seems that bringing CommunityNet and 
high-speed Internet to the province must be what the former 
premier, Tommy Douglas, felt like when he was flying over 
Saskatchewan and he looked down and he saw darkness. And 
so he decided to bring in rural electrification to all of the farms 
and all of the communities in rural Saskatchewan many, many 
years ago. And that was one of his proudest things. 
 
He brought in medicare. He brought in a whole bunch of 
beneficial social programs. But when he was asked what was 
one of the things that he was most proud of, flying over 
Saskatchewan at night and seeing the farmyards with the lights 
twinkling, that had a huge advantage to Saskatchewan people. It 
changed people’s lives for the better for many, many years to 
come. And unfortunately today, Mr. Speaker, many people take 
it for granted. 
 
I grew up in a community where it had party lines. And farms 
in other parts of Canada, even recently, had party lines — one 
ring, two rings, had their distinctive rings. Saskatchewan led the 
way with SaskTel in eliminating party lines and having 
dedicated lines to farmyards. 
 
I’m sure members here have separate farm lines for their 
Internet . . . separate phone lines for their Internet, for their 
home, and they probably even have a separate phone line to 
their barn. Well, Mr. Speaker, that is because SaskTel invested 
in that feature, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Tommy Douglas invested in rural electrification and this 
government, Mr. Speaker, I think there’ll be people looking 
back from years to come, looking back and saying that was a 
wise decision to invest in CommunityNet. It gave us a distinct 
economic advantage for our children, for businesses, for our 
health practitioners, for our First Nations people. And I think 
people will look back and say that was a very good idea. 
 
So I’m very pleased to second the motion put forward by the 
member from Regina Wascana Plains: 
 

That this Assembly encourage the government to continue 
its leadership in expanding Internet services to schools, 
communities, and government offices throughout the 
province by the CommunityNet program. 

 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re talking this evening about CommunityNet — 
the Internet, Mr. Speaker. The Internet which provides access to 
people who have the opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to either own or 
access a computer to be able to access the Internet because it’s 
not just, Mr. Speaker, the availability of the Internet itself. You 
need the equipment to be able to access it. So, Mr. Speaker, not 
everyone is in a position to enjoy the benefits of CommunityNet 

or the Internet although it certainly is a benefit, Mr. Speaker, if 
you can access it. 
 
Part of the problem is . . . and the government is hollering it’s 
for schools. Mr. Speaker, some of the schools have difficulty 
under this government affording the equipment necessary to be 
able to access the Internet even though, Mr. Speaker, they have 
the cable run into their institution. So, Mr. Speaker, it’s not just 
the idea of having a wire plugged into your wall that you need. 
You need to have all of the other infrastructure in place as well, 
such as computers that can access it. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the old 8088s or the old 286s you could 
access, Mr. Speaker, BBSs (bulletin-board service). You could 
even access the Internet with their use. But I can tell you, Mr. 
Speaker, it is extremely slow. And if a student was going to try 
to download anything with any graphics involved in it, Mr. 
Speaker, half of the computers that we have in the schools 
across Saskatchewan would take their entire study period to 
download that, Mr. Speaker, because of the underfunding 
provided by the government opposite. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, they may brag all they want about providing 
access to, I believe it’s 237 communities, Mr. Speaker, but 
those same communities need to be able to utilize equipment 
that they don’t have in a lot of cases to access that Internet, Mr. 
Speaker. So while their numbers sound good, the actual 
practical sense of that access is very limited, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the use of government funding to provide Internet 
access, CommunityNet as a social policy, is not necessarily a 
bad thing. It’s not even necessarily a bad thing, Mr. Speaker, 
because the government opposite thought of it — although there 
are a lot of things that they do think of and provide that are bad, 
Mr. Speaker, such as the increased rates on seniors that they’re 
doing with the health care practices, Mr. Speaker. But they’re 
not all bad ideas that come forward from the other side, just as, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not all bad ideas or all good ideas either, Mr. 
Speaker, that come from this side. 
 
(20:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a social policy for providing access to 
communities, it’s not necessarily a bad thing. But, Mr. Speaker, 
SaskTel is not the only provider of Internet services. If you’re 
going to provide public policy, Mr. Speaker, to provide a 
subsidy, as the member from Saskatoon said, 
cross-subsidization, if you’re going to provide 
cross-subsidization from the telephone consumer who may or 
may not have access to the Internet to provide CommunityNet, 
then why not allow that same subsidy to other providers of 
Internet access? Why not, Mr. Speaker? If it’s a social policy 
paid for through the collection of dollars by government, why 
must it be limited to providing that subsidy to one entity? 
There’s no reason other than philosophical, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other providers provide Internet access. Wireless 
communications, Mr. Speaker, is the future when it comes to 
Internet. Image cable right now provides wireless connection. It 
is provided cheaper, Mr. Speaker, than what SaskTel is talking 
of providing high-speed access through CommunityNet. And 
the fact is, Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet comes into your 
community. If you can’t get 200 connections outside of the 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 785 

 

schools, outside of the public institutions, outside of 
government offices, you can be sitting right next to that Internet 
node and not get access, Mr. Speaker. Not get access. 
 
So the government is saying, oh yes, we’re going to provide 
high-speed access to 237 communities across this province, but 
only a few of those communities will the individuals and will 
the businesses have access to high-speed Internet. Only a few of 
them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And fact is, I see a sign in Carlyle as I was driving in yesterday 
morning, trying to get people to sign up so that the community 
can get high-speed access, Mr. Speaker. And they don’t know if 
they’re going to be able to get 200 people to sign up, and that’s 
in a community, Mr. Speaker, of roughly a thousand people. So 
every fifth person in Carlyle is going to have to buy high-speed 
Internet. Now if you’re the average population in Canada where 
you have four people to a family, then roughly every family in 
Carlyle is going to have to buy high-speed Internet so that 
anybody in Carlyle — outside of the government offices, 
outside of the school — can access it, Mr. Speaker. And the 
minister is hollering at me, oh they can still get dial-up. That’s 
right, they can still get dial-up, Mr. Speaker. But then you have 
to ask, why are they spending all of this money providing 
high-speed connections into a community where the people 
can’t get access to it? 
 
Let’s take a look at a community down the road from Carlyle. 
Let’s look at Arcola, roughly 3 to 400 people. Every second 
person would have to get a high-speed connection to access in 
that community, even though they got a school. So, four people 
. . . you’d have to have two people in every family, Mr. 
Speaker, with a high-speed connection. 
 
You don’t need it. Every household, Mr. Speaker, only needs 
one connection. You can connect up any number of computers 
to the one connection, Mr. Speaker. You don’t need more than 
one high-speed connection in your home. But the way the 
government’s got it designed, you can’t get it. 
 
You either have 200 people in the community . . . And the 
community, Mr. Speaker, is not what we think of across rural 
Saskatchewan. Community across rural Saskatchewan means 
the town, the village, and the surrounding RM (rural 
municipality). Well with high-speed connection through 
CommunityNet, you have a radius out from your node — I’ll 
use miles because I don’t remember what it is in kilometres — 
of roughly three miles, Mr. Speaker. So you draw a circle three 
miles around that node and that is what you get access to. 
 
So if you’re . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . about five 
kilometres, okay. I took my education in the English system and 
not in this newfangled Trudeau measurement system. 
 
And computers work in English, Mr. Speaker. They don’t work 
in metric in my household . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Yes, 
the member from Regina Northwest . . . no, Regina Qu’Appelle, 
is hollering over there, join the 21st century. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
the largest Internet user in the world is across our southern 
border, in English measurement system, in the English 
measurement system. So maybe the member across should look 
at who’s using the Internet. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, when you look at who gets access to the 
high-speed Internet under the NDP government’s favourite 
CommunityNet program, very few people outside of the larger 
communities are going to be able to access this program. 
 
So while they may be complaining that Alberta has so many 
fewer access points, Mr. Speaker, when it comes to actual 
access by the people I suspect we are going to have a lot less 
communities that are actually going to be able to access 
high-speed Internet under the CommunityNet program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people can access high-speed Internet right now in 
their communities using Image Cable. Why isn’t the 
government providing the same subsidy to Image Cable? If it’s 
a government social policy to subsidize access to Internet in 
communities, then why not allow the private sector to access 
that subsidy as well? 
 
Because they, Mr. Speaker, they would indeed provide that 
access to businesses, they would provide that access to 
individuals — whether there was 50 customers or 100 
customers. They wouldn’t limit themselves, Mr. Speaker, to a 
minimum of 200 customers. And that’s the downside, Mr. 
Speaker, of this particular measure that the government is 
bringing forward. 
 
So when you look at a community, Mr. Speaker, and say we 
have to have a connection of 200 individual hook-ups to 
provide CommunityNet, a high-speed access to individuals, you 
say well why don’t Saskatchewan communities have enough 
people to access this? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s been 58 long years since Tommy 
Douglas was first elected. We had a million people roughly 
back in 1944 and, Mr. Speaker, under too many years of 
CCF/NDP government we still have a million people — not 
quite even. 
 
If the government opposite and their predecessors had put in 
place economic policies that would grow Saskatchewan, that 
would allow people like Image Cable to access business to 
grow this province, Mr. Speaker. All of those communities 
would already be having access to high-speed Internet because 
the customer base would be there. 
 
Only under this form of government, Mr. Speaker, where 
government has to own it all is the economy stagnant. Even in 
Manitoba, Mr. Speaker, even in Manitoba the population is 
growing. Those communities, Mr. Speaker, are getting access to 
high-speed Internet. It’s only in Saskatchewan that our 
communities are shrinking . . . are shrinking, Mr. Speaker, 
under the stifling, economic policies of the members opposite. 
 
So when they talk about providing CommunityNet access very 
few people are going to get access to the high-speed Internet. 
And I hear somebody saying over there, when? Maybe it’s the 
Government House Leader whispering over there, when? 
 
Well that’s a good question. When are they even going to get 
access? A number of my communities would like to have 
access to the high-speed Internet. They’re concerned that 
they’re not going to, as individuals, not going to have that 
access because there’s not enough people residing in those 



786 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

communities any more; the access is so limited that it won’t be 
available to them. 
 
So when is this province going to grow so that all of our 
communities can have access, Mr. Speaker? That’s a good 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite talked a little bit, the 
member from Saskatoon Greystone, no . . . Saskatoon 
Greystone, I believe. No, no, sorry, no, the member from 
Saskatoon Greystone did not speak — Saskatoon Sutherland, 
spoke about growing Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. Well indeed 
we do need to grow Saskatchewan. That is how we will all get 
access to high-speed Internet, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But one of the things that the government is doing that will not 
grow Saskatchewan is increasing the debt, which is what 
they’re doing under this present budget when they put in 
high-speed Internet access through CommunityNet 
programming, Mr. Speaker, through SaskTel, using it to 
cross-subsidize. 
 
But when you’re borrowing the money, Mr. Speaker, to provide 
that service, when you’re borrowing the money to pay the 
exaggerated dividends that this government is demanding from 
its Crown corporations, that, Mr. Speaker, does not grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
When the debt increases, it’s a burden on all of us. It’s a burden 
on the present people living here, the taxpayers, and it’s a 
burden on our future generations, Mr. Speaker, on the children 
that the members opposite say they’re providing 
CommunityNet for. 
 
The member from Saskatoon Sutherland spoke about the 
Premier talking about the digital divide. Well, Mr. Speaker, 
under this government, that divide will continue. Government 
offices will have access to high-speed Internet, but the business 
right next door will not have, Mr. Speaker, because there won’t 
be the 200 customers to sign up. The school will have it, Mr. 
Speaker, but when the student goes home from school, he won’t 
have access to it because they don’t have the 200 sign-ups, Mr. 
Speaker. So they’re creating their own digital divide, Mr. 
Speaker. They’re creating their own divide that they were 
speaking against. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have to remember that as SaskTel 
cross-subsidizes CommunityNet, it’s every SaskTel customer 
that’s providing the funds to do that, Mr. Speaker, except for 
the money the government is borrowing. 
 
It’s every customer, Mr. Speaker, that’s paying for it, but not 
every customer will get access to it. Those customers who 
cannot afford the $50 a month for a high-speed Internet, those 
customers who cannot afford to buy a computer, Mr. Speaker, 
will not get it. And those customers, Mr. Speaker, in 
communities within three miles of the high-speed nodes who 
cannot get 200 people — individual hookups — to sign up, they 
won’t receive it either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, if the people of Saskatchewan believe that 
this is a good use of public policy, a good policy to subsidize 
access to the Internet in communities, then it should also be a 

good policy to provide that access to businesses and to 
individuals, Mr. Speaker. And it fits public policy, Mr. Speaker. 
It should also be good public policy then to provide that same 
support mechanism to those in private industry who wish to 
provide Internet access — high-speed Internet access — to 
Saskatchewan communities. Why should it be limited? There 
are other opportunities, Mr. Speaker, out there. 
 
One of the things that’s coming is wireless technology dealing 
with the Internet. It’s here already, Mr. Speaker. And in my 
discussions, including, Mr. Speaker, discussions with 
technologically savvy people within SaskTel, they say that that 
access is not that far away. That they’re even ready, Mr. 
Speaker, to start doing trials to get wireless access — high 
speed — to individuals, to businesses in communities, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So if we’re going through this process of providing hard wire 
access to communities through CommunityNet, then why not 
provide, Mr. Speaker, that access to individuals and businesses? 
Or why not look at providing that access, Mr. Speaker, through 
wireless? Perhaps at some point in time, whomever the minister 
would be responsible for this, could provide that information as 
to what is their expectation of SaskTel providing wireless 
Internet connections. What would its availability be? What 
would its costs be? How far in the future would it be? 
 
(21:00) 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, there are a number of questions dealing with 
CommunityNet programming. But if it’s a good public policy, 
Mr. Speaker, as I said earlier then it should be provided to 
individuals, businesses, and to other businesses to provide that. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I would like to move an amendment to this 
particular motion dealing with exactly that. The motion would 
read, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Amend by inserting after the words schools, communities 
the words business, individuals. 
 
And further add after the words CommunityNet program 
the following: and provide similar support to private 
high-speed services who wish to service Saskatchewan 
communities. 

 
I so move, and seconded by the member from Redberry. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, it gives me a 
great deal of pleasure to speak on this amendment to the motion 
and the motion. The Internet is a very fundamental part of our 
society nowadays and it’s a growing part of our business 
community, of our government, and of individual people in 
society. 
 
We applaud the government for its efforts to connect with rural 
Saskatchewan, but we have some problems with the original 
motion. The word leadership is in it. Frankly this government 
has shown nothing in the way of leadership to put this province 
back on track. And even worse, it has done nothing to revitalize 
rural Saskatchewan. 
 
An example of how the amendment to the motion has pointed 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 787 

 

out that this government is leaving out some very important 
sectors and people in the community, namely the business 
sector, and individuals out of their motion, out of their plans. 
And again, as the member from Cannington pointed out, that 
they’re not giving any subsidy to any private investors 
concerning implementing the Internet in Saskatchewan. 
 
This government has not had a very good track record of 
revitalizing rural Saskatchewan. They’ve made many 
announcements. They’ve talked about it, but they have done 
nothing to revitalization in Saskatchewan, and as any 
constituency, rural constituency in the province can note. We 
can speak about any constituency, but in Redberry Lake 
constituency, rural revitalization was a non-starter. It has never 
happened; it’s never even began. 
 
And I’d like to point out a few points where it’s been a total 
failure in Redberry Lake constituency. Number one, we don’t 
have basic quality highways for the communities in Redberry 
Lake constituency. The highway’s in such a terrible mess it 
affects the business community, affects the farming community. 
It’s really a safety hazard in Redberry Lake constituency. So 
that’s the first place where the government has failed. 
 
On the agriculture front, much of the constituency of Redberry 
Lake, as much of the areas of rural Saskatchewan, is going 
through a drought, a severe drought. And what has this 
government done but increased premiums to crop insurance, 
reduced coverage, eliminated the spot loss . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’d remind the member that the 
motion under discussion has a focus of Internet and 
CommunityNet program, and if he could bring his remarks 
around to that topic, please. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well the point I was 
getting at, they’re talking about revitalization, rural 
revitalization and how important the Internet is to rural 
revitalization. And the point I was trying to make is that people 
in rural Saskatchewan need to be in contact with other 
businesses, the government, as far as doing business in the 
province, and this is just another handicap that Saskatchewan 
rural business have, and they don’t . . . and they need to have 
access to all communication, including the Internet in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Other areas, Mr. Speaker, is concerning, as the member from 
Cannington had pointed out, the Internet is not being given to 
individuals and to businesses in the communities. It’s only 
being given to schools, hospitals, and Indian reservations, and 
it’s very important that these groups are getting it. It’s important 
to the future of our students that the Internet is available in 
those communities. But I believe that no matter where people 
live, they should have the same access to technology 
information as other people in the province and across Canada. 
 
And in fact when it comes to connecting digital economy, we 
wholeheartedly on this side support the members opposite when 
they say things like we cannot afford to lag behind other 
jurisdictions; we must invest today to connect to the future. 
Unfortunately the members opposite just don’t know how to 
apply that across the board. And as I’d mentioned before, it’s 
absolutely crucial that all sectors, just not one or two, are given 

the opportunity to grow growth in the economy in jobs and in 
health care, and an agriculture centre must not only be 
encouraged but provided for. 
 
Mr. Speaker, CommunityNet is a six-year $700 million 
initiative, and before the members opposite start patting 
themselves on the back, we have to remind them this is a 
federal-provincial program. Without federal funding, there is no 
way this would have become a reality. When it’s complete, 
CommunityNet’s intent is to connect nearly 370 communities to 
government offices, educational institutions, health facilities to 
high-speed Internet. 
 
What some members don’t understand is that some 
communities in Saskatchewan may not last six years. They may 
not be around to get the Internet, and that’s where we need to 
talk about rural revitalization and the need to bring that to the 
forefront. 
 
It’s interesting that when members opposite talk about the 
digital economy, and specifically CommunityNet, one of the 
first things they mention is how important it is that everyone 
has access to government services, that all departments, boards, 
and Crowns get hooked up first. And my point, Mr. Speaker, 
was before that, the farming community, the business 
community in Saskatchewan do not and will not have this 
access to the Internet. And it’s very important that they do, so 
that they can communicate with the departments and 
government services and other businesses in the country and 
around the world. 
 
In fact when it initially launched CommunityNet, the members 
opposite talked about how many opportunities this would 
provide for SaskTel. And it’s interesting how typical this is of 
this government to have an ulterior motive — helping out one 
particular Crown. 
 
And from this year’s budget document we have had the quote: 
“CommunityNet is an excellent example of the public sector 
and a Crown corporation working together.” What’s wrong with 
this statement, Mr. Speaker? There’s no mention of the private 
sector. Why isn’t the private sector involved? Why weren’t they 
given an opportunity to partner with this extremely important 
initiative? 
 
And after all we know that the private sector is the engine that 
drives our economy. It provides the jobs; the private sector is 
the biggest employer of young people and it stands the most to 
benefit from the CommunityNet. And students and graduates 
from schools and universities will undoubtedly begin their 
careers with the private sector. These are the opportunities that 
the members opposite just don’t seem to get, Mr. Speaker. 
 
CommunityNet is an initiative, one that members on this side of 
the House feel is not only important but vital to ensure the 
survival of rural communities, but it’s just one of the many 
initiatives that the members opposite could be talking about to 
keep Saskatchewan alive. 
 
And as I mentioned other initiatives that the government should 
focus on is the basic infrastructures of this province — just not 
CommunityNet — hospitals, roads, schools to encourage 
businesses into a community. And one of the things that 



788 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

community needs to supply to businesses and farms is the 
Internet, but under this program they won’t be getting that 
technology. 
 
And quite simply when you limit involvement to only the 
public sector and the Crown corporations, then you’re also 
limiting the opportunities and this will have a serious impact on 
our young people — young people that are desperately needed 
to help grow Saskatchewan and grow the economy. 
 
The amendment speaks directly to this need of increased private 
involvement in the economy, and it also speaks to the 
businesses and the individuals in rural Saskatchewan that need 
access to the Internet. And once again we see this government 
only looking at having Crown corporations involved in the 
delivery of the Internet, and as we’ve seen with the 
government’s past policies, that this is a very inefficient way of 
doing it. There’s no competition to speak of and they’re driving 
out any private sector or any private involvement in the 
economy. And this is to the detriment of the province as a 
whole. And, Mr. Speaker, this is the similar track that this 
government has been going on and this is not helping the 
economy of Saskatchewan whatsoever. 
 
What we need is more private investors, more competition in all 
fields of this province, and we should not limit the Internet just 
to SaskTel and the people that run SaskTel. And what we have 
seen in the past is that we do not need an increased role of 
public sector in the economy. We need to attract private sector. 
 
And again, we see that this initiative in the CommunityNet is 
driving private businesses away. It’s another red flag up to 
businesses around the world, in other parts of Canada, that 
private investment is not welcome in this province, and that this 
government is going in the wrong direction as usual. 
 
I have to go back to the amendment, Mr. Speaker, and speak to 
how important it is that this Internet, CommunityNet, also be 
available to businesses and individuals in rural Saskatchewan. 
And also the government needs to support the private sector 
with subsidies on a fair, competitive basis as it does with the 
Crown corporations, and SaskTel in particular, supplying 
high-speed service. 
 
So at this time, Mr. Speaker, I would like to say, just before in 
closing, that I will not be supporting the motion but I will be 
supporting the amendment to the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, you know I rise to, of course, 
oppose the amendment and support the motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, here we have a very good news story for the 
province of Saskatchewan. We’re having a good deal with 
international competition. We have a knowledge explosion in 
the world with Internet. And all I hear from the old Tories, the 
Saskatchewan Party, is the same old, negative, hopeless 
message. 
 
They should be standing up to be proud of their schools who 
will be having the Internet. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(21:15) 
 
Mr. Goulet: — They should be having pride in their hospitals, 
in having Internet. They should be having pride in their 
communities that would not normally get the Internet without 
the support from CommunityNet. 
 
Mr. Speaker, just a bit of an overview, you know, vis-à-vis the 
structure of the impact in regards to CommunityNet. This is a 
$71 million program which will deliver high-speed Internet to 
communities, not only in the urban centre but north and rural 
areas. But it also impacts the educational facilities, health 
facilities, government offices, and also First Nations 
communities. In total there will be, over the long run, an impact 
of 366 communities. Now of course, right now, there’s about 
eight communities that are impacted by high-speed Internet. We 
will be impacting over the long run of this program 366. 
 
Also I would like to mention some of these communities 
because, while there is very important private sector 
development in the big cities . . . we see that in Vancouver, 
Toronto. We see that in our bigger cities in the province, and 
it’s very, very good to have that positive, private sector 
investment here, it has not reached Cumberland House in 
northern Saskatchewan. It has not reached Beauval up in 
Athabasca region. But with this CommunityNet, Beauval and 
Cumberland House will be part of the CommunityNet process. 
We will also have Sandy Bay, way up north of Cumberland 
House. We will also have the member from Athabasca’s own 
community of Ile-a-la-Crosse. We will also have La Loche, 
Pinehouse. We will have Creighton and La Ronge. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — I might mention as well that they’re not very 
proud of some of the communities, not only in the North and 
the fact that we will be receiving Internet for the first time, 
high-speed Internet for the first time, but also many rural 
communities . . . and because of time I will just mention a few. 
There’s Big River, Leoville, Loon Lake, Raymore, Shellbrook, 
Southey, and a lot more have been mentioned before but these 
are the communities that do not have high-speed Internet will 
be getting high-speed Internet. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — We also have pride in our universities, our 
community colleges, our SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 
Applied Science and Technology) programming that’s 
delivered in many of our rural northern communities. We also 
have the elementary and high schools. In all we will have 834 
educational facilities supported through CommunityNet. 
 
On the health facility side we will have 310, there’ll be 
approximately 250 government offices, and we will also have 
86 First Nations schools connected through this tremendous 
linkage that we’ll be having between our public approach 
vis-à-vis the health side, educational side, and government side. 
 
But we must say that it will support also the private sector 
development because of its impact to our residences and our 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 789 

 

businesses. So we have an important approach of recognizing 
both our mixed economy approach with the private and public 
sector. 
 
The member from across was talking about subsidizing one of 
the companies which was Image Wireless. So I will 
acknowledge the fact that Image Wireless as a private sector 
company, which is very important to the province, is here. But 
they service Yorkton and Regina. They do not service North 
Battleford, Swift Current. They do not service La Loche. They 
do not service these areas. So it’s very important on 
CommunityNet that we impact the many other communities in 
this province. 
 
Also the member only focuses on the private sector company of 
Image Wireless. And it’s very important to recognize that 
there’s also Shaw communications. Shaw communications 
provides services in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, Prince Albert, 
Central Butte, Swift Current, Assiniboia, Bengough, Lafleche, 
and Rockglen. 
 
There’s also an important cooperative in regards to Regina and 
Access Communications provides high-speed Internet in 
Regina, Yorkton, Estevan, and Emerald Park. But note, Mr. 
Speaker, that many of the communities that have been raised by 
members throughout this province will be impacted by this 
CommunityNet program, and acknowledged by the members 
that it is also cost-shared by the federal government which very 
. . . which is, which they must have something against. 
 
But I think it’s very, very important, you know, that the 
governments work together. If we saw the subsidization like 
that in health we’d really improve, you know, from 14 cents to 
50 cents. That would be a big improvement from the federal 
level but maybe they’re opposed to that as well. 
 
But I would like to say this in regards to the program, on the 
quality of the program. National broadband task force report 
says this about the CommunityNet. They say that it is the most 
advanced undertaking by any comparable national state or 
provincial government anywhere in the world. 
 
So there it is, the Saskatchewan Party like the old Tories just 
don’t like to look at the good side of this province, they don’t. 
They have to complain and look at the bad side of Internet. 
Here it is benefiting our students. It’s benefiting the seniors and 
our hospitals in regard to the services that they will get. It’s 
benefiting our businesses. But what do they do? Gloom and 
doom and complain. It’s the same hopeless thing that I heard 
when I was seeing the Tories in opposition when we came over 
in government. 
 
The other thing is that the Saskatchewan Party is sometimes 
called Alberta envy party because they say, all the great things 
happen in Alberta. Now I would like to do a little bit of a 
comparison. 
 
And it’s interesting Alberta calls their program the SuperNet. 
And interestingly, very Saskatchewan style, we call ours the 
CommunityNet. What’s the comparison? While they spent 
money over there from the public sector, they put in 362 
million. We put in 71 million. Ours, we impact 237 
communities in addition to what we already have. Alberta, 35 

communities. The big difference. I’ll say that again. 
 
We will be . . . they will be spending 464 million from their 
public and private money. We will be providing 71 million. We 
impact 237 communities. They will impact 35 communities. In 
Alberta, only 35 communities are guaranteed high-speed access. 
The remaining small rural centres will only receive services if a 
private-sector company can build a business to pay the rates for 
accessing SuperNet. This will mean that fewer communities 
will receive services over time. 
 
And when I look at the aspect of Alberta, one of our members 
mentioned that we do a great strategy in this province on doing 
positive partnerships with Aboriginal people. We do that in the 
forestry sector, the mining sector, and in growing areas on 
public educational institutions. 
 
We do the partnerships on SIGA (Saskatchewan Indian Gaming 
Authority). But, again, when we do positive partnerships, for 
example in the question of SIGA, all we hear is about 
complaints. They have only raised one question on the 
Aboriginal issue since I’ve been around this legislature. And 
they talk about an accountability and SIGA. And I acknowledge 
it should be raised, but it’s not should be raised 100 per cent of 
the time. 
 
There is important issues on First Nations people in this 
province on building the economy and positive partnerships 
there, on the health side development, on the positive 
partnerships in regards to education, but all that they will look 
at is the negative side of life. 
 
All they will talk about is the accountability question on SIGA 
which I said should have been rightfully acknowledged, but not 
on all the questions that they ask. They did not ask any other 
questions other than those accountability. But not once will they 
talk about their old partners. Some of them are old Tories and 
they will never talk about the accountability of the Tories. They 
will stay silent . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. I would remind the member that 
the topic under discussion relates to Internet and 
CommunityNet programs. I’m wondering if he would relate his 
remarks to the motion. 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I was just mentioning the fact of 
Aboriginal people and our partnership in regards to 
CommunityNet that we do have in this very, very positive 
approach of having 86 First Nations schools being part of 
CommunityNet. 
 
And I would say that I was looking at the rural area 
commentary and our policy of inclusion, both rural, urban and 
northern. I would like to look at this report from the rural area. 
Neil Herland, the reporter, says in regards to Strasbourg: 
 

The local school got high-speed Internet access and it’s 
having a profound affect on students. This physics class 
used to be taught using books and a black board now 
science concepts are illustrated by visiting web sites and 
clicking on animation sequences. 

 
Lorne Gottselig, the teacher said: 



790 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

Getting high-speed Internet in every school is an excellent 
idea because it creates a level playing field, you know. 
What a teacher does in Regina or Saskatoon could be 
translated over to a teacher that teaches in rural 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is a good news story. Internet, high-speed 
Internet, is good for rural areas, good for northern 
Saskatchewan, good for First Nations communities, good for 
SaskTel, good for the private sector, good for everybody in this 
province. And I’m proud to say that indeed I support the 
motion, vote against the amendment. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, at this time I would like to adjourn the 
debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 21:28. 
 


