















































Hansard: May 15, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1437 
 May 15, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about certain inadequacies in the province’s tobacco legislation. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this petition is signed by citizens of Carrot River, 
Martensville, and Whitecourt, Alberta. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition 
today to present on behalf of the snowmobile tourism industry: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to recognize the financial savings that could be 
made by contracting the Saskatchewan Snowmobile 
Association to groom trails and obtain funding for this 
through the sale of provincially owned grooming 
equipment, mandatory trail permits on Crown land, 
provincial parks, and the attachment of trail permits to 
snowmobile registrations. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from the town 
of Weekes. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens concerned about the high cost of 
prescription drugs. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Melfort, Tisdale, and Gronlid. 
 
I so present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present to do with the overfishing of Lake of the 
Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Churchbridge, Esterhazy, and Stockholm. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with this government’s 
tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from 
the communities of Milestone, Moose Jaw, and Keeler. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Again today, Mr. 
Speaker, I have a petition concerning crop insurance premium 
hikes and coverage reductions. The prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by producers in the 
communities of Portreeve, Sceptre, Abbey, and especially the 
community of Hazlet. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens that are 
concerned about the deductible for the prescription drug plan. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And this is signed by folks from my constituency in Estevan 
and also the Lampman area. 



1438 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

I so present. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who are concerned about 
the tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco product; and furthermore, anyone found guilty 
of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more 
than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed by residents of Weyburn and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens opposed to possible reduction of services to 
Davidson and Craik health centres. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to ensure that the Davidson and Craik 
health centres be maintained at their current level of service 
at a minimum, with 24-hour acute care, emergency, and 
doctoral services available, as lab, physiotherapy, public 
health, home care, long-term care services available to 
users from the Craik, Davidson area and beyond. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens from Craik, Aylesbury, Moose Jaw, and 
Unity. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My petition this 
afternoon reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the people 
from Paddockwood and Meath Park. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the tobacco 
legislation. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence will be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Borden, Vanscoy, Cando, and 
Biggar. 
 
I so submit. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it 
will be no surprise that I stand today with a petition from 
citizens concerned about Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads 
as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And again the signatures, Mr. Speaker, show how well travelled 
this highway is because they are from Simpson, Watrous, 
Raymore, Davidson, Young, Saskatoon, and Morris, Manitoba. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed by 
citizens of Saskatchewan concerned with Besnard Lake. And 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with federal government, First Nations representatives, to 
bring about a resolution in the Besnard Lake situation, and 
to ensure that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
And the signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Leask, from Blaine Lake, and Duck Lake. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by citizens of the province concerned about the hike in 
crop insurance. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by residents of Denzil and of 
Luseland, Saskatchewan. 
 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1439 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today I rise with a petition from citizens who are concerned 
about the lack of cellular phone coverage in southern 
Saskatchewan. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
provide reliable cellular telephone service to all 
communities throughout the Wood River constituency. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is signed by the good citizens of Glentworth 
and McCord. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 7, 18, 22, 23, 31, and 32. 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts 

 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as 
Chair of the Public Accounts Committee, it is my privilege to 
present the second report of the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts to the third session of the twenty-fourth legislature. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, while I’m on my feet after having presented 
that report on behalf of the committee, I would like to move, 
seconded by the Vice-Chair of the Public Accounts Committee, 
the member for Regina Northeast: 
 

That the second report of the Standing Committee on 
Public Accounts be now concurred in. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of CIC: (1) what is the detailed breakdown 
of all out-of-province travel undertaken by SaskEnergy 
President Ron Clark in 2001; (2) were any of the president 
of SaskEnergy’s out-of-province travel expenses in 2001 
covered by subsidiaries of SaskEnergy and, if so, what are 
the details of those expenses; and (3) who accompanied Mr. 
Clark on these trips? 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 

notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Provincial Secretary: (1) with regard to the booklets 
produced by the province of Saskatchewan to 
commemorate Her Majesty’s Golden Jubilee, how many 
booklets were produced; (2) what was the cost to the 
provincial government for the production of these booklets; 
and (3) how many posters commemorating the Golden 
Jubilee were printed and at what cost? 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 48 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of the Environment: can the minister please 
provide which cities, towns, villages, and hamlets currently 
have permits to dump sewage effluent and/or raw sewage 
into provincial lakes, streams, rivers, ponds, waterways, 
and all other bodies of water? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the members 
of the House know, yesterday I had the privilege of introducing 
a number of grade 8 students from Rosetown. Well today we 
have the second half of the grade 8 class from Rosetown 
Central High in the east gallery — 33 students. 
 
And they are accompanied by their teachers, Richard 
Berezowski and Jana Clark, as well as chaperones, Greg 
Moffat, Lyle Stang, and Jeanette Bell. 
 
We just had a wonderful visit with the first half of the grade 8 
class yesterday following question period and I’m looking 
forward to an opportunity of meeting with this class following 
question period. And we hope that you enjoy the proceedings of 
the legislature, including question period. I look forward to 
meeting with you afterwards. 
 
And would all members of the House join me in welcoming 
grade 8 students from Rosetown. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like 
to introduce to you and through you to all the members of the 
House, a gentleman sitting up in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Avrum Fenson. 
 
Mr. Fenson is from Toronto, Ontario and he’s here as the 
researcher for the Standing Committee on Agriculture. And Mr. 
Fenson, although from Toronto, he’s a prairie boy at heart, 
having been born and raised in Manitoba. 
 
And Mr. Fenson has a long degree of . . . a long time of 
experience in legislative assemblies across Canada and has 
done a marvellous job in the Ontario legislature as a researcher 
there. And his credentials are quite long, so I won’t go into 
them. But I do know that he’s serving the committee very well. 
 



1440 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

So I ask all the members to offer him a very warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this House, I’d like to take 
this opportunity to introduce 10 students from the grade 6 and 7 
class of the school in Hazlet, Saskatchewan in the heart of the 
Cypress Hills constituency. 
 
Now this group of students are most welcome here, Mr. 
Speaker, because they gave me a good part of their time last 
fall. I had such an enjoyable time with them that I was afraid 
this return visit might not happen, but I’m glad to see they’re 
here today. I’m sure that you will be happy to welcome them 
here. 
 
(13:45) 
 
I’d like to introduce Mr. Chris Siemens, the teacher that’s 
accompanying them. Actually his face is quite familiar. He’s 
spent a lot of time around this legislature recently as an attendee 
at the Social Science Teachers’ Institute and is part of the 
organizing committee this year. 
 
And with Mr. Siemens are the chaperones, Faye Keenleyside, 
Shari Robertson, and Shannon Shrum, and bus driver, Evelyn 
Anderson. You can’t get here without a bus driver. And I really 
appreciate the effort that she put in today. 
 
Would you please welcome this group here to the House, 
please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s indeed a 
pleasure for me to introduce to you and through you to all 
colleagues in the Assembly, 21 grade 7 students seated in the 
west gallery. Mr. Speaker, they’re from Pilot Butte School, and 
you will remember the enjoyable morning that we had and we 
spent with them during their model legislature. 
 
I’ve met with the students and tried to describe the proceedings 
of question period here today. And it probably won’t be nearly 
as much decorum as our Assembly, hoping that members will 
help me out on that one. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they’re accompanied by their teacher, Mrs. 
Ceulemans, and chaperones Mrs. Effa and Mrs. Shaeffer. They 
had good questions for me. I know they’re looking forward to 
watching the proceedings and the tour that they’ve just 
completed. So I ask all members to please give them a warm 
welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to 
you and through you to the Assembly I’d like to introduce a 
constituent of mine sitting in the east gallery, Valerie Rousseau. 
Valerie is the co-owner of C R Plumbing and gas fitting in 
Coronach and she is up today to watch the proceedings and 
witness question period. 
 

So would all members please join me in welcoming Valerie to 
the Assembly. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Joining us in the gallery today, Mr. Speaker, are members of the 
executive of the Saskatchewan Registered Music Teachers’ 
Association. And they’re here today to watch the proceedings 
of the Legislative Assembly, but also here to hear second 
reading of a very important piece of legislation to them, The 
Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002. And I will be meeting 
with this group later this afternoon in my office. 
 
And I would ask members to welcome Ann McGilp of 
Saskatoon, president; Terrilyn Klassen of Regina, executive 
member; Bev Tillman of Regina, vice-president; Laura 
Ruschiensky of Regina, newsletter editor, and Penny Joynt of 
Saskatoon, who is the registrar/secretary/treasurer. And they are 
accompanied by Kim Mock and Diane Gingras from the 
department. 
 
And I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming 
them to the Assembly today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. On behalf of the 
official opposition I’d like to join with the Minister of Learning 
in welcoming the Saskatchewan Registered Music Teachers’ 
Association. I’m looking forward to the speeches and the 
information that we’ll learn today. 
 
And through the . . . I know your group has been working hard 
on this Bill and I’m looking forward to its passing. 
 
And on behalf of the leader of our opposition, Mr. Hermanson, 
we’d like to thank you for your work in helping him be a music 
teacher . . . music student. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like everyone to please 
welcome two guests and visitors from the federal government 
who are up in your gallery. One is Angela Bishop, and also with 
Angela Bishop is Kevin Nixon. 
 
Angela Bishop is of course the daughter of the late Rod Bishop, 
who was well known in the building of the Métis Nation, as 
well as her mother, Rose Bishop, who was involved in 
education as a board member of Northern Lights School 
Division. But now she’s doing a lot of development work and 
Angela is following in the footsteps and doing a lot of 
development work, particularly in self-government at the 
federal level. 
 
And we also have . . . of course, Kevin is doing policy advice as 
well. 
 
I’d like all welcomes to say . . . give him a Cree welcome, Ta 
wow. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1441 

 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I notice in your gallery 
we have with us today the Child Advocate, Deborah 
Parker-Loewen. As well, sitting beside her, we have the 
Provincial Ombudsman with us, Barbara Tomkins. 
 
And I’d just like to ask all members of the Assembly to issue a 
warm welcome to these guests today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Saskatchewan Opportunities Week 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This week is 
Saskatchewan Opportunities Week. This is the week that gives 
us the chance to showcase all of the successes people from all 
walks of life are experiencing in our province. 
 
I would encourage everyone to pick up a copy of last Saturday’s 
Leader-Post and read the special section on Saskatchewan 
Opportunities Week that highlights all that is happening in this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to highlight a specific opportunity for 
young people in our province that has led to successes at the 
international level. Last week my colleague from Regina 
Dewdney told this Assembly about a group of young people 
with the Market Intelligence Team of the Saskatchewan Trade 
and Export Partnership utilizing their skills at an international 
competition. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report that this team from 
Saskatchewan won the Champion in Strategic Intelligence 
Award two days ago at the Competia Symposium in Cape Cod, 
beating out, Mr. Speaker, an American team. 
 
Such an achievement by a group of young people who were 
born, raised, and educated in our province just shows that our 
province is home to a number of young people who’ve 
developed world-class expertise in innovation. 
 
These individuals have also demonstrated that young people 
can indeed have successful careers right here in our province. 
Let them, Mr. Speaker, stand as a role model to other young 
people in our province and let their achievements act as a 
reminder of the positive opportunities available in our province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would invite all members of the House to extend 
their congratulations to the STEP’s (Saskatchewan Trade and 
Export Partnership) Market Intelligence Team. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Achievement in Business 
Excellence Award Ceremonies 

 
Mr. Wakefield: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I wish to 
congratulate the Saskatoon Chamber of Commerce and Women 
Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan for recognizing business 
excellence at the 2002 SABEX (Saskatoon Achievement in 
Business Excellence) Awards in Saskatoon last evening. 

Under the theme Celebrate Success, special awards were 
presented to V. Lynne Pearson as this year’s ATHENA Award 
winner, and to Dr. Jeremy Lee and Dr. Palok Aich receiving the 
Award of Innovation. Another special SABEX award went to 
Howard Stensrud as the 2002 inductee into the SABEX Hall of 
Fame. 
 
Other SABEX awards, Mr. Speaker, went to Norampac — 
Saskatoon Division; Ghost Transport Services; Saskatoon 
Credit Union; Inroad Solutions; Yanke Group in co-operation 
with Children’s Health Foundation; and there was even a tie 
between Nu-Fab Building Products and Superior Millwork in 
the Export Award. 
 
The major winner of the evening for the 2002 SABEX was 
Philom Bios Inc. which took three awards including the 
Marketing Award, the Growth and Expansion Award, and, most 
importantly, Business of the Year. 
 
Congratulations to all of the finalists in all of the categories; and 
to the winners, well done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. During Opportunities 
Week in Saskatchewan I’m happy to report to the Assembly 
that last night in Saskatoon the annual Chamber of Commerce 
Saskatoon Achievement in Business Excellence, or SABEX 
awards, ceremony took place. 
 
The awards go to those who have taken advantage of the 
opportunities available in our city, and to those who provide 
opportunities for others. There were many worthy nominees. 
 
The winners were Philom Bios Inc., one of our many high-tech 
agribusinesses, was given a hat trick of awards: for Business of 
the Year, Marketing, and for Growth and Expansion. This 
year’s Celebrate Success program gave two Innovation Awards, 
sponsored by Innovation Place and University of Saskatchewan 
Technologies. The recipients were two U of S scientists, Jeremy 
Lee and Palok Aich. 
 
The award of Innovation was not to be confused with the 
previous ones — went to Inroad Solutions. A tie in the export 
category went to Nu-Fab Building Products and Superior 
Millwork. 
 
My Saskatoon Credit Union was presented with the Community 
Involvement Award. Best new business venture was Norampac 
— Saskatoon Division. The Children’s Health Foundation and 
Yanke Group of Companies tied in the Strategic Alliance 
category. 
 
Lynne Pearson was announced as a winner of the ATHENA 
Award. And finally, Howard Stensrud, president of Miner’s 
Construction, was inducted into the SABEX Hall of Fame. 
 
I’m sure all hon. members will join me in thanking these 
individuals and businesses who keep making our province and 
our cities humming, and our rural Saskatchewan humming. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1442 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Cadet Graduation Parades 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
this time of year is graduation time and parade time for cadets 
across Saskatchewan. 
 
In the past week I have had the opportunity to attend two such 
parades. The 675 Bow Valley squadron at Oxbow held their 
awards on Friday night, making excellent presentations, Mr. 
Speaker. Also the Oxbow squadron won first in marching 
demonstration for southeast Saskatchewan. 
 
Many of the cadets won awards, Mr. Speaker, ranging from first 
year camps in Ponoka, Alberta, to both powered and gliding 
flying scholarships, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The guest speaker at the Oxbow banquet was James 
Richardson, on active service with the Royal Canadian Navy, 
having served as a Petty Officer First Class now for 32 years. 
James graduated from the 675 Bow Valley squadron in 1969 
and went immediately to the Royal Canadian Navy. 
 
The guest speaker, Mr. Speaker, at the Carlyle ceremonies on 
Monday was Lieutenant Governor Lynda Haverstock. Her 
Honour reviewed the cadets and complimented the cadets on 
their marching demonstration, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, at this time I’d like to congratulate all cadet 
organizations across the province for the excellent work and 
service they provide; congratulate the cadets for the hard work 
and dedication that they put forward; to the officers who do this 
voluntarily to support the children that are involved in air 
cadets; and most importantly, Mr. Speaker, the parents who 
support their children in the cadet movement. Thank you very 
much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Women Entrepreneurs Award 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today is another 
chapter in the life of Saskatchewan, our land of opportunity. I 
would like to call the Assembly’s attention to some of the 
recent achievements of the business community, but 
specifically women in business. 
 
I was happy to accompany the Minister of Labour to the 
Women Entrepreneurs of Saskatchewan banquet last Friday 
evening. Our very own Olympic gold medal winner curler, Joan 
McCusker, was the keynote speaker which added a dash of 
excitement but she also had words of encouragement to all who 
were present. 
 
Including in the evening was the presentation of three energetic 
entrepreneurs with Member of the Year awards. The recipients 
were Misty Cey from Saskatoon who won the emerging 
business award for her role in establishing Nutrition Made 
Simple business; Linda Langelier of Regina for her role with 
Employment Network organization which specializes in human 
resources and consulting and related activities. A special 
recognition award was also presented to Monica Coneys, a 

business consultant from Gravelbourg who is playing a major 
role in economic revitalization of that community using a 
feminist model. 
 
Congratulations to all women entrepreneurs in Saskatchewan, 
and particularly to those who were honoured that evening by 
their peers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Wadena Ukrainian Dancers 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Melissa 
Hayden said: Learning to walk sets you free; learning to dance 
gives you the greatest freedom of all, to express your whole 
self, the person you are. 
 
Wadena has a proud Ukrainian heritage which is being kept 
alive in traditional dance. The characteristics of these dances are 
agility, courage, and joy of life. Anyone who has had the 
opportunity to watch Ukrainian dancers will readily agree that 
they display a high level of agility. 
 
The Wadena Ukrainian Dancers’ commitment to excellence 
saw them in the top three spots of every category entered during 
the competitions in Regina. The club not only displayed talents, 
they also won the congeniality award. This club has been in 
existence since 1981. 
 
Junior trio Sidney Melnick, Kahla Hryhoriw, and Nathan 
Wdowach won a silver medal, while junior quartet dancers 
Kendra Godhe, Stacy Stelmach, Denise McClymont and Travis 
Wdowach won a bronze medal. As a group . . . and as a group 
they won the silver medal. 
 
The intermediate level dancers Kendra Godhe, Stacy Stelmach, 
Kahla Hryhoriw, Sydney Melnick, Denise McClymont, Nathan 
and Travis Wdowach, won bronze medals. 
 
The senior group of Cherise Nelson, Sheena Berezuik, Marilee 
Hordos, Joanna Kerluke, Melanie Stasiuk, Stacy and Jill Kulyk, 
and Marian Grandin, and Annamarie Nataraj won bronze. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d ask this Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating this group on preserving their Ukrainian dance 
heritage. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 

Only in Saskatchewan Contest Winners 
 
Hon. Ms. Crofford: — Mr. Speaker, today I, and you as well, 
attended the Only in Saskatchewan event. May I say, Mr. 
Speaker, I was delighted and energized to see the enthusiasm 
that this event revealed within our province’s young people. 
The contest was a province-wide campaign that asked young 
people to explain, one, their Saskatchewan career dream and 
their personal Saskatchewan success story or the success story 
of someone they know. 
 
To encourage creativity, submissions could be expressed in any 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1443 

 

medium. And, Mr. Speaker, I have to say this was a colossal 
success. 
 
I’d like to acknowledge the innovation and hard work of the 
staff from the Department of Industry and Resources for 
enabling youth to speak out and making this event so successful 
— well over 500 entries from over 40 communities, ranging 
from Web sites, essays, photos, sculptures, electronic 
presentations depicting a wide range of current activities and 
career aspirations that foreshadowed a vibrant future in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Nineteen-year-old Courtney Keith of Regina said: 
 

We cannot let ourselves sink into the idea that 
Saskatchewan is inferior. It isn’t. It is possible for us to 
succeed in life because of the valuable skills and 
opportunities that are found only in Saskatchewan. 
 

Or the eloquent words of Dakota McFadzean, an Aboriginal 
youth: 
 

True there aren’t many hills here, yet snowballs of 
prosperity roll and grow at a rapid rate in Saskatchewan 
 

Mr. Speaker, this confirms and reinforces what this government 
already knows. Saskatchewan has many exciting, innovative, 
entrepreneurial, and captivating young people. I say young 
people are our most valuable resource and their optimism our 
most important industry. Only in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Employment Standards for the Hog Industry 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Agriculture. On Monday night 
the minister stood in this Assembly during estimates for his 
department and said that there is a consultation process 
underway in the province to discuss the employment standards 
for the hog industry. He said and I quote: 
 

. . . you can rest assured that there will be more meetings 
because it’s that consultation process that we had asked Mr. 
Halpenny to undertake with the industry and labour. 

 
Mr. Speaker, yesterday Sask Pork, the industry organization 
representing the pork producers of our province, issued a press 
release saying that there is no consultation process taking place. 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: is the NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government consulting with the hog producers of our 
province or not? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This 
government’s consultation process on this issue has been very 
comprehensive and inclusive. For over a year, numerous 
discussions, both informal and formal, have taken place with 
industry representatives. And our main objective during this 
process — and it continues to be our objective — is to ensure 

that those who will be impacted by these regulations and 
changes have an opportunity to provide input into how the 
process will proceed. 
 
This government hired a consultant that began formal 
consultations in January of this year for the purpose of engaging 
the parties that are involved. And during that period, Mr. 
Halpenny either met or interviewed over 80 people, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Following general consultations, there was a selected group of 
industry and employee representatives brought together. And 
this process has gone on beyond that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, from 
that member’s answer we have to wonder, inclusive of who? 
Because we’re hearing from the Sask Pork that it’s certainly not 
inclusive of the hog producers of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Sask Pork’s press release is quite clear. Joan 
Steckhan of Sask Pork says, and I quote: 
 

Unfortunately on May 1, after only one meeting, the 
minister’s consultant cancelled the consultation process 
mentioned by Minister Serby. He told our representatives 
that there would be no further meetings. From the point of 
view of the producers, there is no consultation process 
taking place. 
 

Obviously, Sask Pork is under the impression the minister has 
cancelled the planned consultations and the industry has now 
been shut out of any involvement in the department . . . in the 
development of employment standards for their very own 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the minister cancelled consultations with 
the industry? And why did he stand in this House Monday night 
and say that the meetings were still taking place? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, after the initial round of 
general consultations, a more intense round . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, after the first general round 
of consultations, a more intensive consultation progress . . . or 
process was initiated that involved a meeting with industry and 
employee representatives on April 25. And at that time, 
representatives from Sask Pork requested that staff be involved 
from the Department of Labour to answer more specific 
questions dealing with labour standards and how they would 
apply to their industry. And at that time, after an extensive 
meeting, it was requested that both parties and each side of the 
discussions, employee representatives and representatives from 
Sask Pork, would supply a written submission on the meetings, 
which they have, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 



1444 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
interesting that the minister is calling one meeting a general 
round of consultations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Joan Steckhan of Sask Pork says, and I quote: 
 

Our industry has repeatedly asked the Minister of 
Agriculture for meaningful consultation on this issue. If the 
Minister of Agriculture could get a real consultation 
process started, producers would be very happy. 

 
Mr. Speaker, there is definitely a problem if the NDP 
government is going ahead with the development of 
employment standards for hog producers without the industry’s 
input. Sask Pork is obviously upset with the minister’s 
statements that there are meetings underway between the 
industry, labour, and government when, in fact, there has only 
been one meeting and the industry has been told that there will 
be no more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP going ahead with the 
development of the industry employment standards without the 
input of the pork producers of this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — . . . Mr. Speaker, we’ll begin at the 
beginning. Since January of this year, a general round of 
consultations was done where over 80 people were interviewed 
and met with over this process. Since then, there was a more 
specific consultation process and meetings that were held April 
21 and May 1, and at that time written submissions and the 
comments of the interested parties was asked to be submitted to 
the Department of Labour, which has happened. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that doesn’t include the meetings with the 
Minister of Agriculture and myself that we attended with Sask 
Pork, which happened on three different occasions, and 
discussions that were held with ACRE (Action Committee on 
the Rural Economy). Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskEnergy Natural Gas Network 
 

Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the minister of SaskEnergy. In 1998, 
SaskEnergy began a pilot project called the SaskEnergy 
Network, which contractors joined by paying a $1,000 
membership fee to SaskEnergy. But many licensed gas 
contractors and plumbers in the heating trade believe this 
program is discriminatory. 
 
Claude and Valerie Rousseau own C R Plumbing in Coronach. 
They say, and I quote: 
 

Why are licensed gas fitters suddenly forced to compete 
with the government to do the very work that this same 
government has lawfully required us to be licensed to do? 
 
We pay gas bonds and gas license renewals each year to be 
qualified. But now, we’re not even recognized. Only 
certain contractors who pay the SaskEnergy network fee 

are recognized as qualified. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is SaskEnergy carrying out a program that 
discriminates against legally licensed gas contractors in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, and 
I thank the member for the question. It’s a question we get 
asked every once in a while about SaskEnergy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there’s no private sector company that’s forced to 
join this association at all. It’s an association that was formed in 
co-operation, Mr. Speaker, with SaskEnergy and with 
mechanical contractors. There is, I believe, in excess of 120 
private sector businesses who have now partnered with 
SaskEnergy to access programs such as the low interest rate 
loan program, Mr. Speaker, that has . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
There’s a number of benefits such as a low interest rate loan 
program that I know many of the partnership dealers, the 
associate dealers, find very beneficial. It also affords them the 
opportunity to raise the profile of their business, not only in 
their own community but right across the province, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I know that if there are concerns, I know the association 
itself, many of the private sector dealers would be happy to 
address the concerns of other private sector dealers, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, this is just another slap in 
the face to small businesses in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Rousseau’s say they have lost work because 
they have not joined the network because SaskEnergy will not 
tell people they are qualified to do the work. People in their 
community have told them that when they call into SaskEnergy 
for information, they were given the name and number of the 
closest network member. But SaskEnergy didn’t even mention 
that there was a local licensed gas fitter in their community. 
 
Mrs. Rousseau says, and I quote: 
 

We found ourselves explaining to customers why we 
weren’t on SaskEnergy’s list and that we . . . 

 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. Would the member repeat the question again so 
we could all hear it. I ask for order so that we can actually hear 
the question. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, I’ll go to Mrs. Rousseau’s 
quote: 
 

We found ourselves explaining to customers why we 
weren’t on SaskEnergy’s list and that we were qualified to 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1445 

 

do service work and installations on natural gas appliances. 
 
Mr. Speaker, gas fitters in the province say SaskEnergy, as a 
publicly owned utility operated by taxes and utility rates paid 
by Saskatchewan utilities, should work for all people of the 
province. 
 
Why is SaskEnergy not promoting the businesses of all licensed 
gas fitters in the province and only promoting those who pay 
this exorbitant fee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well first of 
all let me be clear — this is not an association that was forced 
on anybody. This was in consultation with private sector, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
The mechanical contractors, Mr. Speaker, the Mechanical 
Contractors Association of Saskatchewan, the Natural Gas 
Appliance and Equipment Dealers Association partnered 
together with SaskEnergy, Mr. Speaker, to form this 
association. They came along and talked to SaskEnergy to form 
this association so they could profile their businesses, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I quote here. It says: 
 

“The Network provides us with a number of business 
growth opportunities such as joint advertising, business 
leads, up-to-date information and more,” said Arnie Shaw 
of Centennial Plumbing & Heating in Saskatoon. 

 
And listen carefully. I quote again: 
 

“Independent businesses like mine are excited about 
working with SaskEnergy and the rest of the industry to 
better serve our customers (Mr. Speaker).” 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Mr. Speaker, this is just clearly another 
example of the NDP government wanting to pick winners and 
losers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, several contractors have contracted our offices 
with concerns about the SaskEnergy Network. Academy 
Plumbing & Heating in Regina says, and I quote: 
 

It is unfair and unethical for our government utility to 
discriminate against contractors who are legally performing 
in SaskEnergy’s gas trade. 

 
Skip’s Plumbing & Heating in Watrous also contacted us and 
says there’s no SaskEnergy Network in Watson, but all of his 
customers are being sent by SaskEnergy to Yorkton, Humboldt, 
or Lanigan because that’s where the qualified SaskEnergy 
Network members are. 
 
He says, he says: 
 

It’s another situation where the NDP government is hurting 
small businesses and hurting rural Saskatchewan 

businesses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP and SaskEnergy insist on 
picking winners and losers? Why doesn’t SaskEnergy allow all 
licensed contractors in the province to access the services it 
only promotes through the network? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I can appreciate the 
member may not understand the process but I do not understand 
why he would be opposed to the private sector wanting to form 
an association, Mr. Speaker. The private sector wants to form 
an association. The reason . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. I’d ask 
the member for Saltcoats to come to order please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the private sector 
has formed an association with SaskEnergy. They came to 
SaskEnergy looking for tools to better market their business, 
Mr. Speaker, and create new business opportunities. I don’t see 
why they would have any opposition to that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It’s not a closed shop, Mr. Speaker. If any member of the 
private sector wants to join that network they are free to do that, 
Mr. Speaker, and I would encourage them to do that. 
 
Many of the people who have joined this association have 
found many benefits, Mr. Speaker. They’ve been able to raise 
the profile of their industry and of their business, Mr. Speaker, 
and take advantage of new opportunities. It’s a new marketing 
tool, Mr. Speaker, that affords their businesses many, many new 
opportunities. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Environmental Concerns at Last Mountain Lake 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the people who live around Last 
Mountain Lake now have a new problem. Last week they found 
out the NDP was allowing Regina sewage water to be pumped 
into their lake. This week they’re noticing an unusually high 
number of dead jackfish washing up on the shore. 
 
Area residents are saying that they never seen so many dead 
fish in the spring, and it’s particularly unusual to see so many 
large fish washing up dead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what steps is the government taking to determine 
why so many fish are dying, and is there any connection 
between the dead fish and the discharge of sewage water into 
Last Mountain Lake last winter? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ve asked that 
member time and time again to not play politics with the whole 
challenge of safe water quality in this province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 



1446 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

They have been very effective, Mr. Speaker, in spreading doom 
and gloom throughout all Saskatchewan cities and towns and 
villages telling people, oh the sky is falling, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — A little order, please. A little order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, early results of some of 
the pike that were found in this lake indicate that there’s a lack 
of oxygen — that’s the direct result of this death. We are now 
sending those fish out to get — preliminary findings suggest 
lack of oxygen — we’re now sending those fish out for more 
comprehensive tests to find out, Mr. Speaker, exactly what 
happened, to be sure. 
 
But I’ll say one more thing, Mr. Speaker. There’s another 
species over there that is suffering from lack of oxygen, Mr. 
Speaker, and I would say it’s that opposition and their silly 
political games when it comes to safe water for the people of 
Saskatchewan and the challenges associated with it. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, we are concerned about the safe 
water in this province and that’s why we’re asking these 
questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, Environment officials are 
admitting that there may be some sort of disease in the northern 
pike population, but they say they won’t know for sure for at 
least a couple of months. This is a big problem for the people 
who like to fish on Last Mountain Lake. What are they 
supposed to do in the meantime? If the fish in the lake have 
some sort of disease, are they safe to eat? 
 
How soon will the Environment department know what is 
killing the fish, and should the people be eating the fish caught 
in Last Mountain Lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, as I mentioned, the 
preliminary tests show that we are clearly looking at this as a 
lack of oxygen. This is one particular species of fish, Mr. 
Speaker, and it’s a larger part of the fish population, Mr. 
Speaker. And I would point out that, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
point out that anybody out there to use prudence when you look 
at fish. If you feel that a fish is diseased, then obviously you 
don’t eat it. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we take very seriously some of the charges 
when we talk about making sure that the test results are there, to 
making sure that safe water is there, Mr. Speaker, and to make 
sure that we test all the systems throughout the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, as I’ve said before, preliminary tests show 
that this is clearly a lack of oxygen in some of these fish. We’re 

extending those test results out, and prudence will dictate to 
anybody that if a fish appears diseased, then please don’t eat it. 
But in the meantime let us not speculate, let us not fearmonger, 
Mr. Speaker. Let us deal with facts — what that member should 
do from day one. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, the last minister assured the 
people that the fish were safe to eat in that lake. 
 
The biggest concern here, Mr. Speaker, is the government may 
not be telling the people of Last Mountain Lake anything until 
these concerns wind up on the news. The NDP didn’t tell 
anyone they were discharging sewage water into Last Mountain 
Lake until it was on the news, the NDP didn’t tell anyone about 
the high bacteria count of some water samples until it was on 
the news, and now the NDP didn’t tell anyone they were testing 
dead fish for disease until it got on the news. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP withholding so much information 
from the people around Last Mountain Lake? And don’t these 
people have the right to know what’s going on in their lake? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — I’ll say, shame on that member, Mr. 
Speaker. Every town and every village and every city on the 
South Saskatchewan River, on the North Saskatchewan River, I 
want that member to walk down that riverbed and tell 
everybody, oh don’t drink the water, don’t eat the fish because 
this is bad; we’re getting pollutants from further upstream. 
 
I want that member to do that, Mr. Speaker. And if that member 
is not prepared to do that, then that member should sit down and 
stop playing politics with the water quality issue that’s very 
important to the people of Saskatchewan and to this 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, if you find a fish that’s floating 
in the water, I would suggest that you don’t eat it. I would 
suggest that perhaps you’d catch the fish and if the fish seems 
healthy to you, then you can eat that fish, Mr. Speaker. But in 
the meantime . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. During his remarks, the minister of 
Sask Water forgot that the decorum in this Assembly insists that 
he should make all his remarks through the Chair. 
 

Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it looks like the NDP 
government, through CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan), is very close to signing a deal with Broe 
industries of Denver, Colorado with respect to the ethanol 
industry in the province. And if they do that, it also looks very 
apparent that they’re prepared to give exclusive production 
rights to Broe in terms of this industry. 
 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1447 

 

The NDP is also apparently prepared, at least negotiating, to 
pump millions of taxpayers’ dollars into the Broe proposal. Mr. 
Speaker, this is a little bit strange given the fact that Broe 
industries has never produced a litre of ethanol anywhere in the 
world, notwithstanding their other activities that they might be 
very proficient at. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are many companies with a solid track 
record in ethanol production, yet the NDP appears to be 
hitching its wagon and millions of taxpayers’ dollars to a 
company with no track record in ethanol production. Why is 
that, Mr. Speaker? Why would the NDP want to sign an 
exclusive deal with a company that has no history in the ethanol 
industry? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you very 
much. Perhaps what the member opposite should understand is 
that what we are looking for is a way to match up investors, 
proponents, communities, and those who know how to build an 
ethanol industry together. 
 
Broe, through OmniTRAX is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Broe 
Companies are potentially good investors in this. They’re 
interested in bringing their investments to Saskatchewan. 
 
Now what I’m interested in is in the party opposite and their 
Grow Saskatchewan platform says they are welcoming 
investment. Is there attached to their platform a list of people 
who need not apply? And I would appreciate knowing that. 
 
If people want to come and invest in Saskatchewan 
communities, we’re going to welcome that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this particular company may 
not have any direct experience in ethanol but they have one 
thing going for them, Mr. Speaker. They are hooked up 
apparently with Garry Aldridge and Reg Gross of Points West 
Consulting, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You remember Points West, Mr. Speaker? That’s the firm that 
the NDP . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — That’s the firm that the NDP used when the NDP 
government decided to use its NDP friends to survey NDP 
ministers about NDP Crown corporation policy, Mr. Speaker. 
Now instead of paying that particular firm for that sort of 
service, now apparently Points West is getting paid to consult 
with the NDP. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what involvement do Reg Gross and Garry 
Aldridge have in brokering this deal between Broe and CIC? 
And how much money do they stand to make if they can 
convince CIC to give Broe industry millions of taxpayers’ 

dollars? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
things we have learned on this side is that we always need to go 
back to check the facts on what these members are talking 
about. 
 
Let’s be very clear about this. If Broe is interested in hiring a 
Saskatchewan consultant, they should do so. Let’s understand 
also who exactly Points West is. Well it turns out that as we 
look at this letterhead from that company, lo and behold, who is 
listed as one of the principals of it? Verna Thompson. 
 
Now in case the members opposite have forgotten who Ms. 
Thomson is, I understand that this is the same individual that 
ran and lost for the Sask Party nomination in Kindersley. 
 
Now I can imagine, and I want to tell the members of this 
House that this New Democratic Party welcomes everybody on 
to our side. And if Ms. Thomson has had such a terrible time in 
the Sask Party, she is welcome not only to join Points West, she 
can join the NDP directly right here. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member . . . Order. Order. Why is 
the member for Canora-Pelly on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, with leave on behalf of the 
Public Accounts Committee to request time to propose a motion 
regarding the appointment of the Provincial Auditor of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Appointment of Provincial Auditor 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the Public Accounts Committee has been very busy 
over the last number of months going through a process to 
secure a Provincial Auditor for the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I would like to share with the members of the Legislative 
Assembly and the many guests in your gallery, Mr. Speaker, the 
process that was followed so that people in the province of 
Saskatchewan, as well, would understand this new approach 
taken by the Legislative Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the report that was tabled earlier on this afternoon 
highlighted four sections that deal with the process that was 
followed over the last number of months and I would like to 
share a bit of that report. 
 
First of all, we must recognize that a number of people assisted 
in . . . assisted the committee in carrying out this responsibility. 
The responsibility of carrying out a competition to fill the 
position of Provincial Auditor was a novel one for your 
committee. In approaching this task, your committee sought the 
assistance of two individuals with recognized expertise. 
 
Your committee wishes to extend its appreciation to Clare 



1448 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

Isman, executive director, human resource development, Public 
Service Commission; and to G.N. Arnie Arnott, vice-president, 
finance administration, Saskatchewan Blue Cross for their 
valuable insight and effort while serving on the selection 
committee. 
 
(14:30) 
 
The committee expresses its appreciation to the Office of the 
Clerk for administrative support and procedural advice, to the 
Hansard branch for preparing the verbatim record, and to the 
other branches of the Assembly that contributed their own 
expertise that enabled the proceedings to operate smoothly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, under terms of reference, I would like to share the 
following. The position of Provincial Auditor has been vacant 
since March, 2000 when the incumbent, Wayne Strelioff, 
accepted the position of Auditor General of British Columbia. 
 
During the 2001 spring legislative session, amendments were 
adopted to The Provincial Auditor Act that enhanced the 
independence of the Provincial Auditor by providing for an 
independent selection and appointment process. Under the new 
provisions, the task of developing a process for the selection of 
a new Provincial Auditor and overseeing the competition was 
delegated to the Standing Committee on Public Accounts. The 
Act specifies that it is the Standing Committee on Public 
Accounts who is charged with unanimously recommending an 
individual to the Legislative Assembly which then makes the 
appointment by resolution. 
 
In approaching this task last fall, your committee sought input 
from the Office of the Provincial Auditor and the Office of the 
Provincial Comptroller. In addition, the guidelines previously 
agreed to by the committee in its first report of May, 2001 were 
reviewed. It was decided that the selection process outlined in 
this report would be followed. 
 
That selection process took place as follows. The first step 
undertaken by your committee in developing a fair and open 
competition was to seek the assistance of individuals 
experienced in the selection of senior public sector executives 
and in the accounting field. It was agreed that a three-person 
selection committee would be appointed and consist of a person 
designated by the Office of the Clerk, a senior staffing officer 
from the Public Service Commission, and an independent 
individual who is a member in good standing with the Institute 
of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan, who holds a senior 
position within the private sector, the academic field, or the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan, and who is 
not engaged in public practice. 
 
Names for each of these positions were solicited from the 
Office of the Clerk, the Public Service Commission, and the 
Institute of Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan 
respectively. After deliberating on the nominations, Clerk 
Assistant Margaret Woods, Clare Isman, executive director of 
human resource development with the Public Service 
Commission, and Arnie Arnott, vice-president of finance 
administration with Saskatchewan Blue Cross were chosen to 
fill these positions. 
 
The selection committee was immediately tasked with drafting 

a recruitment process for the committee’s consideration. They 
were also charged with the responsibility to draft an 
advertisement, position profile, and selection criteria. 
 
In considering the most effective approach in reaching the 
intended audience, the committee chose to place the 
advertisement in the two provincial dailies and in one national 
newspaper. In addition, the advertisement was distributed 
electronically and through professional mail-outs to the 
provincial chartered accountant Web site. 
 
A total of 17 resumes were received. Three Saskatchewan 
residents applied, ten from elsewhere in Canada, and there were 
four international applicants. The selection committee approved 
a preliminary short list of three candidates. A standard set of 
questions touching upon each of the competencies enumerated 
in the position profile was asked of each candidate to ensure 
consistency and fairness. 
 
These candidates were interviewed on April 12, 2002. Based 
upon the responses received, the short list was reduced to two 
candidates. The selection committee unanimously agreed to 
forward those two names for the consideration of the Standing 
Committee on Public Accounts. 
 
A second interview was scheduled with the membership of the 
Standing Committee on Public Accounts on April 30, 2002. A 
second set of questions was developed for this interview. By 
prior agreement the members of the selection committee were 
designated to pose the questions while the members of the 
Public Accounts Committee observed and sought clarification 
from the candidates. 
 
A final meeting took place on May 1, 2002, to deliberate on the 
committee’s recommendation. A unanimous decision was 
reached. Mr. Speaker, after carefully reviewing the 
qualifications of each candidate and the results of the 
interviews, our committee unanimously makes the following 
recommendation. 
 
I move, seconded by the Vice-Chair of the Public Accounts 
Committee, the member of Regina Northwest, that: 
 

Pursuant to s.3.1(1) of The Provincial Auditor Act, this 
Assembly appoints G. Fred Wendel, of the city of Regina, 
in the Province of Saskatchewan, to the position of 
Provincial Auditor for Saskatchewan. 

 
I so move. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
rise to support the motion, and like all members, certainly 
welcome the appointment of Fred Wendel to be the Provincial 
Auditor. He’s a person that I personally have worked with in 
many capacities over the years and I think the committee has 
made a very good choice. 
 
I also want to thank the committee members for their very 
considerable work that they have done outside of the normal 
work that the committee undertakes for their activity in this 
matter. 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1449 

 

Mr. Speaker, I just wanted to take a few moments to comment 
on the fact that this is such a very, very different selection 
process from the last time a Provincial Auditor was appointed 
in 1990, and when I served as Chair of the Public Accounts 
Committee and when Mr. Grant Devine was the Premier of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The legislation respecting the appointment of the Provincial 
Auditor then, in 1990, said: 
 

After (after) consultation with the Chairman of the 
Standing Committee of the Legislative Assembly on Public 
Accounts, the Lieutenant Governor in Council (that is the 
cabinet, the government) shall appoint a person as a 
Provincial Auditor for Saskatchewan. 

 
The dictionary, Mr. Speaker, defines consultation as meaning to 
confer. Consultation in 1990 meant I received a letter from the 
minister of Finance, Mr. Hepworth, saying that a process was in 
place, about which the Public Accounts Committee members 
nor myself were consulted, to carry out the selection of a 
Provincial Auditor. 
 
This process in 1990 involved the appointment of a search 
committee about which the Public Accounts Committee 
members nor myself were consulted. 
 
That committee in 1990 made a recommendation to the 
government, and then the government said to me as Chair of the 
Public Accounts Committee, we want you to support, we want 
you to support this recommendation before we recommend our 
choice to the Legislative Assembly. So consultation in 1990, in 
fact, meant to inform after the fact, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now of course the Public Accounts Committee, the MLAs, and 
not the government sets out the process. The Public Accounts 
Committee, the MLAs, and not the government appoint a 
selection committee to assist them. 
 
Finally the recommendation to the Legislative Assembly to 
appoint a Provincial Auditor requires the unanimous support of 
the members of the Public Accounts Committee and not just a 
majority who are government members or the government for 
that matter, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, it is my opinion these 
changes provide for greater integrity in the appointment of a 
public official whose job it is to hold the government 
accountable. These changes will serve the public well. I applaud 
these changes and I applaud the government for having the 
courage to make these changes and to promote accountability, 
Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. Order. Order. Order, please. 
Order, please. Order, please. Is the . . . once again I ask the 
question. Order, please. Is the Assembly ready for the question? 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — As members . . . Order, please. Order, please. 
Order, please. As members have expressed already by their 
applause . . . Order, please members. 
 
As members have already expressed by their applause, I would, 
at this time on behalf of all of the members of the Assembly, 
like to extend our congratulations to Mr. Fred Wendel on being 
appointed Provincial Auditor. 
 
I wish him patience, perseverance, and best wishes as he 
undertakes a very difficult and important role he has committed 
to on behalf of the people of Saskatchewan. I would like to 
advise the members that Mr. Fred Wendel is here with his 
family and I would ask that at this time he rise and be 
recognized. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — To ask for leave to introduce guests, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
gives me great pleasure to you and through you to introduce a 
couple of guests in your gallery. 
 
From the Weyerhaeuser company we have Mr. Steve Smith 
who I believe is the manager. And next to Mr. Smith is Mr. 
Roznowski, I believe, if I said the name correct. And on behalf 
of the government I welcome these two very important guests 
to our gallery today and hope they stay and watch the banter 
going back and forth. It’s a very informative opportunity and 
I’d like to again welcome them here to the Assembly today. 
Thanks. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Carrot River Valley 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — . . . leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member in welcoming Wayne Roznowski and Steve 
Smith to the Assembly. 
 
I would advise all members however though don’t be fooled by 
the addition of the facial hair. It really is Steve Smith under that 
beard. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member for Regina Lakeview on 
his feet? 



1450 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I’d ask leave to comment on 
the guests that were here and facial hair. 
 
The Speaker: — No. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — . . . Mr. Speaker. I would like to introduce 
guests. 
 
The Speaker: — The Speaker can only entertain one leave at a 
time but I’ll ask for your latter, that is does the member have 
leave to introduce guests? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too want to 
welcome the people from Weyerhaeuser here today. The reason 
that they’re here in Regina today is something that we should 
all celebrate. Weyerhaeuser gave $500,000 to the Saskatchewan 
Indian Federated College this morning and we all want to thank 
them for their contribution to the future of Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 193 through 200 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to questions 193 to 200 have been 
tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 46 — The Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is my 
pleasure today to outline for all members of the Assembly the 
substance and purpose of this new Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Registered Music Teachers’ 
Association has a long and proud history in our province. The 
association was first incorporated under a provincial statute in 
1938. Next year the association will be celebrating the 65th 
anniversary of its status as a self-regulating professional 
association with its own specific legislation. 
 
The Act as it currently exists has not been changed since 1979 
and includes many provisions that go back much earlier than 
that, Mr. Speaker. Needless to say, over the years there has been 
many changes in the profession and in their association as well 
as the broader concepts and principles for the regulation of 
professional groups. 
 
The time has come, Mr. Speaker, then, for a thorough revision 
and updating of this statute to reflect the evolution of the music 
teaching profession in our province and to incorporate the 

appropriate contemporary provisions for professional 
legislation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there are two essential components or aspects of a 
professional statute. The first is those elements that deal with 
the public interest — what we might call consumer protection. 
These provisions are needed so that members of the public can 
have confidence in the qualifications, competence, and 
professional standards of the individuals from whom they are 
acquiring services. 
 
The second element of a professional statute, Mr. Speaker, 
deals with the internal affairs of the professional association. 
These are matters that enable the members of the profession to 
advance their personal and collective interests and to manage 
their own affairs effectively. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the new Registered Music Teachers Act, 2002 
incorporates major revisions that address both of these 
components and I will highlight the key provisions. 
 
Where possible, administrative detail that is included in the 
existing Act is being removed from the statute and now will be 
included in bylaws passed by their association. By way of 
example, Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the current Act specifies 
that the executive of the association must be composed of seven 
members. There is no reason why the association should not be 
able to determine for itself, by bylaw, the size and composition 
of its own executive. 
 
The new Act divides the association’s bylaw-making authority 
into two parts and defines the specific matters that fall under 
each part, Mr. Speaker. Administrative bylaws; those that deal 
only with the profession’s internal affairs can be made by the 
association without any prior approval. Now policy or 
regulatory bylaws, on the other hand, must be approved by the 
Minister of Learning before they can take effect. 
 
This approach to bylaws is consistent with the approach now 
being used in all of our professions legislation and reflects the 
dual elements of public interests and professional interests that I 
mentioned earlier, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now a third major challenge is the addition of a public 
representative to serve as a member of the association’s 
executive and also of its disciplinary committee. Again, the 
appointment of such public representatives is now standard 
policy for our professions legislation. 
 
Now I want to emphasize, Mr. Speaker, that the public 
representative is appointed to bring an informed layperson’s 
perspective to the consideration of professional issues. The 
individual is not a representative of the government or the 
minister and does not report directly to the minister on 
association business. 
 
The current Act, Mr. Speaker, gives the senate of the University 
of Saskatchewan a substantial role in the registration process for 
music teachers. The university has agreed that it is no longer 
necessary or appropriate to play this role and that the 
association should handle this matter as an independent 
regulatory body for the profession. 
 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1451 

 

Mr. Speaker, one area in which the new Act is substantially 
longer and more detailed than the current statute is the 
structures and procedures for dealing with discipline of 
members. At the start of my remarks, Mr. Speaker, I said that 
one of the main objectives of a professional statute is to enable 
the public to have confidence in the competence and 
professional standards of the individuals providing these 
professional services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in order for a statute to serve this purpose 
effectively it is essential that the professional association have 
the capacity to deal with its members in terms of professional 
competence and professional conduct. At the same time, Mr. 
Speaker, it is essential that the rights of individual members be 
protected through procedures that are fair, consistent, and 
transparent. In other words, Mr. Speaker, there must be due 
process. 
 
Over the years the concept of due process has steadily evolved, 
Mr. Speaker, and the required elements have changed as a result 
of decisions by the courts, by arbiters, and others. The 
provisions that are incorporated into this new Registered Music 
Teachers Act reflect the elements that are considered necessary 
by the Department of Justice, and that are being incorporated in 
all new and amended professional legislation in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that many members of this Assembly 
will remember a music teacher from their own earlier years, or 
perhaps a music teacher with whom their children have been 
associated. We know the valuable contribution that a musical 
education can play in enriching our personal lives and in 
enhancing the cultural richness of our society as a whole, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
For many decades now the Saskatchewan Registered Music 
Teachers’ Association has promoted improvements in the 
teaching of music, has fostered public interest in music, and has 
supported the recognition of music as an integral component of 
our province’s education system. 
 
In order for the association to continue playing these many 
important roles effectively, it requires legislation that reflects 
the needs and interests of its members, as well as the interests of 
the public who wish to benefit from their services. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill we are discussing today has been 
developed in close consultation with the association and has its 
full support. 
 
I am therefore pleased to move that Bill No. 46, The Registered 
Music Teachers Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
today to address The Registered Music Teachers Act that was 
discussed by the Minister of Learning. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all know that music is a language that crosses 
all boundaries of culture and even political philosophies. I’ve 
spoken to some of the members of the Registered Music 
Teachers’ Association who are excited about this new Act, and 

I understand that there is a lot of work involved in putting 
together this legislation. 
 
I have also spoken to registered music teachers in my 
constituency who feel confident that their association is 
working well for their members. 
 
The importance of music to our lives should never be 
underestimated. At the happiest times of our lives, the moments 
are usually underscored by music. And often at the other end of 
the scale, music helps us through some of the dark moments. 
 
The work and dedication of the registered music teachers is 
probably not often thought of by parents and students as they go 
through the hours of practice. But I do know that the Act itself 
today is looking at a lot of different aspects involved in the 
actual working of the profession. There is a long history 
involved and I was very pleased to understand that it’s 
self-regulating. 
 
The concept of public interest and internal affairs, I am pleased 
that there’s a . . . independent consultant doesn’t have to report 
back to the government, and that the professional status is 
understated . . . is underscored, and the importance of being 
able to do the work themselves. The disciplinary process is 
something that all of the members must have worked through 
and I’m pleased that there’s been a lot of thought in the process. 
The process involved in passing this piece of legislation is the 
same that is used in ensuring all legislation in this province 
receives due diligence. 
 
The Bill will go into adjourned debates today to ensure that the 
voice of any person or organization will have adequate time to 
have their ideas or concerns brought forward. And, Mr. 
Speaker, at this time, we have no reason to believe there will be 
any objections or concerns with the Bill and any questions can 
be discussed in Committee of the Whole. 
 
But I congratulate the members of the Registered Music 
Teachers’ Association for their work and diligence in ensuring 
this new Act will ensure that not only the association but all 
music teachers and all music students in the province will have 
the best opportunities to do what they do best and to do what 
they love, involve themselves and surround themselves with 
music. 
 
So at this time, I’d like to adjourn debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Health 
Vote 32 

 
Subvote (HE01) 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Health to introduce his 
officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. I’m pleased to have with me 
Glenda Yeates who is the deputy minister of Health, right to my 



1452 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

left. And then to her left, I have Dan Florizone who is the 
assistant deputy minister. Behind Glenda is Lawrence Krahn, 
assistant deputy minister. And right behind me is Barb Shea 
who is the executive director of the drug plan and extended 
benefits. And to my right I have Duncan Fisher, assistant 
deputy minister. And behind him I have Rod Wiley, who is the 
executive director of finance and management services. Thank 
you. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and good 
afternoon to the officials. Unfortunately we cannot join in this 
next hour of the tea honouring the Provincial Auditor, but life 
goes on and work goes on, so we’re going to have to do it. 
 
I also want to say to Duncan that I appreciated his comments in 
Nipawin yesterday. But when I left I thought you’d leave the 
fire alone, and unfortunately they had some real difficulties. 
 
It was interesting when you’re in the community and it was the 
emergency medical association’s convention. And driving into 
the community there was smoke everywhere at the loss of the 
feed facility there. And I know the whole community was very, 
very concerned about it. But it was sort of reassuring to come to 
a parking lot where there were 10 or 12 ambulances and lots of 
the EMT (emergency medical technician) and technicians 
across the province with their convention. So it’d give you at 
least a secure feeling. 
 
Minister, today we begin further detailed examination of the 
Health budget. And I want to focus our attention today on the 
subsection on drug plan and extended benefits for the next hour 
or so and deal with those issues. 
 
And so, Minister, to start this again, as has been our practice in 
the past, we’re not only enlightening ourselves and each other 
and the members of the Assembly. This is also, I think, a very 
important process for people in the wider public domain who 
have an opportunity to watch what’s going on either through the 
live transmission of the broadcast but also in Hansard. And I 
think we have an obligation to inform the public in general as 
well. 
 
And so, Minister, to start off I’d like to ask you to give an 
overview of this department and this subsection and outline the 
objectives of this department. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. Yes, I’d be very pleased to 
provide some information about the drug plan and the extended 
benefits portion of the Health budget. 
 
This particular area of money — and this year the amount will 
be just over $120 million . . . well I guess actually it’ll be $167 
million . . . $120 million, which is the prescription drug plan — 
provides subsidies for approved prescription drugs where costs 
exceed certain levels. 
 
There’s also a special support for low-income people and 
people with special needs. There’s supplementary health 
benefits for low-income residents. And as well there are 
funding for independent living aids including oxygen, 
prosthetic services, and other devices. Included in here also are 

some of the assistance that we provide for people who are 
infected with HIV (human immunodeficiency virus) through the 
Canadian blood system. 
 
And so it includes therefore Saskatchewan Aids to Independent 
Living, coverage for palliative care, the supplementary health 
plan, the support . . . special support for residents, as well as the 
family health benefits program, and that includes adults under 
that plan plus seniors who get some assistance. 
 
So it has all of those aspects and so I think we can be happy to 
entertain questions into these various areas. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I have in my 
hand the annual report for 2000-2001 that you can download off 
the Web site on the drug plan and extended benefits branch. 
And I’ll try to give you an idea where I am in that. Perhaps you 
have a copy at your disposal as well. 
 
Looking at page 21 of that report, it talks about the standing 
offer contract for generic drugs specifically or generally under 
the . . . from generic drug manufacturers. And it outlines in a 
chart from ’96 up to 2001 the estimated cost saving by 
tendering this standing offer process to save prescription drug 
costs. 
 
The way I understand the process works, generic drug 
companies are asked, or sent a request for bidding, if you like, 
on a number of generic drugs. That if they submit the lowest bid 
price for that generic drug, then that drug is the one recognized 
and supported in the Formulary for dispensing across the 
province. And because this bidding process has resulted in 
savings that are outlined on page 21, there has been some 
significant savings to the drug plan and in turn savings to 
people who actually have these drugs prescribed and use them. 
 
Minister, is that the general way the program works and is the 
savings . . . I would like . . . I guess where I’m going is I’d like 
an update about the current process. I understand that the 
current standing offer contract proposal closed on March 31 and 
I’m wondering where we stand currently. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The same process is being used again this 
year and they’re in that process right now, doing the, I guess, 
discussion and consultation around how it’s going to work out. 
But the process is the same this year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, can you outline . . . have there 
been a similar number of generic drug companies bidding for 
the standing offer or has there been a noticeable decrease in the 
number of generic drug companies that proposed bids for this 
year ending March 31? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The indications are that we will be 
receiving a similar number of bids to what we’ve had last year. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Have there been some indication or 
noticeable price pressures on the generic pool, if you like, of 
drugs? I understand that there had been some noticeable price 
increases January 1 of this year. And does it look like that’s also 
being reflected in the standing offer? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — I think you have it right, that there have 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1453 

 

been some increases January 1 and that puts pressure on the 
whole process. But I think outside of our particular process 
which we are using this year, there’s a national situation that is 
developing because Saskatchewan has pioneered this type of 
way of dealing with drug costs and some other jurisdictions 
have been interested in using it as well. Once that happens it has 
changed the position of Saskatchewan. And so we’re a bit 
worried that the process may not even be there in the years to 
come to allow us to get some of the kinds of savings that we 
have now. 
 
But right now, and in this year, the process seems to be working 
the way it did last year. But whether we can be assured that that 
will happen next year is something that it’s hard to know right 
now. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. And I guess that’s 
exactly the concern that I had been hearing and having 
expressed to me is that it looks like this program with a 
standing offer has significant savings in the whole drug plan. 
 
And I’m wondering if, in your discussions with other Health 
ministers across the country — and I recognize that 
Saskatchewan has been rather unique in requesting that 
standing offer — is there . . . has there been discussions about 
looking forward from this point; that if indeed there is a 
diminished likelihood of the generic drug companies wanting to 
participate on this nature if it happens right across the country, 
have the Health ministers looked at alternatives — you know, 
maybe Prairie-wide purchasing or Canada-wide purchasing or 
any alternatives that may result in significant savings on the 
drugs to the Formulary and the drug plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This is one of the topics that was a 
discussion in Newfoundland in September by all the Health 
ministers — and then again by the premiers in January in 
Vancouver — about how do we do things around drug 
purchasing on a national basis. And the direction from the 
premiers to all of the Health ministers was to come forward 
with some of the ideas that deal exactly with the question you 
raised for fall meetings or — of both premiers and Health 
ministers — to see what are some of the national, co-operative 
things that we can do that will provide benefits for the drug 
plans across the country. 
 
Now the position we’re taking from Saskatchewan is that no 
province should be any worse off going into this than they are 
now. And one of . . . because one of the challenges we have is 
that nobody else has been able to develop a program quite like 
this one with the savings for Saskatchewan people. 
 
So we want to basically say, well whatever we do, we need to 
have some plan that maybe gives benefits to other places but it 
doesn’t provide a detriment to those of us in Saskatchewan. 
And it includes things . . . you know, the discussions are around 
things like you talked about, group purchasing or some of the 
other methods of dealing with that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Has there been a discussion about a national 
standing offer contract type of a system so that if drug 
companies are going to be asked to make proposals on a 
nationwide, you’d think that would be a pretty attractive option 
for them to look at . . . or submitting a pretty aggressive tender, 

if you like, right across the country. Rather than worrying about 
us losing a standing offer system, has there been some 
discussion that it might be extended right across the country? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer is clearly yes, there have been 
a lot of discussions around this. And there are challenges and 
one of the big challenges is whether the drug companies will 
actually participate in that kind of a system. And they’ve given 
strong hints that they won’t. 
 
At least their . . . And so one of the reasons that Saskatchewan 
may be disadvantaged is that because we’re only a million 
people and we have a very defined market. They’re willing to 
do . . . use this process here. But if it expanded prairie wide or 
nationwide, then all of a sudden they are not that interested in 
coming forward with this. Now we can’t say that for sure. And 
it may be that tendering on a national basis might make a 
difference. 
 
We also know that similar kinds of discussions are taking place 
in the United States so that I know a number of the states in 
New England, for example, are trying to figure out how for 
their state-paid-for patients, whether they could do something 
together. And they’ve looked at some of the models of some of 
the things that we’re doing in Canada. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, I appreciate your comments. And 
perhaps a national vision is unworkable because of the 
magnitude of it for the reasons you listed. 
 
Has there been some increased discussion between at least our 
neighbouring provinces, perhaps the four Western provinces, to 
look at if there could be on that limited basis maybe some 
leverage exerted in terms of making sure that we get the best 
bid prices as possible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The answer to that question is yes. And 
one of the advantages is for the drug plans in the west — BC 
(British Columbia), Alberta, Saskatchewan, Manitoba — there 
are a lot of similarities in how they’re organized so that the 
possibilities for co-operation are greater than if we do it 
nationally. And so this has been an item of discussion. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The other component of an attempt to hold 
the costs as reasonable is the maximum allowance cost program 
where I believe not necessarily generic drug companies but 
brand drug companies as well are asked to submit a tender that 
would have a maximum cost for the period of the time that the 
drug is offered. 
 
Again, is the closure for those kinds of proposals March 31 and 
has there been a similar pattern of tendering exhibited this year 
as in the past? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — As it relates to this particular issue of 
maximum allowable cost, maybe I can give a little bit of an 
example to show how it works which then explains my answer. 
 
Basically my answer is is that there isn’t any specific deadline 
or time. It’s just an ongoing process. And what happens is, for 
example, there might be five drugs by five different companies 
that have the same effect and their effect, you know, practically 
interchangeable. Our system will basically pick the one that’s 



1454 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

the lowest cost and then all of those ones will, if they wish to 
sell their drugs at that cost, they will provide them. 
 
And so you don’t know, for example, from month to month, 
whether a particular company wants to have its particular drug 
included in that plan or not. But practically, most of them are 
included. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I would like 
to turn now briefly to the Formulary process. And as I 
understand it, there’s essentially two standing type of 
committees that are advisory to the department in terms of how 
the Formulary process works. 
 
The first committee is the Drug Quality Assessment Committee. 
And I, again, Minister, for the record, would like you to outline 
the job of the Drug Quality Assessment Committee. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The Drug Quality Assessment Committee 
is the committee of experts. So it’s pharmacologists, clinical 
pharmacologists, physicians, and people like that who work on 
this particular committee. And they evaluate the submissions 
from the drug manufacturers around what kinds of drugs might 
be considered to be included into the Formulary. 
 
And so they go over the clinical reports, the scientific reports, 
all of the published literature, and they evaluate and make a 
recommendation about whether the particular drug is 
interchangeable with another one that may be already on the 
Formulary. That’s probably one of the more common 
applications. Or if it’s a new drug or a special drug that is 
dealing with a particular problem and should now be included. 
 
But this Drug Quality Assessment Committee is the very 
technical committee and is comprised of experts in analysis of 
the effectiveness of drugs. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Would it be fair to say 
that this committee would be the first committee that a drug 
company, for example, that has a new product that’s been 
approved by Health Canada for use in Canada . . . this is the 
committee where a drug company then would make their 
submission for consideration of a product on the Saskatchewan 
Formulary? 
 
And if it is, what’s the timeline in terms of this process? What 
is . . . Has there been any statistics on the approval process? 
How timely are new drugs introduced to this committee? 
Whose responsibility is it to introduce them to the committee? 
And then what’s the timeline for consideration and approval? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This process is exactly as you’ve 
described — the place where the manufacturers come forward, 
they submit their information to the drug plan, which then sends 
it immediately to the Drug Quality Assessment Committee. 
 
I think in 1997 there was a review of the processes that were 
used across the country, and the Saskatchewan process came 
out quite well as it related to the brand name drugs across the 
country. They got in there, got reviewed, and were assessed you 
know pretty quickly. And maybe not at the top of the list, but 

close to the top of the list as far as speed. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, you indicated that there was an 
evaluation of this committee as compared to committees in 
other jurisdictions. And it would strike me from your remarks 
and from my knowledge of how this process works, that there’s 
a lot of similarity between jurisdictions, provincially anyway, in 
terms of this type of committee. 
 
Has there again been discussions with our neighbours 
provincially, Western Canada, and even nationally, to have one 
process for the country that would go through this? Because it 
strikes me is that to do this repetitively 10 or 12 times across the 
country may be a bit of a waste of time and energy. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — This was also clearly a point of discussion 
at the ministers’ meeting in Newfoundland and at the premiers’ 
meeting, in fact. And then the process has started around setting 
up a national system for assessment of drugs. And the criteria 
that would have to be agreed upon nationally are I think close to 
being firmed up. 
 
What one of the visions would be is that all of the provinces 
have experts, and some of them maybe have a little more 
expertise in one area than another. And so initially the plan 
might be that when a new drug is brought forward, it might go 
to one province because they know a lot about some of the 
drugs that relate to arthritis, for example; another province it 
would go to some other area, because they have some of the 
experts in some other particular disease — and that we then 
would acknowledge or use the results right across the country. 
 
And that’s where we are right now. It looks like things are 
moving along very well to have effectively a national 
assessment process that would eliminate any kind of duplication 
or challenge. And so that’s clearly the goal of, I think, all of the 
governments of Canada. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, would this . . . these committees 
that would then potentially have some recognized expertise, but 
then we still potentially would have 10 committees across the 
country. Has there been any thought of establishing a single 
national committee with a range of expertise that would make it 
competent to make these decisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The goal is exactly what you’ve suggested 
— one place, a national system. But as we move towards that 
goal, what I described is sort of an interim step. Ultimately, you 
may have a national place and even then send it out to particular 
experts who might be located at various universities or other 
places across the country. But the goal is clearly to have one 
national system at the assessment level where all jurisdictions 
would buy into that. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. I understand that 
there’s a little over 3,000 drugs in the Formulary plan and 
another 4,500 under the exceptional drug plan sort of thing in 
the Formulary. The second committee, the Formulary 
Committee is charged with making sure that those Formulary 
status stays up to date, as I understand it. 
 
Are they a different group of experts or how does that 
committee function in relationship to the quality . . . drug 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1455 

 

quality assessment committee? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The Formulary Committee is made up not 
of experts on drugs and their effectiveness or the quality, but 
more of the clinical people. So it’s doctors and nurses and 
pharmacists and others who are using the particular drugs on a 
day-to-day basis or working with that. 
 
And their job is to examine carefully the clinical effectiveness 
and the overall cost within the whole structure as well. So their 
job is to make sure that the most effective drugs are the ones 
that are included on the list. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, does this committee do its own 
research on the efficacy of drugs? Or do they rely on, I guess, 
what’s still currently HSURC (Health Services Utilization and 
Research Commission) or CIHI (Canadian Institute of Health 
Information) information or other research papers in terms of 
looking at the effect of this, of individual therapies? Or do they 
do their own research or are they empowered to do their 
research. Or how do they . . . What methodology do they use to 
determine the actual efficacy of the drugs that are in the 
Formulary? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The Formulary Committee relies very 
heavily on the Drug Quality Assessment Committee for that 
kind of information about its actual use. But what they go and 
then look at are studies from other places. They probably would 
get information from HSURC or CIHI depending on what the 
issue was. 
 
Sometimes if they have a particular concern, they contract with 
an organization which is a joint Canadian body called the 
Canadian Coordinating Office of Health Technology 
Assessment, or CCOHTA for short. And this particular agency 
is one that is a co-operative agency across the country. 
 
So the same questions you were asking before about could we 
do these things together with provinces, I think the answer is 
yes. But once again, it’s a next level and I know that Health 
ministers and premiers have talked about this. But it then gets 
into, well, what are the kind of resources that you have in your 
particular province about what kinds of things you actually 
include on your Formulary and pay for them. 
 
And so, the Formulary Committee is trying to address the cost 
issues but also the drug quality issues. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. Minister, I want to 
turn to the changes that have been implemented in the drug plan 
in terms of the, I guess, the special report or support program 
currently, or proposed to be in place. 
 
Would you outline the way the current program works? And 
then later, we’ll go over how the proposed program, as 
proposed in the budget, will work. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you for that question. And I’ll try 
to lay it out in a way that is understandable. 
 
The present program up . . . which is in existence right now will 
continue with the semi-annual deductible of $850. In other 
words, there . . . for a total year, if you were . . . you would end 

up with $1,700 as a deductible. And this is generally based on 
the fact that the . . . with the people or families with income of 
$50,000 or less, it covers about 3.4 per cent of their income. 
 
There’s going to be some change in that area. What’s going to 
happen is that those people with incomes greater that $50,000, 
instead of having a deductible of 1,700 — 850 times 2 — they 
will end up having a deductible based at 3.4 per cent of their 
income. So that if you earn $100,000, then the figure would be 
3.4 per cent of $100,000 which is $3,400. So it will be an 
increase for those people who earn more than $50,000. 
 
The items that will stay the same, there will be no change — 
and the change that I just talked about will take place on July 1, 
2002 — the ones that there will be no change, the coverage for 
Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living; there’s no change 
there. 
 
There’s no change for any palliative care clients. There’s no 
change for supplementary health plan clients. There’s no 
change for those residents that have a special support required 
for drug costs. 
 
And also there’ll be no change around the semi-annual 
deductibles for adults with the family health benefits program 
or for seniors receiving the guaranteed income supplement or 
the Saskatchewan Income Plan assistance. 
 
So effectively the change relates to those people with incomes 
above $50,000. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. As the plan works 
now, once you reach your $850 deductible, are the drugs that 
you incur the costs of over and above that completely covered? 
Or do you then move to a copayment program and how does 
that work? 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What happens is that the government pays 
65 per cent and the individual pays 35 per cent. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So the 850 deductible just is where then 
near the copayment plan comes into effect. You use the 
example of a $50,000 income family or whatever. And I 
recognize that there’s a special form that’s available through 
pharmacists that take in allowance, your gross income, or the 
family income, and then there’s deductions for dependants and 
things of that nature to arrive at the actual family income that’s 
used for calculation for these purposes. 
 
You indicated that at a $50,000 family at 3.4 per cent that 
would be $1,700 a year. The current deductible program is 
essentially that over the year, but it’s in two six-month periods. 
 
How does the program work then? Do you go . . . say you had a 
$300 a month, if you like, drug bill, once you reach that $1,700 
do you automatically kick into the copayment program for the 
rest of the year, or these are in six-month blocks? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Under the current plan it’s two six-month 
blocks. 
 



1456 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

Mr. Gantefoer: — And under the new plan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The way the new system will work is that 
people can apply, because often they are on a chronic drug, say 
at $300 a month. They can say, okay, well this is what I 
anticipate my drug costs for the year will be and they can then 
get the copayment to start right on the first of the month. 
 
They don’t have to wait until the first $1,700 is paid or 
whatever amount that is, 3.4 per cent of the income. So there is 
a process that allows for the copayment to kick in immediately. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So then how will it be, if that circumstance 
is there where a family would have a $50,000 income and 
theoretically a $300-a-month recognized drug cost, they could 
apply under this plan to be into a copayment position day one? 
Then what happened to the $1,700 deductible? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Effectively what would happen under 
your example, if for example the drug costs were $300 a month, 
then you would basically take the $1,700 deductible, divide it 
by 12, and get some figure just . . . between 140 and $150, and 
the copayment would kick in for that other $160 starting in the 
first part of the month. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Okay. So what I understand then, the family 
would be able to amortize the deductible over the 12 months 
and then divide that onto a monthly basis so they’d be into 
copayment only for the amount . . . one-twelfth of which that 
their annual amount. 
 
Now the annual amount is an annual amount, and the 
relationship to the six-month system that’s in place now no 
longer . . . or will no longer apply after July 1. Is that clear, for 
the record? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — That’s correct. So starting July 1, 2002, it 
will be a one-year period that you will look at for your 3.4 per 
cent of your income for the calculation of the deductible. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, in terms of applying for this 
program, you use your previous year’s income — line 150 or 
whatever from your Income Tax Act, I believe there is 
something of that nature. 
 
Have you got statistics on how many people will be affected 
based on prior experience? Because people with the $850 
copayment structure every six months that exists now, would 
not necessarily make themselves known or identify themselves 
under this 3.4 per cent. So are there statistics that you’ve 
established in terms of your estimation about how many people 
would be affected by this change? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — For this year, for July 1, 2002, the 
information that would be used would be the information that 
was filed on the 2001 income tax return, which should have 
been filed a couple of weeks ago. So that’s the answer to that. 
 
Now as far as how many people will be affected, we think that 
about 11,000 people based . . . 11,000 families. So 11,000 
calculated income. About 5,000 of these will be higher-income 
senior families and about 6,000 will be higher-income 
non-senior families. 

Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, how much extra money is going 
to be expected from these individuals that they’ll have to 
contribute to their drug costs? What’s estimated in this budget 
for extra contributions from these groups? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — It’s anticipated that there will be about $3 
million more per year contribution from higher-income families 
that are not seniors, and the higher-income seniors will pay 
about 2 million more. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Has there been or 
is there going to be prepared some information to make this 
very clear? 
 
Certainly looking at the Web site and some of these 
informational sources that would be there — in the senior’s 
case they may not be that conversant with the Internet — but 
the whole way the program is described is a little bit obtuse in 
terms of really understanding how this is going to work. 
 
And I would encourage the department to review the way they 
are explaining this program because there is some confusion 
from people on the annual amount. And if it’s a semi-annual, 
it’s calculated annually but applied semi-annually, for example. 
There are those confusions because of the difference between 
the current plan and this proposed plan and the way it’s applied. 
 
So I would encourage the department to review the way they 
explain this on their various sources, because I know from some 
of the calls that I’ve had that it is not completely clear to people 
exactly how this works. 
 
Mr. Minister, I would like to go into some of the other areas as 
time allows today and look at the Saskatchewan Aids to 
Independent Living program, and ask the minister to outline the 
general direction of that program. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you. You’ve given me an 
opportunity to give you a bit of a history about the SAIL 
(Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living) program, and I 
think the public would be interested in this as well. 
 
The SAIL program, Saskatchewan Aids to Independent Living, 
began April 1, 1975, providing eligible residents with prosthetic 
and orthotic devices. August 1 of that same year the benefits 
were expanded to providing equipment loans and equipment 
repairs for all residents of the province. 
 
In April 1 of 1976 SAIL took over the responsibility for the 
paraplegia program, which covers the cost of appliances 
recommended by attending physicians, the cystic fibrosis 
program which provides drugs and special appliances for 
certain beneficiaries, and the chronic end stage renal disease 
program which provides assistance with the cost of necessary 
medications for certain beneficiaries. 
 
In 1979 the ostomy and hemophilia programs were added. In 
’84 the coverage was expanded to include aids and services 
required by blind residents of the province. And in 1987 the 
responsibility for the acquisition, distribution, and repair of 
special needs equipment — that’s wheelchairs and patient lifts 
— was transferred to SAIL from the Saskatchewan Abilities 
Council. Or no, it was transferred from SAIL to the 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1457 

 

Saskatchewan Abilities Council but SAIL continued to fully 
fund the program there. 
 
In August of ’87, SAIL took over the home oxygen program 
from the drug plan, and basically in ’87 also they transferred all 
of the responsibility for equipment required by the blind to 
CNIB, Canadian National Institute for the Blind, but SAIL 
continues to pay CNIB for these services. 
 
And then in 1996 there were some changes to the home oxygen 
program which basically set out medical criteria for benefits 
under the plan. 
 
So basically the program is set up to provide aids and services 
to physically disabled residents of Saskatchewan, and the types 
of programs or the components of the budget include things like 
orthopedic services, special needs equipment, home oxygen, 
respiratory equipment, paraplegia supplies, cystic fibrosis 
supplies, renal disease, ostomy, and aids to the blind. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
these programs . . . there has been a little over a million-dollar 
increase in the money allocated for this general program area, 
and I’m wondering how these services are delivered specifically 
and what are the lead times, the lag times in terms of people 
requesting some of these orthopedic devices and actually being 
treated and receiving these devices. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — The services as I described are provided 
sometimes through other means. So sometimes some of them 
are delivered through the districts, some go through CNIB, 
some are dealt with by the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. 
 
So I can try to answer some of your, you know, more specific 
questions around what you might be interested in. But it’s . . . 
Basically this is where the budget is, and then things are dealt 
with through particular service organizations, and some of it 
includes the districts. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, in some of that service provision, 
are there . . . is there room for private practitioners or is it done 
pretty much through, you know, the institutions that we now 
have, like Wascana Rehab, for example? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Some of the services — for example, 
oxygen — are provided by four or five different private 
companies; some other things are done on a contract basis. For 
example, I think orthotics is done on a contract basis with 
Wascana hospital and with the Saskatchewan Abilities Council. 
 
So I’m not sure if that’s what you’re asking about but it’s . . . 
but there are different ways of doing it. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — The cost of medical oxygen is certainly an 
issue for a lot of people. Can you explain how that program 
works and is there some contracting to try to determine from 
these individual providers of the service to make sure that there 
is a cost-competitiveness and cost-effectiveness? 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Basically you’ve asked: how does this 
program work? So how much does an ordinary person pay for 

oxygen. Well the basic package, an oxygen concentrator and 10 
cylinders a month, is free. Okay basically that’s paid for by the 
program. 
 
The client pays on top of that for some disposable supplies of 
about $10 per month, and it’s estimated that the additional 
electric bill for the pump each month is about $25. 
 
If a client chooses to upgrade, primarily related to mobility so 
you could get a smaller oxygen cylinder and some method of 
carrying it, then the typical charge seems to be about $65 a 
month to do an upgrade that a person might be. The exact extra 
costs that are there aren’t . . . we don’t know that exactly 
because different companies do have competitive prices around 
that kind of an upgrade. So I think that’s maybe what you’re 
asking. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — So the department doesn’t negotiate for the 
best prices on behalf of clients that have to pay some, or in the 
case of the primary example where up to 10 cylinders are 
provided, how are those prices arrived at? Is there a tendering 
process for companies — again, similar to the Formulary, 
submit prices so that there is the most cost-competitive? Or is it 
just out in the market? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There is a contracting process around the 
basic package, the one that SAIL covers fully. And that is a 
process where a maximum price is set, and if a company 
doesn’t think they can operate at that price well then obviously 
they wouldn’t supply the basic package. 
 
But as far as the increased amounts over that, there is no 
negotiations centrally. And that’s done on a total market basis. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Minister, as well there are, like, 
supplementary health benefits and things of that nature that are 
available under the general category of the drug plan and 
extended benefits. Can you describe the qualifications for 
people to qualify for the supplementary health benefits plan. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — For the supplementary health program, 
these people are those who are nominated by Social Services, so 
they’re people on social assistance or they may be wards of the 
province. So it’s just those two categories that are included 
there. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you. And the family health benefit as 
well is an income tested type of program. Can you indicate how 
that program . . . the criteria for that program? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Yes, and in my last answer I forgot one 
other group that’s included under the supplementary health 
beneficiaries and that’s all inmates of provincial correctional 
institutions. 
 
But as far as the family health benefits are concerned, these 
benefits go to families receiving benefits under the Family 
Income Plan, children covered under the child benefit program, 
and families approved under the family health benefit program. 
 
And so I guess what it is, there’s a dividing line of July or 
August 1998 and so there were some that were sort of brought 
in under the program, and then I think as the program changed 



1458 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

with the child benefit program, the criteria changed slightly. But 
practically, the family health benefits relate to people who are 
on the Family Income Plan or they’re covered by the child 
benefit program. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. In the time we 
have left, I’m not sure exactly where it relates, but on all of 
these plans, certainly one of the . . . there’s a number of 
underlying or overriding issues in terms of prescription drugs 
and the drug plan. 
 
There has been a lot of discussion in medical circles 
surrounding the whole issue of do people . . . First of all, are 
they prescribed the appropriate drugs that are appropriate to 
their condition, but that is a medical professionals’ issue and 
there is a great deal of interaction between the drug 
representatives and company representatives with the family 
physicians, etc. 
 
But then there’s also a very hard to control issue about are 
people taking them appropriately and are making sure that this 
is being followed up. Has the department . . . and I’m not sure 
which of these plans or this whole issue surround it and that’s 
why I’ve left it for the end. Is the department doing any work or 
is there any work being done across Canada to make sure that 
really the drugs are being used appropriately, that clients who 
are prescribed drugs make sure that they follow the entire 
regimen? 
 
I know there’s a great deal of concern with antibiotics, that 
people only take some of the antibiotics and you’ve got issues 
of immunity building up and all of these sorts of circumstances 
or the condition gets worse and then you come back and you 
need even more powerful, more expensive drugs. 
 
Has there been any work done on how that we work with the 
system to make sure that people are indeed using the drugs that 
are prescribed to them appropriately? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — There are a number of different areas 
where we are doing some things to try to address that problem 
around people continuing to use drugs appropriately. One of 
them is academic detailing, it’s called. It’s basically providing 
independent advice to physicians and pharmacists around the 
most appropriate use of drugs. 
 
So that’s on the side of making sure that prescriptions are the 
most effective, and it’s being done not by a drug rep but by an 
independent person. And we’re working together, actually, with 
some of the drug companies around that particular program. 
 
Another area where this shows up is in our plan for the primary 
health care team which then includes this ability to continue 
monitoring this. There’s quite an interesting example that I can 
give you which is taking place in Moose Jaw right now as sort 
of an initial project, which I think will explain how working 
together as a team — doctors and pharmacists and patients — 
can make sure that drugs are being used most effectively. 
 
And what it relates to in Moose Jaw is the use of warfarin 
which is a blood thinner. And effectively what they’re doing is 
the doctors are giving a prescription for warfarin, and it’s a kind 
of drug where it needs to be monitored weekly to be most 

effective. 
 
And so what happens is the patients get their prescription from 
their druggist but they go into the hospital in Moose Jaw on a 
weekly basis, quickly have a blood test. The pharmacist at the 
hospital will take a look at the blood tests and adjust the dosage 
for the warfarin for that week based on what they see in the test. 
That information is sent to the pharmacy, to the druggist who’s 
provided the drugs and to the family physician, and the patient 
basically is willing to be part of this program because instead of 
waiting at their doctor’s office, then at the drug store, and 
probably at a lab in that whole situation, all they do is they go 
into the lab on a regular basis for a very quick test and 
everything else is done in behind them. They get the most 
effective level of Warfarin. And all of the professionals have a 
very good record of, in fact this patient is using the appropriate 
drug in the appropriate way. So that’s an example of something 
that is done as well. 
 
But this whole area is one that is also of concern by ministers of 
Health across the country. And we are looking at, well what are 
best practices? So that if somebody is doing something well in 
one part of the country we’re going to make sure that we get 
that information across the country. So this Moose Jaw plan 
around the use of Warfarin will be one that we share with our 
colleagues across the country. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Minister. It certainly seems that, 
you know, we make modest progress on individual little fronts 
and yet while this is happening — and I’m not criticizing the 
fact that indeed progress is being made — the issue is sort of 
expanding exponentially and while we’re making these baby 
steps, I mean, there’s sort of a big boulder rolling down the hill 
at us and I’m afraid we’re not going to get out of the way fast 
enough at the present pace of change. 
 
Minister, I know, anecdotally, I’m sure you’ve had the 
experience as well where you talk to either pharmacists or you 
visit with seniors . . . And I remember in a very personal case 
with my mother at one time when I opened her medicine 
cabinet — she was there — and it looked like a pharmacy shelf. 
 
And I wondered sometimes why that happens, and it seems to 
be sort of one of those gradual things that one thing leads to the 
next, and before you know it there could be very inappropriate 
prescriptions that are occurring, all occurring very innocently. 
 
And I sometimes wonder if the pharmacists could speak to the 
doctors directly and there would be a better interdisciplinary 
communication process that this may eliminate some of these 
things that sort of creep into an individual’s prescription 
regime. 
 
When we look at primary health care teams and moving 
forward, is there work being done between the College of 
Medicine and the college of, or the College of Physicians and 
Surgeons and the college of pharmacists to look at protocols 
for, you know, looking at how the appropriateness of 
prescriptions can be flagged and make sure that these kinds of 
things don’t sort of inadvertently creep into an individual 
situation? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — You’ve identified a concern that’s there 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1459 

 

for many people. What I would point out is that one of the goals 
behind the primary care team model is to have pharmacists and 
doctors and nurses and others at the table to address exactly that 
kind of an issue. 
 
The other thing is that the legislation that we brought forward 
this session around keeping track of the prescription drugs, one 
of the reasons that the pharmacists and the doctors are so keen 
on supporting this particular legislation is that we’ll . . . it will 
give them the kind of information you’re talking about in the 
actual record so that they can then end up having the 
conversations around, well, you know, how can we add that into 
the mix? 
 
Because at the present time there are some situations where 
certain kinds of prescriptions aren’t entered onto the total 
system. So I think that practically it’s an area of concern. It’s 
one that we all have to work at together, but by setting up a 
team management process we think that that will provide the 
opportunity even in . . . in an even better way than exists now to 
address this particular problem. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Chair, I move that the committee 
report progress on Health and move to estimates on the 
Department of Finance. 
 
(16:00) 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Finance 
Vote 18 

 
Subvote (F101) 
 
The Chair: — I recognize the Minister of Finance and invite 
him to introduce his officials. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. With me this 
afternoon to my immediate left is Mr. Ron Styles, the deputy 
minister of Finance. And to his left is Mr. Terry Paton who is 
the Provincial Comptroller. And to my right is Mr. Doug 
Lambert who is the director of Revenue Programs in the 
Revenue division. Seated behind Mr. Paton is Joanne Brockman 
who’s the executive director of Economic and Fiscal Policy. 
Seated behind Mr. Styles is Mr. Bill Van Sickle who’s the 
executive director of the Corporate Services division. 
 
Seated behind me is Mr. Glen Veikle, who is the assistant 
deputy minister of the Treasury Board Branch, and behind Mr. 
Lambert is Mr. Kirk McGregor who is the assistant deputy 
minister of Taxation and Intergovernmental Affairs. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Chair. 
And good afternoon, Mr. Minister, and your all . . . to your 
officials as well. 
 
We have a bit of a shorter hour, so we’ll try to get through a 
number of things. 
 
Mr. Minister, first, for the first time I believe last year, you 
introduced a third quarter report along with the normal 
mid-term report. Do you have plans to introduce quarterly 
reports; that is, the first quarter, the mid-term, and the third 

quarter, for this fiscal year that we’re in? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — The answer to that, Mr. Chair, is yes. We 
plan to publish the financial results of the Government of 
Saskatchewan on a quarterly basis. 
 
I might add that this is part of a long-term plan of the New 
Democratic Party, and now the NDP-Liberal coalition, to 
improve accountability of finances. 
 
When we took office at the beginning of the ’90s, we actually 
had a situation where the Public Accounts Committee did not 
function very effectively. The Treasury Board did not meet. 
And in one year, there was not even a budget. 
 
And what we did to try to repair that, and prevent our province 
from getting into the financial circumstances we had in the 
1980s under the previous government, was to first of all make 
sure that the Public Accounts Committee met on a timely basis 
so that the members of the legislature would have the 
opportunity to meet with the Provincial Auditor and go over the 
Provincial Auditor’s recommendations pertaining to the 
province’s books. 
 
We of course have introduced annual budgets, which every 
government should do. We intend to continue with that. But we 
also decided, Mr. Chair, to introduce mid-year financial 
statements, so that we would go halfway through the year and 
say, this is what we said we would do in the budget, this is how 
we’re doing so far this year. We were the first government to do 
that. 
 
But we’re committed to getting better information out to the 
people of the province. So I have stated that we’re going to 
publish the results, as best we know them, on a quarterly basis. 
That is, every three months we’ll report to the people of the 
province how we are doing. And as I say, that is part of our 
continuing efforts to improve public accountability. 
 
We also saw in the legislature just this afternoon, as part of that 
accountability exercise, the appointment of a new Provincial 
Auditor. And what we did, Mr. Chair, was to involve all of the 
political parties in the legislature. We said that we want . . . We 
passed a law last year to say we want all of the political parties 
represented on the Public Accounts Committee to have to 
unanimously recommend the appointment of a Provincial 
Auditor. 
 
And we obtained the agreement of the opposition. In fact it was 
the member asking the question who made the motion to 
appoint the Provincial Auditor. Because we’re trying to make 
sure that we have proper accountability, quarterly financial 
statements are part of that and we’re going to move forward 
with them. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Chair, thank you, Mr. Minister. 
And, Mr. Minister, besides the people that you already 
mentioned as being supportive of that, I think you can include 
the official opposition as supporting what you have decided to 
put forward as far as improving the accountability. 
 
And yes, I do want to say that I wish to congratulate you on 
putting forward the changes to the auditor’s Act. And I think 



1460 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

that there is a need to address some of the other offices as well 
of the Legislative Assembly and we look forward to developing 
a more accountable, more . . . a much more accountable system 
to the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talk about a quarterly report. I’m wondering 
. . . I’m sure reports come to the department of Treasury much 
more often than quarterly, I believe probably monthly. Do you 
have . . . as the Minister of Finance, does Treasury have an idea 
already — in light of the fact that we’re a month and a half into 
our new fiscal year — do you have the report on any of your 
projections on revenue from the month of April? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, in fact revenue forecasts are 
made available to the Department of Finance on a quarterly 
basis. Which isn’t much of a surprise if you think about it in the 
sense that for the first month of the fiscal year being April, we 
will have vendors who are collecting the sales tax, but they may 
not remit their sales tax that they collect in April until, you 
know, sometime in May. And it really . . . you really can’t get 
much of a read on what your revenue is doing until after the 
first quarter. And indeed that is when we expect projections to 
come to the Department of Finance. 
 
So no, we don’t have anything we can say after one month. It’s 
too short a period of time and most of the taxes are not yet filed 
with the Department of Finance. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And yes, I do 
recognize that many businesses don’t submit until the 11th or 
the 15th of the following month. So I was just curious whether 
or not Treasury indicates to you what their estimate might be 
after a month and a half. 
 
Mr. Minister, you projected revenues for the two taxes that 
were increased this fiscal year in the budget, that being the 
liquor consumption tax and the tobacco tax. In light of 
discussions around the province, Mr. Minister, that I think it 
was reported that a number of drugstores, in fact, could not 
supply the patch and any other product that would assist the 
individual to quit smoking indicates that there must have been a 
tremendous demand out there immediately after the tobacco tax 
increase. 
 
And while we’re already at the exact, the 15th day of May, is 
there any concern from Treasury Board or officials in Finance 
that your projection for revenue that would be obtained from 
the increase in the tobacco tax indeed is going to be met? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No, we’re not concerned about our forecast 
being met, Mr. Chair, because when we estimated our tobacco 
tax revenue for this upcoming year, we built in a 20 per cent 
reduction in tobacco consumption. In other words, we feel 20 
per cent of the people will quit smoking or some will smoke 
less than they did before. And that’s quite a considerable drop 
in consumption, so we think we’ll get the revenue we projected. 
 
But I want to add, so there’s no misunderstanding, if everyone 
in this province stopped smoking, if everyone stopped smoking 
and we got no tobacco tax, we would be happy. Because in the 
long run we would have a healthier population, and we would 
cope with that drop in revenue because in the future our health 
costs would go down. Because the fact is whether — not the 

opposition but some will debate this — the fact is that tobacco 
consumption causes horrendous health problems. And there are 
many who deny that but it’s a fact. And we have people in our 
acute care facilities, hospitals, nursing homes who are suffering 
because they used tobacco. 
 
And so I’m just saying we think we’ll get the tobacco tax that 
we estimated, but if we did not get it, to me it would not be a 
concern. It would be a good thing if that meant that people were 
stopping smoking. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister. And, 
Mr. Minister, I’m not in any way suggesting that we want the 
tobacco tax to increase. I’m just wondering whether or not your 
projections for revenue are accurate. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, in light of occurrences that have taken place 
since the budget was presented, there have been a number of 
things regarding the . . . for instance the interest rates have 
started to change, the dollar has started to change, the value of a 
barrel of oil has started to change. One of the other changes 
though that occurred right here in this Assembly was that the 
government through the Premier, decided to eliminate the 
increase in the long-term care fees. And as a result there will be 
a loss of revenue. 
 
Will the budget have to be reassessed? And will you be making 
that reassessment at your first opportunity, which I understand 
will be the first quarter report that will take place? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, we will be required to submit a new 
estimate for the Department of Health to add the 
seven-point-some million dollar increased expenditure that we 
would now estimate for Health because we estimate they’ll 
spend more money. 
 
And so we will have a new estimate for the Department of 
Health I believe, and also some kind of motion pertaining to the 
Department of Highways, because in the event that we don’t 
recover that money from somewhere else, we may defer some 
winter work and recover the money that way. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, it’s interesting that . . . I believe 
your projection for your budget document indicated that a barrel 
of oil was to be priced around the $20 mark and I think today 
we’re at somewhere in that 27 to $28 per barrel. 
 
If these numbers continue through the year and the fiscal year 
that we’re in is much more stable than last year, which is of 
course I’m referring to September 11, will you be looking at 
balancing your budget or intending to provide for that $7 
million deficiency by using revenues rather than cutting a 
specific department? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, if we obtain more revenue, 
from oil and gas for example, then we might — I think we 
would — take the $7 million out of that increased revenue and 
use that to pay for the change with respect to long-term care 
fees rather than deferring some winter highways work. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, in 
your projections also — and you’ve made some comments 
about this — and I’m referring to page 25 of your budget 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1461 

 

document that you put together, you indicate that the change for 
retail trade in Saskatchewan, the percentage change for 2001 
was 2.9; and for next year, 2003, it’s going to be 3.3; and this 
year only 1.6. 
 
Could you indicate to the people of Saskatchewan why your 
government feels that we will have such a tremendous drop for 
retail sales in Saskatchewan for this fiscal year and then return 
to more, I guess, normal numbers for next year? 
 
(16:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well the first observation I would make, 
Mr. Chair, is that when the member refers to a decline in retail 
trade, that’s not quite correct because the 1.6 per cent figure is a 
projection that says retail trade will increase by 1.6 per cent this 
year over last year, and last year retail trade increased by 2.9 per 
cent. So it would be an increase on top of an increase, if you 
follow my reasoning, thereby over two years being an increase 
of some 4.5 per cent. And I just point that out to say nobody’s 
talking about any decrease in retail trade. 
 
I think what the member means to say is that the budget 
projects smaller growth than occurred last year. But I think the 
reason that would be projected . . . and hopefully by the way, 
the growth will be higher than that; that’s what we all hope. 
 
And I’ve noticed that most of the private sector forecasters like 
the Bank of Montreal and others feel that the rate of economic 
growth for Saskatchewan will be somewhat higher than we 
projected in the budget. But we’re being cautious which I think 
is a good thing because we saw what happened last year. 
 
But to answer the question specifically, what may affect the 
growth of retail trade this year in Saskatchewan will be that 
farm income in 2002 will relate to the 2001 crop year. And we 
all know that the 2001 crop year was a very bad year 
unfortunately, because of a very, very severe drought. 
 
Income to farmers will be down, thereby meaning that 
purchases by farmers will be down — less than last year 
because last year they’re going on the 2000 crop for their 
income. And I think that will be a bit of a drag on retail trade 
and that’s why we project growth, albeit at a slower rate of 
growth than the previous year or in 2003 when we think we will 
continue along the road to recovery. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Minister, and Mr. 
Chair, for clarifying that indeed we’re talking about a smaller 
growth — not necessarily a decline but significantly down from 
the previous increase. 
 
Mr. Minister, I want to clarify one sale that was made in the 
previous year of a Crown asset, and how it affects debt for this 
current fiscal year. Because your documents indicate that our 
debt has risen, or will rise from 11.1 billion to 11.4. 
 
I refer to an article from the Leader-Post and The StarPhoenix 
last fall that dealt with the sale of Cameco shares. And I 
understand — and you could clarify — that indeed this was the 
remaining portion of the Cameco shares. In other words, the 
government no longer owns any Cameco shares. 
 

Could you indicate for clarification if you would, how this 
affected the General Revenue Fund debt and how it affected the 
CIC debt that, you know, was related to the entire sale of 
Cameco shares. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, Mr. Chair, I’d be happy to provide 
that information as I have before. As I said, when the remaining 
Cameco shares were sold — and yes we did sell all of our 
remaining Cameco shares — we would apply as much as we 
could toward debt. It was applied to General Revenue Fund 
debt. 
 
During the last fiscal year we took $120 million and applied 
that toward General Revenue Fund debt. And during this 
current fiscal year, in April I believe, we applied another $61 
million of those proceeds for a total of $181 million which was 
the net proceeds from the sale of those shares toward a 
paydown of the General Revenue Fund debt. 
 
And I’m very happy to say that because as usual, Mr. Chair, 
when we sold the Cameco shares, there were some in the media 
and some in the opposition that sort of ran around the province 
saying, oh, they’re going to spend the money on operations that 
should go to debt. Well I said, it will go to debt, and as we said 
it would, it has gone to debt. And I know that the opposition 
will be very happy that we made that sale at a reasonable price 
and applied that toward debt as part of our continuing effort to 
reduce the debt of our province which certainly we are doing. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One other question 
regarding the Cameco shares. As I indicated, I believe this was 
the second sale, significant sale, of Cameco shares and I think 
the article indicates that the share price at the time of the sale 
was around $42. 
 
Could you indicate what . . . if we compare that $42 per share 
price of last fall versus what was the share price at the initial 
sale of the largest amount of Cameco shares. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. I believe that actually this was the 
third sale of Cameco shares — third and final since we don’t 
have any more. And the second sale, I believe the share price 
was $73 approximately when we sold those in 1996 or 1997. 
 
And up until that time we had 15 million shares. We sold 10 
million shares at about $73 and then we held on to 5 million 
shares. The share price went down to 20-some dollars in the 
interim. Then it came up to 40-some and we sold at 42 or 43 of 
those 5 million shares. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, you 
indicated that you have applied about $180 million in total — 
the sum of 120 and 60. I believe the paper reports that the net 
profits would have been in excess of 200 million. Was the 
remaining portion allocated against CIC debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes, the remainder would, as we have done 
with other asset sales, be left with CIC as representing their 
costs of those assets, you know, in the beginning. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. And you know, I 
don’t know what that balance was but if you would look at page 
17 of the schedule of debt in the budget document, there’s an 



1462 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

estimation there that the CIC debt will drop from 175 million to 
40 million — a drop of about 135 million. 
 
And as I understood you in questioning of your department 
back, I think, at during the interim supply, you’d indicated that 
it was going to be applied to CIC for this fiscal year, and that it 
wasn’t applied prior to March 31. Yet the difference between 
220 million — if that number is correct — of the net profit of 
Cameco versus the 180 that you’re applying to the General 
Revenue Fund is only about 40 million. Is that 40 million what 
has been applied to the 175 million debt? And then what is the 
balance . . . why will the debt of CIC drop from 175 million to 
40 million? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I think the member is really 
talking about apples and oranges. I mean the money is left in 
CIC. They will make their own decisions as to where money 
will come from to pay debt. They have sinking funds so they 
will access some of their sinking funds to pay off some of their 
debt. The reduction in their debt will not necessarily be directly 
related to the sale of the Cameco shares, nor would the 
reduction of the debt necessarily be the same mount. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Could you clarify, Mr. Minister, through the 
Chair, whether or not all of the balance of profit in excess of the 
180 million was applied to debt? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, it is cash retained by the Crown 
Investments Corporation for Crown Investments Corporation 
purposes. It may be used to pay down debt. It may be used for 
reinvestment. It may be used for any number of purposes. 
 
They will also have a debt reduction plan, as they do an 
investment plan. They will make their decisions as to what to 
do with cash that is in CIC. 
 
We at the Department of Finance do not say to them, give us 
our money that we will apply to our debt, and by the way, when 
you recoup your money, this is what you shall do with it. That 
is a decision that they will make on a global basis, looking at 
the funds that are available to them. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair. Mr. 
Minister, if I am to look at the schedule of debt that you have 
within your budget document, you’ve indicated that the debt of 
the province of Saskatchewan — both General Revenue Fund 
debt and Crown Corporation debt — at the end of this fiscal 
year will be at $11.4 billion from last year’s fiscal year end of 
11 . . . just about 11.2, 11.188. 
 
Mr. Minister, you’ve indicated that Cameco shares have been 
applied to the debt and that the profit that was generated from 
the sale of those shares, probably in excess of $200 million, has 
been applied either through retained earnings or directly 
through debt. In other words, it is still a value that is considered 
as an asset within that framework. 
 
If Cameco . . . My question, Mr. Minister, is this: if Cameco 
shares were not sold for the amount of $220 million profit, 
more or less, would the debt of the province of Saskatchewan at 
the conclusion of this fiscal year, would it be as high as $11.6 
billion? 
 

Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, as we 
look at the growing debt of the province, we also recognize that 
from not only the mid-year report but the third quarter report of 
last year, that whenever monies are . . . whenever, I guess, a 
debit to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund occurs that the debt of the 
province of Saskatchewan goes up. 
 
Is that a fair assessment of that Fiscal Stabilization Fund? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Yes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — We’re moving right along, Mr. Minister. 
Thank you. Mr. Minister, if the debt of the province increases 
every time the line of credit or so-called Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund is accessed, does that mean then that there is no money on 
deposit anywhere in a bank in the province of Saskatchewan or 
outside of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — No. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Could you explain then, Mr. Minister, where 
the initial Fiscal Stabilization Fund credit of $775 million, 
could you indicate where that fund was on deposit for the 
people of the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, this is where we’re not 
going to continue to move along quite as quickly as the member 
opposite said we were; because I want to point out to the people 
of the province that what this opposition is trying to do is to say 
that somehow the current Government of Saskatchewan is, you 
know, building up all this debt and mismanaging the finances of 
the province. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Chair, how ridiculous that statement is 
in the face of the evidence. And what do I mean by that? 
 
Well, I mean this: notwithstanding the nonsense that is peddled 
by the members opposite about there being no money in the 
Fiscal Stabilization Fund, which is a cash management tool that 
every business and government uses, Mr. Chair, 
notwithstanding that kind of nonsense that is peddled all over 
the province by the opposition, Moody’s Investment Services, 
which is one of the world’s most respected financial analyst 
houses in the world based in New York, examined the budget of 
the province after the budget was delivered, the budget that that 
member likes to get up and say is some kind of fudge-it budget 
— you can’t fool Moody’s financial services, Mr. Chair — and 
what did they say after examining the budget and examining the 
level of the debt of the province, Mr. Chair? 
 
They said we’re raising the credit rating of the province from 
A3 . . . No, from A1 to Aa3. We went from A into the double 
A’s. 
 
So if we’re doing such a bad job managing debt and if the 
budget was such a fudge-it budget, well I guess what the 
members opposite want to say to the people of the province is 
somehow we fooled Moody’s financial services but we didn’t 
fool them, Mr. Chair. 
 
And it’s ridiculous. It’s absolutely ridiculous that the opposition 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1463 

 

stands in this legislature and says we’re doing something wrong 
on the debt side when the credit rating agencies are raising the 
credit rating of the province looking at our debt. 
 
(16:30) 
 
But not only that, not only that, Mr. Chair, we have the fact that 
the debt of the province — and I want to make this point very 
clearly — the debt of the province, the tax-supported debt, has 
gone from close to 50 per cent about five or six years ago to 25 
per cent today, Mr. Chair. Now the member over there yells, it’s 
gone to 90, which is an indication of the lengths that the people 
over there will go to mislead the people of the province. 
 
The other day on CJME-Radio in Regina, Paul Martin, who is a 
well-known business commentator in Saskatchewan, had this to 
say. He said Investment Dealers Association — these are the 
investment dealers, Mr. Chair, not the NDP, not the Federation 
of Labour, the investment dealers — they say they’re “happy 
with the province’s budget” and there’s a “good sign (they’re) 
paying down the debt.” 
 
And this is what Paul Martin concludes his comments with. He 
says: 
 

Today the debt’s been cut to 25% (25 per cent of GDP, not 
50 per cent) and that’s one of the best performances of any 
province in the entire country. 

 
So now we have . . . as that member gets up and tries to spread 
the misinformation that somehow we are building up some 
unsustainable debt, we have the credit rating agencies saying 
they’re wrong. We have the investment dealers from all across 
the country saying they’re wrong. 
 
And you know, speaking of the use of the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund, here we have Mr. Ian Russell who’s the vice-president of 
the Investment Dealers Association of Canada — I believe he’s 
an economist — and he’s on CJME yesterday. And it says . . . 
This is the report, Mr. Chair. It says: 
 

The provincial government has been criticized for its 
accounting practices in this year’s budget (criticized by 
them, Mr. Chair) but a national securities organization has 
high praise for Saskatchewan’s fiscal plan. Finance 
Minister Eric Cline established a special crown corporation 
to fund upgrades to educational facilities, the opposition 
thought this violated the balanced budget act. 

 
And then it says, Mr. Chair: 
 

The Investment Dealers Association of Canada doesn’t 
agree (with the opposition). Ian Russell argues public 
sector financing is complicated (something the opposition 
tries to take advantage of by trying to confuse the people, 
but the people are not as dumb as they think) . . . 

 
And it goes on to say: 
 

. . . leading to some confusion about just what the 
government’s doing. 

 
But then it says, quote: 

“You can look at these fiscal funds as really a cushion. It 
isn’t always cash that’s put into the fund, which you then 
draw on when you (make) a deficit. It may be borrowings 
that you would otherwise actually make that you don’t 
make.” 
 

And that of course is what we do. 
 

“So, you account for as a cushion and credit rating agencies 
look at it and they see it as being responsible (Mr. Chair).” 

 
So what we have is this member — and he’ll get up and ask 
another question trying to mislead the public — but what we 
have, Mr. Chair, is the credit rating agencies saying no, the 
Government of Saskatchewan is doing a good job managing the 
finances and handling the debt. 
 
We have the investment dealers saying no, the Government of 
Saskatchewan is doing the right thing, it’s acting responsibly. 
But we will have that member and the opposition, 
notwithstanding the fact that when they were in government 
they led the province to the verge of bankruptcy, and everybody 
knows, Mr. Chair, everyone in the province knows that we have 
been paying down their debt. 
 
And for that member in the face of what the credit rating 
agencies have said about the budget and in the face of what the 
investment dealers say, to get up and to continually attack the 
government as if we’re doing something wrong, Mr. Chair, is 
just a phony as a $3 bill. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Well, Mr. Minister, I guess you’re right, 
things are going to slow down a little bit. Because number one, 
at no time would I consider the public of Saskatchewan to be 
dumb as you have indicated that you consider them to be. And I 
would suggest that maybe you should apologize to the people of 
Saskatchewan for suggesting that the opposition considers them 
to be dumb. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Minister, I have not been in government, but I do 
look forward to being in government and an opportunity to 
replace you and your government opposite. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Chair, the reason why I am asking the 
questions about the so-called Fiscal Stabilization Fund is for 
clarification. And I listen to your short answer when I asked 
you whether or not there was money on deposit and your 
answer was no. 
 
And we understand that because you have talked about the fact 
and, in fact, members of the Finance department and treasury in 
Public Accounts have indicated that the credit or the retained 
earnings from SLGA (Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming 
Authority) that were, you know, included in the government’s 
entire financial picture were applied against debt a number of 
years ago. 
 
And we applaud that, Mr. Minister, in fact, that you have taken 
the credit for applying that. And we had a member in our Public 
Accounts Committee, I believe it was one of your members, 
who asked the question about how much money that in fact 



1464 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

would save in reduced interest rate. Okay. So we understand 
that. And I’m not suggesting that you’re trying to mislead the 
people of Saskatchewan or that I’m trying to mislead the people 
of Saskatchewan by suggesting that there is a fund because we 
know that there is no fund. 
 
The question, Mr. Minister, though . . . And you referred to a 
bond rating company in this province and I want to refer to also 
an article from the bond rating company Dominion Bond Rating 
Service, DBRS. The article is February 19. And we need 
clarification of this, Mr. Minister, because it’s in direct contrast 
what you just said. And the article says this: 
 

The DBRS assistant vice-president, Genevieve Lavallee, 
said there is no way to categorize Saskatchewan’s 
budgetary situation this year other than a deficit. 

 
And by this year of course she’s referring to the last fiscal year. 
She says, and I quote: 
 

That (meaning the rate stabilization fund) is not a 
consideration with us. What we are looking at is revenue 
and expenditures. Those are just a buffer. 

 
Mr. Minister, we have a bond rating company who is saying 
there is no money on deposit. It’s not like the Heritage Fund in 
Alberta where there is X millions of dollars, or billions in fact, 
sitting in a fund that draws interest that the government uses the 
interest to lower the costs of actual government expenditures, or 
for that matter to increase government expenditures in health 
and education and the like. 
 
This bond rating company is saying there is no fund, there is no 
asset. We look at revenue and expenditures, and the province of 
Saskatchewan operated last year in a deficit situation and they 
are going to operate this year in a deficit situation because, as 
you indicated just a short while ago, every time that you 
indicate that the Fiscal Stabilization Fund line of credit is going 
to be tapped into, the debt of this province goes up. 
 
Is that not accurate, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Mr. Chair, I want to say to the member, as 
I’ve said several times in this House and outside of this House, 
the member doesn’t have to go to a statement in February by 
the Dominion Bond Rating Service that says we were in deficit 
for last year because the Dominion Bond Rating Service made 
that statement last summer. They made that statement I believe 
in August of 2001. I’ve told the member that before. 
 
The media and the members opposite acted like there was some 
kind of new information that came out in February but I’ll tell 
the member something else. Not only did the Dominion Bond 
Rating Service — and I don’t have any argument with them — 
say that we were in deficit last year on a summary financial 
basis, they said we were in deficit, I think, I don’t have the 
years in front of me but I believe it’s ’95-96 and ’97-98. Those 
two years, where on a General Revenue Fund basis we had a 
surplus but they said we were in deficit another two years in the 
late ’90s. Opposition has never raised that. I’m not sure if they 
actually read what the bond rating agencies say when they come 
out, but this is not new information. 
 

And in answer to the member’s question, I will say what I said 
in fact in the budget speech — if the member was listening, and 
I think he was — I said this, I said: on a cash basis, or a 
summary financial statement basis, there is no question that for 
the last fiscal year, 2000-2001, the province of Saskatchewan 
was in a deficit situation. 
 
You know, the member can get up and ask me if I’ll admit that. 
Well I don’t need to admit it; I’ve stated it myself several times. 
And the Public Accounts, when they are published this summer, 
will show that the province of Saskatchewan, on a summary 
financial basis, will be in a deficit, which will probably be a 
fairly substantial deficit. 
 
But that is nothing new for this last fiscal year. That is 
something that has occurred repeatedly in the same way that on 
a summary financial basis, the year prior, where we posted a 
very small surplus on the General Revenue Fund, I think we 
would have had a surplus of some hundreds of millions of 
dollars looking at it on a cash basis. 
 
There is no hidden agenda here; there is no exposé that the 
opposition has; there is no story. These are numbers that are 
well-known to anybody that takes the time to look at the 
finances of the province. 
 
And in answer to the member’s question, how do the bond 
rating . . . credit rating agencies look at these things? That’s my 
very point, is what the member is saying. They look at 
everything, Mr. Chair. There is nothing that the credit rating 
agencies don’t know about the finances of the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We have, according to the Provincial Auditor, one of the finest 
sets of books, in terms of the summary financial statements, in 
the country, Mr. Chair. That’s on record from the Provincial 
Auditor — if the members opposite want to take the trouble to 
read the reports from the Provincial Auditor, and not just the 
negative parts, but the positive parts as well. 
 
And my point is this, Mr. Chair: that you cannot have, if you 
are going to be a credible opposition, you cannot continually 
tell the people of Saskatchewan that we are all going to hell in a 
handbasket because we’re mishandling the finances, on the one 
hand, and have 10 credit rating upgrades by the people that look 
at it and verification by the investment dealers that we’re 
handling the finances properly, on the other hand, and be 
credible. 
 
Because eventually, Mr. Chair, the people are . . . and when I 
. . . I did not say that the people were dumb, I said that the 
people are too smart to be tricked by the opposition in this way. 
Because eventually the people will say to themselves this; 
they’ll say well, the Minister of Finance says that there’re 
properly using the Fiscal Stabilization Fund and they’ve got 
proper cash management. The investment dealers say that the 
government is handling the funds properly. The credit rating 
agencies say that the government is handling the funds 
properly. 
 
But the Finance critic from the Saskatchewan Party — the 
illegitimate offspring of the Progressive Conservatives of Grant 
Devine — that Finance critic says no, no, they’re not handling 



May 15, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1465 

 

the finances properly. And I simply say, Mr. Chair, that the 
member can get up — the member can get up and he can 
continue to malign the handling of the finances. 
 
But I say this, when the people are asked who do you believe, 
the credit rating agencies, the investment dealers all across the 
country, or do you believe the Finance critic from the 
Saskatchewan Party? I will put my money — betting — that the 
people are going to believe the experts and not this endless line 
of misinformation that suggests that somehow this government 
is mishandling the finances. Because it’s not true, Mr. Chair. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. Mr. Minister, I am not 
suggesting that you are mishandling the finances of this 
province. I’m asking you, I’m asking you to come clean with 
the people of Saskatchewan to tell them the real picture. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, you make reference to the report of the 
Provincial Auditor and that we should read it. I have a copy in 
my hands and I make reference to that often when I ask you the 
questions because I am relying on the report produced by the 
auditor. I’m also relying on the report produced by bond rating 
companies. These are not my numbers, Mr. Minister. 
 
And when I look at last fall’s report, dated 2001 of the 
Provincial Auditor, and I want to make reference to just the 4 
years — not the 15 years that . . . or the 10 years that the auditor 
has in this document. — when I look at the complete financial 
picture . . . And we’re going to get away from what you referred 
to as the cash, okay, because you have a difference of opinion, I 
have a difference of opinion, and maybe even the auditor and 
bond rating companies have differences of opinion on what the 
cash position is of this province. 
 
But let’s look at something that has been referred to often by 
the Provincial Auditor, by others, and that is called summary 
financial statements. And you, Mr. Minister, have referred to 
them often. 
 
(16:45) 
 
In 1998, on the full summary financial statement, the profit for 
the province of Saskatchewan was $368 million. That’s 
including all Crowns, as you would understand. And for the 
benefit of people watching, that’s the entire financial 
involvement of the Government of Saskatchewan. 
 
In 1999 the profit was 128 million, in 2000 it was 418 million, 
and in 2001 it was 506 million. Mr. Minister, as I read this 
document — and I’ve looked through it — nowhere did I find 
on deposit or some reference to the Fiscal Stabilization Fund 
other than that it is a bookkeeping entry. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, I completely agree with you that to provide 
the people of Saskatchewan with an accurate picture — 
because, Mr. Speaker, yes they are smart and they are seeing 
through the mirage of numbers that you’re putting forth — they 
need to see that entire financial picture. 
 
They need to see what Crown corporations are planning for this 
fiscal year. Because, Mr. Minister, your budget is predicated on 
the fact that there indeed will be $300 million transfer of 
dividend money from CIC this year and you’ve made, in your 

budget estimates, you’ve made that same projection for next 
year — a booming year for CIC. 
 
We don’t know whether or not that actual profit will be 
attained, and in fact in the last month we’ve seen some reports 
from the various Crown corporations that profits may not be as 
high as initially projected a year ago. So there is some concern. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at the full picture of the province, 
the recommendation of the auditor that there would be, there 
would be absolutely no discussion about the Fiscal Stabilization 
Fund if in fact we were following summary financial statements 
here in this Legislative Assembly as seven other provinces 
currently do . . . if that was followed by this provincial 
government, we would not be having this discussion about 
whether a Fiscal Stabilization Fund exists on paper, whether it 
exists in a bank account, because we would have all of the fiscal 
position of the province and all of the finances of the province 
before us. 
 
Now what we would also have is we would have the plans of 
Crown corporations before us — we would, as legislators. As 
the public of Saskatchewan, they would be able to put forward 
their idea on what the revenue would be and what the 
expenditure would be. And I know that, Mr. Minister, a number 
of people have raised concerns of course about Crown 
corporations and whether or not they should put forward their 
business plans. 
 
The auditor is suggesting no, that’s not required. What we’re 
looking at is the bottom line of revenue and the bottom line of 
expenditures. So that then, Mr. Minister, we would have an idea 
whether or not we would attain those numbers. 
 
Mr. Minister, when we look at what this current fiscal year that 
just ended on March 31 . . . the auditor’s office is busy 
preparing the summary financial statements. Do you have any 
idea, based on information that has been provided to you by 
your departments — by . . . of treasury, by the Crown 
corporations — what the financial summaries . . . the summary 
financial statements will say when the auditor puts them 
together? Do you have a rough idea of what the total profit of 
the province of Saskatchewan will be for the year just ended — 
the fiscal year just ended, March 31, 2002? 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Well, Mr. Chair, the numbers in the 
summary financial statement will become available when those 
statements are published and when they are audited by the 
Provincial Auditor. That’s when the numbers will become 
available. 
 
But I want to say to the people of the province and to the 
member that the reason . . . the member has raised a lot of 
subjects in his question, but the reason we have summary 
financial statements — which the member says he endorses 
strongly and I accept that — is because they were introduced by 
this government. They were introduced by this government in 
approximately 1992. Up until that time, we didn’t even have 
summary financial statements. 
 
And as I said in my first response to the member, Mr. Chair, it 
should be well understood that what this government has done, 
contrary to other governments and other parties, is to ensure 



1466 Saskatchewan Hansard May 15, 2002 

 

that we have annual budgets; to ensure that we have summary 
financial statements audited by the Provincial Auditor and 
published each year on a timely basis, which was not done 
before; to ensure that we have a Public Accounts Committee 
which includes members from the opposition — in fact it’s 
chaired by the member from the opposition — that meets . . . 
that we put all the information in front of the Public Accounts 
Committee. 
 
Not only that, we introduced mid-year financial statements so 
that six months into the year we inform the people in the 
province, including the opposition, what the state of the 
finances is. And now we’re going to quarterly financial 
statements so that we put out more information about the 
finances of the province than any previous government in the 
history of Saskatchewan, Mr. Chair. That’s our record. And 
that’s what we’re going to continue to do. 
 
And I want to say to the member that, you know, the member 
likes to get up and suggest otherwise that somehow we’re . . . 
I’m glad, by the way, to hear the member has admitted in the 
House this afternoon, he said, look, I’m not saying that you’re 
trying to mislead the people about the numbers. I’m glad that 
we got that admission from the member, Mr. Chair. I think he’s 
starting to acknowledge that in fact this government has done a 
pretty good job about being open and accountable. 
 
But what I wanted to say is, embedded in the question are so 
many inaccuracies that, you know, one could go on all day 
trying to answer some of them. 
 
But I want to answer this one. As I’ve said to the member 
before, the member gets up and he says, well how are we going 
to get a $300 million dividend out of the Crown Investments 
Corporation; maybe their profits won’t be so high this year. 
And I’ve tried to say to the member, not just this year but going 
back about a year and a half, that we left money in the Crown 
Investments Corporation two years ago. 
 
We were supposed to take $150 million out as a dividend for 
the year 2000, I believe, and we didn’t take that dividend. We 
said, we’re going to leave that there for a time when we need 
that money. Now we need that money, so we’re taking it out. 
We’re doing exactly what we said we would do. 
 
And I want to just point out, because it gives the people an idea 
of really how unreliable a lot of what the opposition says is, that 
when we left the money in there, Mr. Chair, what did they do? 
They stood up in the legislature and they criticized us for saving 
that money, for leaving that money in there. They said, you 
should be taking that money out. 
 
I said, well no, we should save it for when we need it. That’s 
what we did. Now we’re drawing $100 million out in addition 
to the regular dividend. So now we’re using the money when 
the people of the province need it, and they’re criticizing us for 
that too. 
 
And the same is true of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund, Mr. Chair. 
When we set up that fund, that member and his colleagues were 
saying we should be spending all of that money now. I have the 
press releases where the member opposite, the one that asked 
the question, said we should have a special session of the 

legislature. I believe it was in December of 2000. 
 
A special session of the legislature to do what? To spend this 
huge surplus that they said existed. But we didn’t. We said no, 
we’re going to use it at another time. 
 
Now at that time they said, there’s too much money sitting 
there. Now they say, there’s no money sitting there. Well, Mr. 
Chair, both of those statements can’t be correct, because they’re 
diametrically opposed to one another. 
 
And my point is simply, when you have the credit rating 
agencies saying we’re doing the right thing in terms of our cash 
management, when you have the investment dealers association 
saying we’re doing the right thing, why don’t we try to be more 
positive, less political? And instead of arguing about problems 
that don’t exist, why don’t we talk about how we can build the 
province, instead of trying to drag everybody down by making 
some kind of suggestion that somehow the finances aren’t being 
properly handled? 
 
Mr. Chair, they are being properly handled, and that’s been 
verified by the third parties that have looked at it. And I don’t 
know why the member endlessly wants to continue on this 
ridiculous line of questioning. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:58. 
 


