















































Hansard: December 09, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 2819 
 December 9, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

Moment of Silence in Honour of Rudi Peters 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, at this time I 
would ask that all members would join me in observing a 
moment of silence in remembrance of our colleague, Mr. Rudi 
Peters, the late member for the constituency of Battleford-Cut 
Knife. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you very much. Please be seated. 
 
There will be a formal condolence motion that will be moved 
later today. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF NEW MEMBER OF THE 
LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY 

 
The Speaker: — I hereby inform the Assembly that the Clerk 
of the Legislative Assembly has received from the Chief 
Electoral Officer a certificate of the election and return of Jason 
Dearborn as member for the constituency of Kindersley. I 
hereby table the writ of . . . 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — I have the honour to present to you Mr. 
Jason Dearborn from the constituency of Kindersley, who has 
taken the oath and signed the roll and now claims his right to a 
seat. 
 
The Speaker: — Mr. Dearborn, as you take your rightful place 
in this Legislative Assembly, I’m sure that your time here will 
be one that serves as a record of honour to yourself and to your 
constituents. Welcome to the Legislative Assembly. Let the 
hon. member for the constituency of Kindersley take his seat. 
Congratulations. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the negative effects that the signing of the Kyoto accord 
will have on the province of Saskatchewan. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by residents of Carrot River, Arborfield, 

Prairie River, and Aylsham. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present 
some more petitions dealing with the Kyoto accord. And I read 
the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign the Kyoto accord in its current 
form. 

 
And this is signed by people from all over the good province. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too stand 
today to present a petition to resist signing on to the Kyoto 
accord in its current form. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Minton and Gladmar 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise today to 
present a petition from people regarding the Kyoto accord. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take immediate action to protect our 
province’s economy and to work to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 

The people that have signed this petition are from Wadena and 
Rose Valley. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens concerned about the Kyoto accord. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to immediately take all necessary action to 
protect our province’s economy and work to halt the 
federal government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord 
in its current form. 
 

Signatures on this petition this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, are from 
the communities of Naicam and Watson. And I’m proud to 



2820 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Langenburg, Churchbridge, Stockholm, and 
Bredenbury. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise as well to 
present a petition signed by citizens concerned with the 
negative impact of the Kyoto accord. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Rouleau, Marquis, Moose Jaw, and Pense. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the crop 
insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions which were 
imposed on the citizens of Saskatchewan and especially of 
Cypress Hills this year continue to cause concern. And I would 
read the prayer as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, these petitions are signed by the citizens and 
residents of Robsart, Eastend, Consul, Piapot, and Kisbey, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition from citizens in the Estevan area who 
are gravely concerned about the effects of the Kyoto accord in 
its present form. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s attempt to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 

And this petition is signed by folks from Estevan. Thank you. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big Muddy who are 
very concerned about the devastating effects Kyoto will have on 
Weyburn constituency. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Minton, Gladmar, and 
Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure to rise on 
behalf of residents of the city of Swift Current who are very 
concerned about the impact of the Kyoto Protocol on the 
economy of our . . . of Swift Current and the Southwest. And 
the prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
All of the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from the great city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise with a petition from citizens concerned about the 
Kyoto accord, from my constituency. And the prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed in total by the good 
citizens of Coronach. 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2821 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I also have a petition on the Kyoto accord. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Davidson, Saskatoon, and 
Girvin. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens of Redberry Lake constituency concerned about 
the signing of the Kyoto accord. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
provincial economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to Kyoto accord in its 
current form. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Signed by the citizens of Leask, Marcelin, Blaine Lake, and 
Borden. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today 
I have a petition of citizens concerned about the assessment 
done this past summer by Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary steps to have Saskatchewan Crop Insurance 
reassess the grasshopper spray penalty assessed to farmers 
in 2002. And further that the government review the 
definition of viable farming practices as outlined in present 
crop insurance policy. 
 

And the petitions, Mr. Speaker, are from the community of 
Hanley. 

 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise to 
present a petition today on behalf of citizens who are very 
concerned that this government has no ability to develop a 
mechanism to change the regional health care boundaries. The 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to ensure the best possible health care 

coverage for the communities of Govan, Duval, Strasbourg, 
and Bulyea by placing those communities in the Regina 
regional health authority as opposed to the Saskatoon 
Regional Health Authority. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Bulyea and Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth petitions signed by citizens 
from my constituency that are concerned with the signing of the 
Kyoto accord. And the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to take the necessary actions to protect our 
province’s economy by working to halt the federal 
government’s intent to sign on to the Kyoto accord in the 
current form. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Spiritwood and Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Clerk: — I hereby present the following petition for a private 
Bill by Ms. Jones, and it’s for the Saskatchewan Wheat Pool in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed, and pursuant to rule 12(7) they are hereby 
read and received as addendums to sessional paper nos. 11, 15, 
18, 22, 23, 31, 147, 168, and no. 174. 
 
(13:45) 
 

PRESENTING REPORTS BY STANDING, 
SELECT AND SPECIAL COMMITTEES 

 
Standing Committee on Crown Corporations 

 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I present the 
third report of the Standing Committee on Crown Corporations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, prior to moving a motion of concurrence, I 
should like to make a few — I can assure the members — very 
brief remarks. 
 
We reviewed as a committee the annual reports and financial 
statements of various Crown corporations that are contained in 
the report. We also considered relevant chapters contained in 
reports of the Provincial Auditor. The committee also adopted a 
number of resolutions that are contained in the report. 
 
I might say we were assisted in our work by committee Clerk 
Viktor Kaczkowski, Hansard, the Provincial Auditor and his 
staff, appointed auditors from various private firms, and also by 



2822 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

the attendance of witnesses from the Crown corporations, and 
we acknowledge and thank all of the foregoing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Finally but not least I want to thank all of the members of the 
committee for their participation and hard work. It is because of 
their diligence that the committee, I might say, is fairly up to 
date in its work. 
 
And therefore, Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the member 
for Swift Current: 
 

That the third report of the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations be now concurred in. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on Wednesday next move first reading of The Medical 
Profession Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I give notice that I shall on day no. 84 ask the 
government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: has CIC sold the remaining potato facilities it 
owns in Broderick? 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too give notice I 
shall on day no. 84 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Learning: regarding the associate school 
operated by the province of Saskatchewan located in Hong 
Kong, referred to in Saskatchewan’s Learning Indicators 
report: (1) does the province of Saskatchewan receive any 
income from the school; if so, how much; (2) in 2002 did 
any employees of Saskatchewan Learning travel to Hong 
Kong on business related to this school; if so, which 
employees and what were the costs involved; and (3) are 
there any other associate schools other than the one in 
Hong Kong; if so, where are they? 

 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I give 
notice that I shall on day no. 84 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: regarding the blue box 
disposal bins used by the provincial government: (1) which 
company currently holds the tender for the manufacture of 
these bins; (2) what was the tendering procedure used; and 
(3) what is the value of this tender; were all private 
fabricating businesses given the opportunity to bid on this 
contract; if not, who made the decision as to which 
companies were invited to submit a bid? 

 
Thank you. 

Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 84 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: how much money has SaskTel spent so far in 
the year 2002 on advertising; how much money has 
SaskTel spent so far in the year 2002 on banquets, 
conferences, and meetings; how much money has SaskTel 
spent so far in the year 2002 on polling; how much money 
has SaskTel spent so far in the year 2002 on focus testing? 

 
Mr. Speaker, I have a following set of questions that are 
essentially the same for SaskPower, SaskEnergy, the 
Crown Investments Corporation, and SGI; and as well, for 
the year 2001. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 84 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: for the year 2002 how much money did SGI 
collect in financial penalties from drivers on the negative 
side of the safety rating scale of the Safe Driver 
Recognition program? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very pleased to 
stand in my place today and introduce to you and to other 
members of the House, 47 people from Spalding, Naicam, and 
Watson area; people that I’ve known most of my life. And we 
had an opportunity to visit earlier this morning and ask 
questions, and you’ll be pleased to know the one question they 
didn’t ask me is how old I am, because normally that’s what 
school groups ask. 
 
I think the group will be pleased not only to visit the legislature 
but later on they’ll be visiting the museum and the light tour. So 
welcome to the legislature, welcome to Regina, and I hope you 
have a great day. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Through you, I 
would like to introduce one of my constituents who’s here 
today, Mr. Gary Carlson, sitting in the west gallery. He’s a keen 
follower of politics and he always likes to be where the action is 
and that’s why he’s here. So I welcome him. 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to bring 
my greetings to the visitors from Naicam and Spalding. And 
anybody who has driven up Highway 6 knows that the sign 
going into Naicam says, Velkommen til Naicam. So I say, 
Velkommen til Regina. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to 
welcome in the east gallery Mr. David Karwacki, the Leader of 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2823 

 

the Saskatchewan Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Karwacki is the first of what I anticipate will be a veritable 
army of future MLAs (Member of the Legislative Assembly) 
I’ll be able to introduce in this Christmas session. So I would 
ask all members to join me in welcoming some future 
colleagues. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like 
to introduce to you and through you to the rest of this House, 
Don Ross from the Wheat Pool, who is sitting up in the gallery 
opposite. And he’s a citizen of Regina and been very active in 
the life of the Wheat Pool for the last number of years. So I’d 
like you to join me in welcoming him to this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

National Day of Remembrance and Action 
on Violence Against Women 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this 
past Friday, December 6, people across Canada gathered in 
vigils, candlelight services, and other ceremonies to 
commemorate our National Day of Remembrance and Action 
on Violence Against Women. December 6 is dedicated to the 14 
young women who were engineering students in Montreal 
killed in 1989. 
 
In our province, observations were held at both universities 
because, tragically, the young women killed were students 
preparing to launch a career in a field traditionally not open to 
them. The Minister Responsible for the Status of Women spoke 
at the vigil at the University of Regina, joining other committed 
women and men in their determination to end this blight on our 
society. 
 
Across the province, men and women took part in the White 
Ribbon Campaign. As well, the YWCA (Young Women’s 
Christian Association) Rose Button Campaign was developed to 
raise awareness and to commemorate December 6. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was both proud to take part in this day of solemn 
remembrance and encouraged to be joined by friends, 
colleagues, and fellow citizens of all ages. But at the same time 
I was saddened by the fact that there still is a necessity for this 
day. We specifically mourn the 14 students, but violence 
against women did not begin nor end on that day. As monstrous 
as that act was, it did not happen in isolation. 
 
The perverted sensibility that spurred Marc Lepine to murder is 
unfortunately still with us, but working together we are doing 
and we can look forward to a day when violence against 
women, when all violence is just a memory. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
 

Recognition of Colleagues 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is with 
mixed emotion that I stand before the Assembly today to 
honour the late Rudi Peters, MLA for Battleford-Cutknife, and 
to welcome the Saskatchewan Party’s newest and youngest 
MLA, Jason Dearborn. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, throughout Rudi’s battle with 
cancer he never let his illness diminish his spirit and he continued 
to serve his constituents with tremendous dignity during the most 
difficult time of his life. Rudi had a strong desire to serve the 
people of Saskatchewan and make our province a better place. I 
know that members from both sides of the House will miss him. 
 
So at the same time we bid farewell to a good MLA and friend, I 
would also like to welcome Jason Dearborn, our MLA for 
Kindersley. Jason’s youth — at least by my standards — and 
exuberance bring a new perspective to our caucus and I’m sure to 
the Legislative Assembly in its entirety. I’m confident that Jason 
will serve his constituents and all the people of Saskatchewan with 
the same dedication and determination as Rudi Peters. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Job Growth 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A November to 
remember for jobs. Saskatchewan’s job numbers just keep 
climbing with yet another record-breaking month, Mr. Speaker. 
Statistics Canada figures showed the highest November on record 
for people working in the province. There were 489,000 people 
working in Saskatchewan, an increase of 24,400 over November 
2001. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan has now posted four straight 
months of record job growth and seven consecutive months of 
solid job growth over last year’s figures. We had the highest 
percentage increase in job growth year over year of any 
province in November, and maintained our low unemployment 
rate at 5.3 per cent compared to the national average of 7.1 per 
cent. Regina also enjoyed the lowest unemployment rate of all 
Canadian cities at 4.2 per cent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our province is showing the momentum that 
comes with an innovative, expanding, and robust economy. 
Other economic indicators are also positive, Mr. Speaker. The 
agricultural sector has gained 3,300 jobs; business 
incorporations, manufacturing shipments, retail and department 
store sales, new vehicle sales, urban housing starts, potash sales, 
and natural gas production are all up. 
 
The economists of major banks are stating the economy will 
continue to expand in 2003 as value-added continues to grow in 
all our major sectors. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is . . . 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 



2824 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

National Day of Remembrance and Action 
On Violence Against Women 

 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, last Friday, December 6, was the 
National Day of Remembrance and Action on Violence Against 
Women. Although the official day has passed, the issues 
addressed on Friday are ones that must be addressed by our 
society every day for violence against women is a daily fact of 
life for hundreds of thousands of women in Saskatchewan, 
across Canada, and around the world. 
 
The national day of remembrance is commemorated annually 
on December 6, the anniversary of the 1989 Montreal massacre 
where 14 young women were killed because of their gender. 
 
Last Friday, the federal, provincial, territorial ministers 
responsible for the Status of Women released a landmark report 
assessing violence against women. Although the report states 
there has been a slight decline in the number of assaults against 
women, its authors warn that this decline must be understood in 
the context that thousands of women never report assaults to the 
authorities. 
 
In Canada, half of all Canadian women have been victims of at 
least one act of physical or sexual violence since the age of 16. 
A Canadian woman is raped every 17 minutes. Aboriginal 
women are particularly vulnerable to violence. In 
Saskatchewan, 57 per cent of women who use shelters are of 
Aboriginal ancestry, yet they’re only 11 per cent of the total 
female population. 
 
Violence against women does not discriminate. It affects 
women of all age, race, religions, cultures, and socio-economic 
background. No matter our political stripe, we must each make 
a political and personal commitment to help end violence 
against women. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Telcare 
 

Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This is the season 
when we try to make a special point of doing what we should be 
doing year-round, and that is sharing with others the blessings 
we receive as members of a very fortunate society. 
 
With this in mind I was very happy to hear glad tidings of joy, 
Mr. Speaker, of a ceremony that took place this morning at 
which employees of SaskTel gave us all a lesson in the spirit of 
giving. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Since 1950, Mr. Speaker, SaskTel workers have through in . . . 
through payroll deductions contributed to a fund called SaskTel 
Telcare. SaskTel adds an additional 50 cents for each dollar 
donated and over 1,500 employees contribute regularly to this 
fund. Last year the total raised was $317,671.75, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This morning at the Canadian Cancer Society building, 18 
excellent non-profit organizations in Regina received cheques 

totalling more than $179,000. The organizations included the 
United Way, the Regina Food Bank, the Salvation Army, the 
Canadian Cancer Society, and several more. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in total this year SaskTel Telcare will contribute 
nearly $325,000 to Saskatchewan community organizations 
right across this province. This is good news in a province 
whose future is wide open. These contributions are a credit to 
these good citizens of Saskatchewan who are the employees of 
one of our great corporate citizens. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Thank You to the Kindersley Constituency 
 
Mr. Dearborn: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to thank the people of the Kindersley constituency 
for placing their trust in me. I look forward to serving them to 
the best of my ability. 
 
Kindersley riding has been home to my family since the 
foundation of our province. We have a wonderful, wonderful 
set of communities with good, industrious, compassionate 
citizens whom I am honoured to serve. 
 
Mr. Speaker, currently we’re hoping for the full and expeditious 
recovery of my constituency assistant, Mrs. Carole Stevenson 
of Eston, who was in a serious car accident on her way to work 
on Friday morning and is recovering in Royal University 
Hospital in Saskatoon. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I look forward to working with all of my 
colleagues in the Assembly towards the common goals of a 
better Canada and a better Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Growth in Saskatoon 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. All too often our image 
of Saskatchewan is coloured by misguided stories such as that 
which appeared in Maclean’s magazine earlier this summer. 
This stereotype of Saskatchewan and its people overlooks the 
dynamic energy of our economy. 
 
Saskatoon showed a healthy 3.1 per cent population growth 
over the last four years. Our surrounding towns and bedroom 
communities were among the fastest growing anywhere, 
ranging from 82.1 per cent for Shields to 20 to 30 per cent for 
Osler, Martensville, Dundurn, and Warman. 
 
In 2001 Saskatoon led the country with the highest industrial 
permit values per capita of all major cities, at $303 per citizen 
compared to $110 per capita for Calgary, Toronto at 126, and 
Vancouver at 58. 
 
We are seeing a record increase in the value of commercial 
permits for shopping centres and restaurants. The value of 
construction in this commercial category is up 145 per cent 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2825 

 

compared to the same time last year. 
 
Saskatoon has the second highest rate of job growth among all 
. . . among the Prairie cities. We have added 2,500 people to our 
workforce in the last 12 months, an increase of 2.1 per cent. 
Saskatoon is emerging as one of the most diverse and dynamic 
economies in the country, thanks to our manufacturing, mining, 
food processing, and strong high-tech and science-based 
growth. And that is a fact. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Provincial Finances 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As I entered the Assembly, the Premier said it just seemed like 
a very short time ago when we were here. Mr. Speaker, I guess 
when your government’s out of control, time moves along very 
quickly. This Premier took office and inherited a $50 million 
surplus, budget surplus from Roy Romanow, in his first year of 
office, and he turned that into a $500 million deficit. In his 
second year of office he already tacked on another $500 million 
in debt. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP (New Democratic Party) under this 
Premier is grossly mismanaging the province of Saskatchewan 
and plunging Saskatchewan into massive deficits like we saw 
back in the 1980s. Mr. Speaker, why has this Premier and his 
government mismanaged the finances of the province of 
Saskatchewan? Why is the NDP taking us back to the deficits of 
the 1980s? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — On Thursday of last week, Mr. Speaker, 
on Thursday of last week, for the information of the Leader of 
the Opposition, Statistics Canada released its final estimate on 
the 2002 crop year. 
 
Here is the conclusion of StatsCanada on the most recent crop 
year. Quote: 
 

Western Canadian farmers experienced one of the worst 
production seasons in the past 25 years. For some farmers 
in Alberta and Saskatchewan, it was worse than in the 
1930s. 

 
Mr. Speaker, two years of the worst drought in Saskatchewan’s 
history seems not to have reached the consciousness of the 
opposition. Mr. Speaker, the fact of the matter is this: yes, this 
year we have stood behind Saskatchewan families. We have 
stood behind Saskatchewan families whose communities were 
threatened by forest fires. We have stood behind Saskatchewan 
farm families raising livestock, and through crop insurance we 
have stood behind Saskatchewan farm families across the 
province. 
 
Which of the above, which of the above, Mr. Speaker, would 
the opposition leader not have us do? 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s pretty scary. He 
sounds just like Grant Devine. But do you know what’s even 
scarier? We don’t even know the true size of the deficit this 
year. And the NDP won’t tell us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says the NDP is only 
providing a partial picture of the government’s finances, and a 
distorted one at that. That’s because the NDP keeps telling us 
that they have a balanced budget, using their imaginary bank 
account. Mr. Speaker, the auditor says that this is not a proper 
accounting practice because it allows the NDP to hide a deficit. 
 
The auditor says last year the true size of the deficit was $483 
million, and this year will likely even be worse. Mr. Speaker, 
will the NDP be honest with the people of Saskatchewan? What 
is the true size of this year’s deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition will stand in this House and stand outside of the 
House making all sorts of accusations about the finances of the 
province. Now he wants to talk about Grant Devine — his very 
good friend, Mr. Grant Devine — who didn’t balance one 
budget the whole time he sat in this chair. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can take the word of Grant Devine or you can 
take the word of the Leader of the Opposition, or you can take 
the word of the Dominion Bond Rating Service of Canada, the 
bond raters. Now what does the bond raters say about the most 
recent financial statement produced by the Minister of Finance? 
The Dominion Bond raters say the following: 
 

We have to keep in mind that the drought is not a 
controllable thing. It’s not that the province has lost control 
of its spending. 

 
Who will you believe, Mr. Speaker — the Leader of the 
Opposition and his friend Grant Devine, or this government and 
the Dominion Bond Rating Service? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well, Mr. Speaker, it’s not the people of 
Saskatchewan that are hiding a deficit; it’s the NDP that’s 
hiding a deficit. The Provincial Auditor knows that the NDP is 
hiding a deficit. In fact now everyone in Saskatchewan knows 
that the NDP is hiding a deficit. The question is, how big is the 
deficit? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP created this mess because they decided 
to grow the government instead of growing Saskatchewan. 
They decided to even go out and grow Australia rather than 
grow Saskatchewan. They decided to grow potatoes instead of 
growing Saskatchewan. And now we see they’re growing a 
deficit instead of growing the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, would the NDP just please give us an honest 
answer — how big is this year’s deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



2826 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the 
Opposition again stands in this House and questions decisions 
about public services that we’ve added to the people of 
Saskatchewan — ability to fight forest fires, ability to support 
our farm families in livestock and through crop insurance, 
ability to deal with the children in our communities that are in 
need. 
 
And what is the result? What is the result, Mr. Speaker? 
Headlines like this — in spite of the hurt in agriculture — 
headlines, “Jobs, jobs, jobs”; “A November to remember.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, today in the province of 
Saskatchewan there are more people going to work in 
November this year than ever before in the history of 
Saskatchewan, 489,000 people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, housing starts are up; retail 
sales . . . starts are up; new vehicle sales are up, Mr. Speaker; 
confidence in the manufacturing sector, confidence in the 
potash sector, confidence in the natural gas sector. The only 
voice that we hear in this province questioning the confidence 
of Saskatchewan is the voice coming from the Leader of the 
Opposition and his party. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, the question is simple. 
According to the auditor’s recommended practices of 
determining the size of the deficit, how big is this year’s 
deficit? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — You know, Mr. Speaker, it must bother the 
members opposite to read the reports of their friends in the 
Fraser Institute these days, because the Fraser Institute came out 
with commentary on Saskatchewan’s financial management, 
Mr. Speaker, and what they said was this. They said compared 
to all other provinces and the federal government, 
Saskatchewan ranked second for performance in handling debt 
and deficit. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — That’s what their friends at the Fraser 
Institute say, Mr. Speaker. And the members opposite want to 
talk about the Provincial Auditor. The Provincial Auditor came 
out with a report this fall, Mr. Speaker, and here’s what it said, 
and I quote. It said: 
 

Saskatchewan’s finances continue to compare favourably 
with most other provinces. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, who do we believe? Do we believe their 
friends at the Fraser Institute, and the Provincial Auditor, or do 
we believe those purveyors of doom and gloom, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Information Services Corporation 
 

Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Justice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last year the NDP racked up a $480 million 
deficit. This year the NDP has already piled up a massive $323 
million deficit that is growing by the day. Why, Mr. Speaker? 
Well one of the reasons is the NDP’s habit of getting into 
business and then losing millions of taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
My question is for the minister responsible for Information 
Services Corporation. ISC (Information Services Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) has blown $88 million to develop a new 
automated land titles system that still doesn’t work. And 
according to documents obtained by the Association of 
Saskatchewan Taxpayers, ISC spent more than a million 
taxpayers’ dollars last year on travel, on advertising, on 
banquets. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how many sales did the NDP’s $88 million land 
titles corporation make last year while racking up a 
million-dollar bill for exotic international travel and 
all-you-can-eat banquets? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the opposition continues 
. . . can continue to criticize the investment of and the 
development of a computerized land titles system as much as 
they want, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell the member opposite that out of 32 
million transactions since August 2001, over 99 per cent have 
gone through smoothly and accurately, Mr. Speaker. This is a 
success story, Mr. Speaker, and this is an investment, Mr. 
Speaker, which will in turn not only reward the investment of 
the people of the province, but will enable us to work towards 
developments in other countries, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member might like to know, Mr. Speaker, that in the work 
done to ensure that lawyers and others understand this system 
effectively and can work with it, seminars take place, 
consultations take place, Mr. Speaker, to ensure that this works. 
That is where this money has gone, Mr. Speaker. Would the 
member have us not work with consumers to make sure that 
they know how to make the system work? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well that answer 
was about as off the mark as the program that he’s trying to get 
. . . (inaudible) . . . Mr. Speaker, according to government 
documents, ISC spent $180,000 last year travelling around the 
world to places like Fort Lauderdale, Hong Kong, and Albania. 
Mr. Speaker, it’s hard to understand what business 
Saskatchewan’s computerized land titles company has in 
Albania where almost no one in Albania owns any property, or 
a computer. 
 
Mr. Speaker, some of ISC’s globe-trotting was for a trip to meet 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2827 

 

with EDS (Electronic Data Systems) officials in Australia. The 
Premier himself travelled to Texas last year to meet with other 
EDS officials. But EDS, Mr. Speaker, has offices right here in 
Regina. Why not use that? 
 
Mr. Speaker, what value did the taxpayers get from the million 
dollars that ISC spent on travel, entertainment, and advertising 
while ISC has made virtually no international sales and still 
doesn’t have a land titles system that works? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, the member will know 
the efforts made by the new president of ISC, Mark MacLeod, 
to respond to consumer concerns and to ensure that we have a 
quicker turnaround on those particularly troublesome issues that 
we’ve always indicated have taken place. 
 
The member will know that there has been a positive response 
to Mr. MacLeod’s efforts, both from the bar, the real estate 
industry, Mr. Speaker, and also . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
not that bar, Mr. Speaker, but the Law Society -- and also, Mr. 
Speaker, with the surveyors. So the community is working 
together, Mr. Speaker, to make ISC work. 
 
One thing that is clear, Mr. Speaker, is the members opposite 
are intent on making sure it doesn’t work and on making sure 
that it is more troublesome than they’ve already identified it to 
be. Mr. Speaker, they should get onside. They should make sure 
that this system works, Mr. Speaker, because it is in the best 
interests of everyone in the province to make sure that ISC is a 
success. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Information Technology Arrangements 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We were somewhat 
more concerned about the success in Albania than success in 
the bar, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP hired a company called EDS to 
computerize the paper-based land titles system in 1998. The 
estimated cost was between 20 and $30 million. Now, four 
years later, the NDP’s Information Services Corporation has 
blown over $88 million and yet Saskatchewan still doesn’t have 
a computerized land titles system that works. 
 
Mr. Speaker, EDS was also hired by the federal government to 
establish a national gun registration database. Estimated cost 2 
million; actual cost so far $1 billion and counting. And now the 
NDP wants to privatize the provincial government’s IT 
(information technology) services through an untendered 
contract to — you guessed it, Mr. Speaker — EDS. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question is will the NDP’s deal with EDS 
to privatize the government IT services run four times over the 
budget like it did with land titles or 500 times over budget as it 
did with the federal gun registration program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
find this line of questioning very interesting from the Sask 
Party. I think it shows a complete lack of understanding of what 

is in fact happening in this province today. 
 
The proposal that EDS has brought to this government is a 
proposal that will improve our services, that will cap our 
expenditures, and will create hundreds and hundreds and 
hundreds and hundreds of new jobs in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I want to be very clear about this, Mr. 
Speaker. We are continuing to evaluate the proposal that EDS 
has brought to us and we will not be rushed into making that 
decision either in favour of the proposal or against the proposal 
until we’ve done the analysis. 
 
Let me be very clear about this. We will ensure before we enter 
into this agreement that this will provide better IT services. 
We’re going to make sure it reduces the cost, that we’re able to 
protect the cost guarantees, that we’re going to have significant 
economic development, and that there will be no privatization 
of unionized employees in the government IT service. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, those are our principles 
— not theirs. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor says the 
NDP ran a $480 million deficit last year. The Finance minister 
admits the NDP is going to run at least another $323 million 
deficit this year, and the NDP has been forced to admit the debt 
of the province is now larger than it was in 1991. Yet the NDP 
continues to pour millions of dollars into losing land titles 
corporation, ISC. And ISC officials continue to jet set around 
the world trying to sell this system that doesn’t even work back 
home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is the NDP’s plan for EDS and the 
taxpayers’ $88 million investment? Is the NDP government 
considering the privatization of ISC corporation and the sale of 
ISC to EDS or any other private sector company? 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, I thought I was clear in 
my last answer that this was not about privatization. There will 
be no privatization of unionized workers under this NDP 
government. Let me be very clear about that. And the member 
should write this down for his next question when he asks me. 
 
Let me also say, in terms of ISC there is a fundamental 
difference between what we are dealing with EDS on today in 
terms of the proposal they put forward and what the member 
characterizes it as. 
 
This is not about application development. It is not about 
creating something new. It is about integrating the e-mail 
services. It’s about integrating the help desk functions. It’s 
about making sure that we’ve got a system of computers within 
government that can talk to each other. This is about buying an 
off-the-shelf solution to a problem that we have in government. 
 
And we are going to continue to deal with EDS until we’re 



2828 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

satisfied that either we’ve got a contract that we can sign or we 
decide to walk away from it. And the members can hoot and 
holler from their seats all they want; it will not change that 
process. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Government Participation in Potato Industry 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. One of the 
reasons why there is a huge deficit now in the province of 
Saskatchewan under this government’s leadership is that they 
continue to blow millions of taxpayers’ dollars on hare-brained 
business schemes, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 3, 1997, the minister responsible for Sask 
Water took a decision item to cabinet saying that Sask Water 
would own 49 per cent of the potato storage facilities and a 
private sector company would own 51 per cent. It turns out that 
that wasn’t the deal at all. The potato storage sheds were 
actually 100 per cent government owned and taxpayers were on 
the hook for the whole bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
By April of 1998, CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of 
Saskatchewan) officials, or someone in the government at CIC, 
was raising the concern with cabinet. Mr. Lingenfelter, the 
minister at the time, indicated that this wasn’t the case at all. 
And what did the NDP do about it? Did they tell the truth then 
to Saskatchewan people? No, Mr. Speaker, they did not. They 
decided to blow more millions of dollars on four more potato 
sheds. 
 
And the question, Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, is this: why did 
the NDP throw good money after bad even after they were 
warned by CIC officials, and why weren’t they telling the truth 
about this deal? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Well first of all, members opposite will not be surprised, when 
he raises the question he knows that the matter is before the 
court and I’m unable to answer in very specific detail. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can say though, Mr. Speaker, I can say and they 
will know this, Mr. Speaker, that there has been over the years 
significant investment in infrastructure in that area, Mr. Speaker 
— something in excess of $140 million, Mr. Speaker, by way of 
irrigation infrastructure. 
 
I can say, Mr. Speaker, that we grew the potato industry from 
roughly 200 acres to 10,000 acres, Mr. Speaker. We have a 
viable, strong, and vital industry in potatoes out in that area 
now, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, is that member saying, Mr. Speaker, that this 
government should not have assisted the growers in that area to 
. . . And who to this day yet, Mr. Speaker, to this day yet ask us 
to stay involved to ensure that that industry stays strong and 
vital, Mr. Speaker. Is that what they’re saying? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we are saying is 
that it is unacceptable that this government would pursue these 
kinds of deals and wind up losing 28 million taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
And it’s even more unacceptable when we find out that cabinet 
made decisions based on information that wasn’t correct, Mr. 
Speaker, brought to it by one of its ministers — the current 
Minister of Industry, Mr. Speaker — who now is proposing a 
new deal, a new ethanol deal and asking people to trust him, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s what we object to on this side of the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we can’t trust them. With respect to the budget 
they say it’s balanced; we know there’s a deficit. 
 
They said land titles would cost 20 million; we know it’s going 
to cost over 88 million and the system still isn’t working. 
 
They said there was a partnership on this deal; we know now 
there wasn’t. The taxpayers were on the hook all along. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the then minister, the current Minister of 
Industry, take the wrong information to cabinet in 1997 and 
why should we trust him today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, let me get this straight 
then. That member is saying that there should have been no 
investment by the province whatsoever. Mr. Speaker, after that 
government and the federal government invest $140 million by 
way of irrigation infrastructure, we should have just left it lay 
there, not do anything, Mr. Speaker; add water and irrigation to 
crops that had no value, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Instead this government responded to requests from growers in 
that area to work with them, Mr. Speaker. They grew large 
amounts of potatoes, Mr. Speaker, and you don’t just dump 
them out on the ground. You put them in facilities, Mr. Speaker, 
where you can store them. 
 
We worked with the growers in that area so that we could store 
those potatoes, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have a strong 
industry that this year, by the way I point out, Mr. Speaker, this 
year will be profitable, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, in a 
document, a cabinet decision item filed in court, a public 
document from the then deputy premier, Dwain Lingenfelter, to 
the then premier, Roy Romanow, and to all of the cabinet — 
and I note, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the current Premier was 
the then premier’s chief of staff — I quote from this document: 
 

That Cabinet receive as information that the CIC Board has 
directed CIC to lead a financial and management audit and 
review of the current business arrangements, agreements, 
contracts, financial reports, and projections that comprise 
Sask Water’s potato storage business, and to return to the 
CIC board with recommended alternatives . . . 
 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2829 

 

Mr. Speaker, to the Premier, the question is simple: will he 
simply table this audit, this independent review that the 
government asked for in 1998? Will he table it in the legislature 
today? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, this opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, is schizophrenic in the notion, Mr. Speaker, that we 
should sit . . . that we should not invest in rural Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I point out to those members who don’t know, Mr. 
Speaker, and for the public of Saskatchewan who doesn’t know 
this, Mr. Speaker, that we have a strong potato industry. We 
grow amongst the best seed potatoes here in Saskatchewan, out 
in that area, Mr. Speaker, in all the world. People across the 
world come to our province to get seed potatoes that are 
amongst the very best in the world, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Would those members, Mr. Speaker, have us not invest and 
partner and work with producers to grow a strong industry that 
now is well on its way, Mr. Speaker, to being very successful? 
And I say again, we have a corporation that is profitable this 
year. What have they got against profit, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is a 
very important series of questions. We know, we know clearly 
from the documentation that’s been made public in court, that 
cabinet made their decision based on recommendations from 
the then minister of Sask Water that clearly — clearly — did 
not represent entirely the correct . . . the facts of the matter. We 
know that. 
 
We also know that at the end of the day the taxpayers lost $28 
million, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, we have had no answers 
from the minister today. Even Enron executives have been hired 
to a higher standard . . . held to a higher standard of 
accountability than what we’re seeing over there in terms of the 
answers. So we’re going to give the minister another chance to 
answer the question. 
 
We know from the documents that a review was done, an audit 
was done. The government can easily clear up this matter, can 
clear up all the questions, if only it table that document. Will 
the minister commit to table that document today in the 
Legislative Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I look at the newspapers of 
last . . . several weeks ago, and they report the job numbers in 
November, Mr. Speaker. Record job numbers, Mr. Speaker. 
Part of that, Mr. Speaker, is diversification of our economy. 
Part of the diversification of our economy, Mr. Speaker, is 
doing things like we’ve done with the growers in the potato 
sector out in the Outlook area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a record that we should all be proud of, 
Mr. Speaker. We have diversification in agriculture; we have 
the ag-biotech sector, Mr. Speaker. We have all the wonderful 

things that have been done in education and health care, Mr. 
Speaker. This opposition should work with this government, 
Mr. Speaker, to ensure that we have continued job growth, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I just ask leave of the Assembly to make a brief statement. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

STATEMENT BY A MEMBER 
 

Clarification of Response 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’d like to apologize to the member from Thunder Creek and 
indeed all of my hon. colleagues for the information provided 
last June in response to a written question regarding whether or 
not there was an assurance fund at the Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan. 
 
Regrettably, Mr. Speaker, the written response did not identify 
how customers can be compensated for claims, which may have 
left the impression that there was no such compensation. While 
ISC doesn’t have a dedicated assurance fund as was indicated in 
the written response, there are most certainly provisions for 
clients to be compensated for claims. And I apologize for any 
misunderstanding. 
 
When I became aware of this situation last week, I wrote a letter 
of apology to the member from Thunder Creek that included the 
information needed to clear up any misunderstanding. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

TABLING OF DOCUMENTS 
 

The Speaker: — Members . . . Order, please. Order, please. 
Members of the Assembly, I wish to table, in accordance with 
the Board of Internal Economy directive No. 22(1)(g), the 
members’ accountability and disclosure statements for the year 
ended March 31, 2002. 
 
And in accordance with directive 23(1)(c), I also table the 
audited financial statements and schedule of assets for each 
caucus for the year ended March 31, 2002. 
 
And in accordance with directive 10.15, I also table the 
financial statements for the offices of the independent members. 
 
And I wish to table a letter dated November 13, 2002 received 
from Her Honour advising the membership of the Board of 
Internal Economy. 
 
The materials are hereby tabled. 
 
 



2830 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

ANNOUNCEMENTS 
 

Introduction of Pages 
 

The Speaker: — Members, it’s my pleasure now to introduce 
and also to inform the Assembly that the Pages for this portion 
of the session — and I would ask the Pages to rise when they’re 
introduced — will be Andrea Barraza, Robin Canham, Fabian 
Contreras, Nikki McNaughton, Michelle McNichol. 
 
Thank you, Pages, for your work that you will be doing during 
the session. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Vacancy in Battleford-Cut Knife Constituency 
 
The Speaker: — And it is now my duty to record a vacancy in 
the Assembly in the constituency of Battleford-Cut Knife due to 
the death of Mr. Rudi Peters. 
 
I believe we are now prepared to go into condolences. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the day, I 
would ask leave of the Assembly to move a motion of 
condolence concerning the late member from Battleford-Cut 
Knife, Rudi Peters. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has requested leave to move a 
motion. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 

CONDOLENCES 
 

Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And before I 
make the motion, which I believe will be seconded by the 
Premier of Saskatchewan, I would like to make just a few 
comments regarding the unfortunate and untimely passing of 
Rudi Peters, the MLA for the Battleford-Cut Knife, this past 
November 30. 
 
Saskatchewan lost a great citizen and the sitting member for the 
Battleford-Cut Knife. I believe that this is the first time that this 
Assembly has lost a sitting member for approximately 16 years. 
And we lost Rudi Peters at the young age of 63 years. 
 
Rudi Peters lost his battle with cancer. He leaves behind a 
loving wife, Shirley; a son Kevin; and daughters, Debbie, 
Wendy, their spouses, and four grandchildren. 
 
In his private life, Mr. Peters carried on the family tradition of 
farming. In fact, Rudi would share with us that he still lived in 
the very house in which he was born and he planned and in fact 
did live his entire lifetime on the family farm. 
 
During his life he devoted time and energy to a variety of 
community organizations. He was a member of the Rabbit Lake 
Hall Board and the Meeting Lake Regional Park. And in 
addition, in his community he volunteered as the chairman of 
the Mennonite Church of Rabbit Lake. 
 
Before his election to this Assembly, Mr. Peters developed vast 

experience in both local and rural government. He served as a 
rural municipal councillor for 14 years. Mr. Peters was also a 
member of the Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities Board of Directors for eight years. But Rudi 
wanted to get even more involved in the province of 
Saskatchewan, a province that he loved. 
 
I remember I had spoken with Rudi by telephone, but first met 
him at a nomination meeting in Shellbrook-Spiritwood where 
he was seeking the nomination for the Saskatchewan Party. 
Now Rudi had the unfortunate problem of living across the road 
in the Redberry Lake constituency and we had already 
nominated our candidate for that constituency. And it was a 
very tightly contested nomination, which I believe Rudi only 
lost by one or two votes. Unfortunately he and his wife weren’t 
able to vote for themselves, living outside of the constituency. 
 
Had Rudi been a lesser person he might have been a bit 
disillusioned, but Rudi Peters said, I really do want to help this 
province. What can I do? And we talked with Rudi Peters and 
said, we still have a vacancy in the riding of 
Battleford-Cutknife. Are you interested in seeking the 
nomination in that riding? Which is also quite close to where he 
lived. And in fact, Rudi Peters did seek the nomination, won it 
in the Battleford-Cutknife, and was elected to this Assembly 
back on September 16, 1999. 
 
All members of the House know that Rudi was a very, very 
dedicated member. He was extremely loyal to his constituents 
and worked very hard on their behalf. His key concerns, of 
course, long-time concerns of his, were agriculture, municipal 
issues, and education. 
 
Rudi fought a remarkable battle against cancer and it was when 
this House was in session back in 2001 that he made the 
announcement to our caucus that he had been diagnosed with 
leukemia. He fought a very courageous battle, took 
chemotherapy, lost a lot of weight, but nobody could dampen 
his enthusiasm or his determination to be successful in this 
battle. And in fact he rebounded remarkably well and was able 
to come back to work and in fact again sit in this legislature and 
take part. 
 
Rudi had even contemplated running again and seeking a 
second term. But one day he came into my office and said, 
Elwin, I think considering my situation and the time that I need 
to spend with my family, perhaps I shouldn’t seek re-election. 
But he said, would you please keep me in the loop. 
 
And I think that very much embodies Rudi’s personality, his 
spirit, his wanting to be involved, his wanting to do things. 
 
Just the other day we laid Rudi Peters to rest and almost all of 
the Saskatchewan Party caucus were present at the funeral. 
There were members from the NDP caucus present at the 
funeral and for that we want to express our true appreciation for 
those who represented the government side of the House. And 
the member, the member from the . . . from North Battleford 
also was present at the funeral and I know that that was 
appreciated by the people of the community, by Rudi’s family, 
and by all of those who very much appreciated Rudi. 
 
The funeral was a very warm celebration of Rudi’s life on a 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2831 

 

very, very cold day. We were impressed by his wonderful and 
personal faith in God and the importance his church played in 
his life. We were particularly impressed by the strength of his 
family and the tribute that they paid to a brother, a father, and a 
husband, and a grandfather. 
 
Rudi’s family, his community, came out to express their warm 
appreciation for his life, as I said, did many MLAs. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, with leave of the Assembly, I would 
move this motion, seconded by the Hon. Premier of 
Saskatchewan: 
 

That this Assembly records with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a sitting member of this Assembly and expresses 
its grateful appreciation of the contribution he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to the province. 
 
Rudi Peters, who passed away on November 30, 2002, 
was a member of this Legislative Assembly from 1999 
until his death, representing the constituency of 
Battleford-Cut Knife for the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Mr. Peters was born on January 30, 1939 and raised on the 
family farm in Rabbit Lake. He married Shirley Janzen on 
November 10, 1962 and they had three children. Mr. Peters 
is survived by his wife and their children and four 
grandchildren. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I 
appreciate the opportunity to second this motion of condolence 
to the Peters family. 
 
It’s a motion that comes from this House not just to Rudi’s 
family — to his wife Shirley and their children and their 
grandchildren, to his extended family — but a motion that will 
go to Rudi’s community and friends. And though we occupy 
different sides of this legislature, this day we are united in 
expressing our condolences. 
 
And if I may say on behalf of government members, we extend 
condolences to our opposition colleagues who will have had an 
opportunity to work much more closely with Rudi Peters, who 
will have developed some very, very deep friendships. 
Condolences to our colleagues in this House. 
 
That said, we who occupy this House know that we share some 
very important common bonds, whether it’s common 
experience in the electoral process, common experience in 
serving our constituents, common experience in the rigours of 
this Chamber and the rigours of elected office, and a common 
experience, Mr. Speaker, which I believe unites us in a desire to 
do what we believe is right for the people we represent and for 
the province. 
 
And so today we share a sadness in the loss of a colleague and, 
for some, a friend on both sides of this House. It is entirely 
accurate as the Leader of the Opposition has said today, when 
we think of Rudi Peters, we think of a dedication — a 
dedication to his community and his constituents, a dedication 
to rural Saskatchewan and to farming, and a dedication to this 

House — that if I may say in my experience in this House, was 
well above and beyond what any one of us would have 
expected, given the challenges that Rudi faced in these last 
months. He was dutiful to his service to this legislature, dutiful 
to the service he brought to the constituents and to the province 
of Saskatchewan and, obviously, dutiful to the service and the 
love that he brought to his family and friends. Therefore, Mr. 
Speaker, I am pleased on behalf of the government caucus to 
second the motion of condolence. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is a 
special privilege to stand today in the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan to pay heartfelt and sincere tribute to our 
colleague and friend Rudi Peters, who sat as a respected 
member for the Battleford-Cut Knife constituency from 1999 to 
2002. Rudi’s passing indeed sent a pang of sadness through the 
hearts of his colleagues, his family, and his friends. We will all 
miss him and his down-to-earth, positive, and easygoing 
approach to life. His attitude was truly inspiring as his life 
exemplified eternal optimism. Rudi in a sense was an educator. 
He educated all of us on what’s important in life, and having a 
very positive approach to life. 
 
Initially, when he and Shirley . . . his wife Shirley heard the 
news that Rudi had leukemia, their immediate response was 
shock, but very quickly after that they adopted a motto and that 
was, we’re going to beat this. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And contrary to popular belief, Rudi did not lose his battle with 
cancer. He was the first to remind us that he was cancer free. 
And I encourage all of us in this Assembly to think of him, in 
fact, as a winner. A winner — why, Mr. Speaker? Because he 
chose to be optimistic; he chose to meet the challenge of cancer 
by taking on a positive attitude towards it. 
 
With that attitude and God’s grace he in turn challenged all of 
us to choose life over death. Rudi taught us all what is meant to 
be upbeat in the face of huge challenges. He taught us to always 
remember that tomorrow promises hope even when they may be 
painful todays. How often during the past year I heard Rudi say, 
it’s good to be alive; or, my life is so good. 
 
And during the last legislative session I was fortunate in that I 
had many opportunities to spend time with Rudi and his wife, 
Shirley, with his brother, Peter, and his sister-in-law, Margaret, 
chatting over good meals at the end of the day after the 
legislature closed. Rudi spoke at those times with a great deal of 
delight about his children, his grandchildren, his wife, and his 
appreciation and his love of farming. 
 
To Rudi, farming was not a chore; farming was a joy. It was an 
environment where he could encourage his family to learn 
practical skills necessary to manage everyday life. Rudi loved 
to tell jokes and often they were off colour. But he enjoyed 
doing that, and more than telling them he enjoyed the 
expression that he would see on the faces of his friends when he 
did so. 
 
Rudi was very, very proud to be elected as a member of this 
Assembly and to contribute to improving to the quality of life 
for all people in Saskatchewan. His wife, Shirley, was a 



2832 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

constant and faithful companion to him throughout this time 
and throughout all their life. Together they made a decision to 
give thanks for all they’d experienced together in life and take it 
easy from here on in. Rudi’s motto that he left with us before 
his passing was, folks there’s more to life than hard work so 
stay lighthearted and enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know that members of the Saskatchewan Party 
along with all members of this Assembly will miss Rudi Peters. 
We will remember his warmth, his goodness, and his dedicated 
contributions to Saskatchewan, and we’ll remember them with 
great gratitude and pride. And he will always have a special 
place in our hearts. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and I do indeed 
consider it an honour to be able to participate in this debate and 
offer my personal tribute and condolences to Shirley and to the 
other members of the family on behalf of myself and my party, 
but I think especially on behalf of the people of the Battlefords 
who we came to appreciate and to hold in our hearts for his 
work in the Battlefords as the other MLA for our community. 
 
We will remember him as a man of dignity and quiet humour 
and diligence and of course finally, this past year, as a man of 
great courage. And that is probably what will remain most in 
our minds — the image of a man who continued to perform his 
duties in spite of what we obviously knew to be great pain and 
discomfort. But I do not recall ever hearing complaints about 
that and I don’t think his colleagues in the Saskatchewan Party 
did either. He had been elected to perform his duties. He 
continued with them in spite of the obvious strain that he was 
under. 
 
And certainly the most indelible memory I have of Rudi is not 
in this Assembly, but his participation in the cancer walk in the 
Battlefords last spring when he led the survivors lap. For that 
charity he certainly worked very hard for many of the causes 
and community efforts in the Battlefords. And we worked 
together. There was no sense of party or partisan difference. We 
had mutual constituents that we were to serve and work for and 
that was certainly the way Rudi approached it. And I remember 
working on many community projects in the Battlefords with 
Rudi, but most particularly I think the one which will remain in 
my mind is the cancer walk from the Canadian Cancer Society 
that he had such a prominent role in last June. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we in this Assembly would be remiss if we 
did not also mention the people of Rabbit Lake. They had about 
500 people descend on their community last week and it was 
typical of what we think of as rural Saskatchewan in the way 
that community responded. It of course took two halls. The 
crowd could not be accommodated in one hall. 
 
And at the conclusion of the service we were all asked to attend 
the graveside, which I wondered about at the time. And then I 
realized why we had been specially asked for the entire crowd 
to go to the grave. His closest friends, the people of Rabbit 
Lake, were not able to take their friend Rudi to his final rest. 
They remained behind in order to change and redo the hall and 
bring out the tables and the food in order that they could 
properly welcome their guests to their community, even in their 

sad occasion. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as one would expect in rural Saskatchewan, 
after the 500 of us had finished eating, there was still food left 
over for another 500. 
 
So I offer my condolences to Shirley and the family. I say that 
we have lost both a colleague and a friend and someone whose 
memory will continue to be held dear by all of us. 
 
I too remember last summer when I was working on a joint 
project with Rudi in the Battlefords. He took me aside and he 
told me that he would not be seeking re-election. I knew that 
this hurt him to have made that decision, but I was at least 
pleased for him on a personal level and I expressed the wish to 
him that this paved the way for many years of happy retirement. 
And it is a matter of personal sadness to me that unfortunately 
that’s not the way it turned out. 
 
So I’m pleased to support the motion of condolence before the 
House this afternoon. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
pleased to join with other members of this Assembly in 
extending our condolences to Rudi’s wife Shirley and the 
family in this remembrance of Rudi as a special friend. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of meeting Rudi when I was 
invited by the then minister of Rural Development, Neal Hardy, 
to chair a rural . . . a committee on rural development. And Rudi 
was a SARM (Saskatchewan Association of Rural 
Municipalities) representative on that committee. And as some 
of my colleagues have already indicated, he certainly brought 
an interesting charm to many of our meetings. And if a meeting 
got somewhat quiet and subdued and maybe just too technical, 
Rudi would pipe up and there’d be a little story that would just 
get us focused a little bit more for the time being. 
 
But what I found about Rudi, he was certainly a very outspoken 
individual. He was a man who enjoyed serving people, and I 
think that was seen in the number of people from all walks of 
life, not only representing SARM and members of the 
Legislative Assembly, but people from all across this province 
who gathered to celebrate his life at his funeral last week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would venture to say that Rudi enjoyed meeting 
people a lot more than . . . while he enjoyed representing them 
and sitting with us in this Assembly, he would just as soon sit 
down in the coffee shop, or across the table, to discuss an issue 
than stand up in the Assembly and try and debate that issue. He 
felt more at home sitting down and meeting with people 
individually, and talking to them in that fashion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, about a month and a half ago I had the privilege of 
being in the city and in the caucus office for a few moments and 
noticed Rudi was in. And I thought it very interesting that Rudi 
would have taken the time to come to Regina. I could see he 
really wasn’t feeling that well, although you wouldn’t tell it by 
talking to him. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, the reason he was here is because it was his 
caucus duty, and Rudi was a person that it seemed that no 
matter what his situation was personally, if there was a duty he 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2833 

 

had to uphold, he was prepared to do it. And we saw that as 
colleagues; we saw that he made a commitment to his 
constituents even in the most difficult days of his life. 
 
And on that occasion, Mr. Speaker, I had the privilege of asking 
Rudi, well where are we going for dinner today? And Rudi said, 
well let’s find a good pasta place; I enjoy pasta. So we went 
down and we enjoyed some pasta and were chatting away and 
Rudi just . . . his comment was, you know, he says, I’m just 
enjoying life right now; I’m really enjoying life. I’m enjoying 
my family. And he said, we’re looking forward, we’re making 
. . . at that time he was making plans for Christmas, and the 
family was all going to be home. And you know, Mr. Speaker, 
as we were just chatting around the table, you wouldn’t tell, just 
talking to Rudi, that he was facing the last few days of his life. 
You just couldn’t really tell that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, but the one thing that really stood out in his 
mind, he said, not only was family important, but he said, I 
have to share with you that one of the most important things 
I’ve become to appreciate more and more is my faith, my faith 
in God. And he said, He sustained us, my family and I, many 
days over this past . . . these past few months. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, Rudi is no longer with us; 
his spirit is here. We want to extend our condolences to his 
wife, Shirley. We know that the first few days after someone 
passes away — and I think back to my mother leaving us so 
quickly — that the shock doesn’t really hit you until about 
three, four, two months later, and all of a sudden the loneliness. 
 
We want Shirley to know that she’s not alone. There are a lot of 
people thinking about her. We want her to realize as well that 
our thoughts and our prayers are with her at this time. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to join with other members on both sides of the legislature 
today to pay respects to Rudi Peters. 
 
I met Rudi some 20 to 25 years ago, Mr. Speaker, when Rudi 
was a representative, an RM (rural municipality) out in rural 
Saskatchewan as I was. And we met at SARM conventions. 
And Rudi went on to further his political career within SARM 
by running for director for division 6 within SARM. 
 
And I think the respect that Rudi brought to himself and the job 
that he had done was represented at the funeral that day by the 
number of past and present SARM presidents and directors and 
even staff that were there that day and thought nothing but the 
best of Rudi and the job that he’d done. Everyone that had met 
Rudi and dealt with him had liked Rudi for the things that he 
brought to the table. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Peter, Rudi’s brother, the day of the funeral I 
thought did a tremendous job of giving the eulogy. He spoke of 
Rudi quite often with good humour when he talked about Rudi 
being somewhat of a prankster as we all had become 
accustomed to. 
 
And he had the people at the funeral with smiles on their face 
just thinking back about things that . . . When he talked about 

something, you know, you could picture Rudi saying those 
things and bringing that fun and bright side and that positive 
feeling to everyone that was around him. 
 
Rudi’s son spoke at the funeral and he said — and I thought it 
was probably one of the most true comments that I’ve ever 
heard about Rudi — he said, my dad was not a great politician 
but he was an excellent and caring representative for the people 
of Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
And when you think about that, Rudi would be the very first 
one to have said, when I stand in my place, I couldn’t speak for 
an hour; I wouldn’t want to even try. He would become very 
nervous. And yet those of us that saw him day after day in his 
office on the phone talking to ministers responsible, caring for 
the people in his constituency and representing them and trying 
to solve problems that they had — he spent endless hours doing 
that. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remember the night that I believe it was six 
or seven of us went to a Riders football game at Taylor Field, 
Rudi being one of them. And I was walking beside Rudi with 
someone else and we were walking up the ramp, Mr. Speaker, 
on the far side of Taylor Field. And we got about two-thirds of 
the way up and Rudi stopped and we knew right away Rudi had 
some problems. We couldn’t figure out what it was because 
Rudi was a very healthy guy and he bent over the railing and 
said, I don’t know if I can go on. 
 
So we waited and finally Rudi got up, went to his seat. And it 
wasn’t long after, Mr. Speaker, that Rudi found out that he had 
leukemia and had health problems. But up till that point Rudi 
had a very positive attitude in life, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But that never changed. In caucus he would be an inspiration to 
the rest of us when we were having a bad day, be feeling sorry 
for ourselves over some trivial little thing. And here would be 
Rudi going through all these problems, not a care in the world; 
just loved to be alive. 
 
And I think to this moment Rudi is an inspiration to me and I 
believe to every member on this side of the House, Mr. 
Speaker. So we’ve all lost a friend and a respected colleague, 
Mr. Speaker, and we extend to Shirley and the entire Peters 
family our condolences and best wishes. 
 
Rudi will be greatly missed but not quickly forgotten. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I want 
to join with all of our colleagues in the legislature in offering 
our deepest sympathy to Rudi’s wife, Mrs. Peters; Rudi’s 
children, Kevin, Deb, and Wendy; their spouses; his four 
grandchildren; his brother, Peter, and sister, Margaret; and all of 
his neighbours and friends in Rabbit Lake and area as well as 
his constituents in Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague, the member from Regina 
Coronation, and myself were able to attend Rudi’s memorial 
service and funeral on December 3. And we observed some 
interesting events. And I think the thing that was said by Peter 
Peters, Rudi’s brother, was that Rudi was never more happy 



2834 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

than he had been in the last years of his life, serving his 
constituents and serving as a member of the legislature in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’ve been a member of this Assembly for 16 years 
and in those 16 years you see colleagues come and go, lots of 
them. And when you think about all of the people that have had 
the opportunity to serve in this legislature in the past 16 years 
I’m sure they number more than 80. And what I found most 
amazing about Rudi Peters is that he did not come here for the 
power and the glory, to have his name seen in the newspapers 
and on TV every night. He came here to represent the 
constituents of Battleford-Cut Knife. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as a minister of the legislature for some nine and a 
half years, you get to know who contacts your ministerial 
office. And when Les Headrick I think it was, one of the people 
who gave the eulogy, said Rudi was a better MLA than he was 
a politician, I think that my experience can confirm that. Of all 
of the members of the legislature, it was Rudi and his 
constituency assistant that had the most contact with my 
ministerial office. And that tells you something about him. It 
tells you that he was there advocating and representing and 
serving his constituents. 
 
And that was borne out on the day of his funeral. I think that 
there were more than 500 people there. There was a hall that 
was full, and the senior centre across the street was full. And 
some friends of mine run the Rabbit Lake general store and 
cafe, and they told me that there wasn’t a coffee to be served 
that day really because people were busy attending to the events 
around Rudi’s memorial service and funeral. 
 
I think that there is no greater tribute to a person than who 
shows up to your funeral. And the people who showed up at 
Rudi’s funeral represented all political persuasions. I knew lots 
of people that were in the room. There were people from all 
over Saskatchewan, people from my own constituency. Rudi 
seemed to have lots of second and third and fourth and fifth 
cousins. And I noticed even the member from Rosthern had a 
relative there, who I sat beside, who came from Winnipeg. 
 
So it was a day where Rudi’s personality, the values that he 
represented in terms of our province, were truly evident by the 
people that came to show their respects to Rudi and his family. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think that the Legislative Assembly in this 
province has lost a good and loyal member, and for that we pay 
tribute. And for that, as members of the legislature, we should 
be thankful that at the end of the day our fundamental job here 
is not how much press we get, not how many times we read our 
names in the newspaper. I’ve come to know that if you’re 
reading your name in the newspaper it’s not necessarily good. 
The real tribute, the real measure of us as legislators is how we 
serve our constituents, the people back home. 
 
And Rudi was a true and loyal servant to the people of our 
province. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join with 
my colleagues in paying my respect to Rudi and give 
condolences to his family. 
 

Rudi, I had never met him before the 1999 election, and his 
office was across mine . . . across the hallway from mine. The 
best thing about being an elected member is meeting people 
who you’d have nothing in common with and sitting down and 
finding out that they really are friends. 
 
With Rudi, I found out we had more than political beliefs in 
common. Rudi’s family and friends and community were the 
most important thing in his life. Rudi was always in the office 
in the morning before I was. I used to wonder if he just slept 
there overnight. Rudi used my fax machine in my office and it 
was a daily ritual for me to go through all the papers and take 
them into the office in the morning and we’d have a chat about 
work and family and politics. 
 
On June 26, 2001 he wasn’t in his office in the morning, and 
most of our caucus found out that day that he’d been diagnosed 
with cancer. We were devastated by the news, yet for some 
reason the world seems to go on no matter what happens in 
personal lives, so we carried on with the day. 
 
That evening there was a vote in the House that we considered 
quite important. It was the only vote that I’d ever been involved 
in that the government lost. But more important than that to us 
was the fact that Rudi showed up for that vote. We knew that he 
felt strongly that it was his duty and his responsibility to 
represent his people at this time and that his own physical 
well-being came second. He believed that he had a chance to 
make a difference. And we all admired Rudi for his strength 
and his attitude that he could beat this disease. 
 
Two weeks ago today, Rudi himself phoned my office and 
asked if I would meet with one of his school groups because he 
didn’t feel he could make the trip to Regina. Mr. Speaker, Rudi 
went into the hospital two days later and he never came home 
again. 
 
So last Monday when I had the opportunity to speak to his 
class, I told them about Rudi. I told them about his commitment 
and his respect for them and his belief that because of young 
people like them, tomorrow would be a better day. I tried to 
explain to them that maybe they didn’t see Rudi on TV every 
night but Rudi really had a fundamental belief that every one of 
those people, those young people, could make a difference in 
this world. And when they left the room, I told them that it was 
their opportunity and their responsibility to make sure that they 
would carry on working hard in whatever career that they chose 
and give it their very best, because that’s what Rudi had done. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Rudi will always be one of the heroes to our 
caucus. He made a difference not only . . . our lives on both . . . 
colleagues on both sides of the floor, because he had priorities 
in his life that were more important to him than his own 
physical well-being. He didn’t speak at length on many subjects 
and he never tried to be in the public eye. But he got our 
attention because he was the kind of person we’d all like to be. 
He was caring and giving and dedicated. 
 
So, Rudi . . . and Shirley, thank you for sharing Rudi with us. 
We’re all much better people because of Rudi. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2835 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — By leave of the Assembly, Mr. Speaker, I 
would like to move that this Assembly record with sorrow and 
regrets the passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
express its grateful appreciation of the contributions he made to 
his community and his constituency, that of Mr. James Wilf 
Gardiner. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, on the completion or 
conclusion of my remarks, moved by the member from Yorkton 
and seconded by the Leader of the Official Opposition from 
Rosetown-Biggar, I would ask: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and express 
its grateful appreciation and contributions he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to this province. 
 
Mr. James Wilfrid Gardiner, who passed away on 
October 3, 2002, was a member of the Legislative 
Assembly from 1956 until 1967, representing the 
constituency of Melville for the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Gardiner was born on July 27, 1924 in Regina. He 
attended the public school in Lemberg, Regina, and Ottawa 
before pursuing studies in political science at Queen’s 
University in Kingston. He graduated in 1946 and married 
his wife, Margaret, the same year. Mr. Gardiner is 
predeceased by his wife and survived by their six children 
and ten grandchildren. 
 
In his private life, Mr. Gardiner was an active participant in 
the communities in which he lived. After farming for four 
years in the Lemberg area, Mr. Gardiner moved his family 
into town where he occupied an insurance . . . or opened an 
insurance and real estate business. Later he became the 
general agent and secretary for the Lemberg Rural 
Telephone Company, and he served there for many years as 
the town clerk and as the secretary of the Lemberg school 
division. 
 
In the years following his political career, Mr. Gardiner 
continued to work in government as the deputy minister of 
Co-operation and Co-operative Development. He also 
embarked on creating a hotel business in Regina and 
Bienfait areas. 
 
Mr. Gardiner was well known for his volunteer work in a 
variety of social services organizations ranging from the 
board of trade to the curling club and to his church. He also 
played an active role in other organizations such as the 
Saskatchewan Farmers’ Union, the Saskatchewan Wheat 
Pool, and the Melville Board of Trade. 
 
With Mr. Gardiner’s decision to enter politics, it was said 
that he was following in his father’s footsteps. James 
Garfield Gardiner was the elected representative of 
Melville constituency for many years, serving first as a 
member of this Assembly, including two terms as premier, 
and later as federal parliament and minister of Agriculture. 

His son, Wilf, was first elected to the Legislative Assembly 
in 1956 and re-elected again in 1960 and 1964. He entered 
cabinet in 1964 as the minister of Public Works. Mr. 
Gardiner also held the portfolios of Saskatchewan Jubilee 
and Centennial Corporation, the Western Development 
Museum, Saskatchewan Government Printing, 
Saskatchewan Water Supply Board. Upon leaving elected 
office, Mr. Gardiner retained his interest in politics and 
often commented on provincial issues. 
 
In the recording of our own deep sense of loss and 
bereavement, this Assembly expresses its sincere sympathy 
to the members of the bereaved family. 

 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to join the member from Yorkton in bringing condolences 
to the Gardiner family. 
 
Mr. Gardiner was a farmer, a business person, but more than 
that even, I think he was a community person that was involved 
in many, many volunteer positions within his community. The 
Gardiner family, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, has a long, long 
history in provincial and federal politics and the name is well 
known throughout the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the official opposition, I want to join 
the member for Yorkton, Deputy Premier, in expressing our 
sympathy to the family of the late Wilf Gardiner. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It is truly an 
honour for me to speak to the condolence motion presented. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the name Gardiner is truly synonymous with 
politics in Saskatchewan. Wilfrid Gardiner was born into a 
political environment. His father was the late Hon. James G. 
Gardiner who was serving in the Saskatchewan provincial 
cabinet of Premier Charles Dunning in 1924, the year Wilf was 
born. 
 
(15:15) 
 
In 1926, the statesman who became fondly known as Jimmy 
Gardiner became the premier of Saskatchewan. Jimmy Gardiner 
later went on to become the federal minister of Agriculture, a 
portfolio he held from 1935 to 1957. Following in his father’s 
footsteps, Wilf Gardiner was first elected to this legislature in 
1956, re-elected in 1960, in 1964 when he did become minister 
of Public Works in the cabinet of Premier Ross Thatcher. 
Between Wilf and his father, the two represented the Lemberg 
district of the Melville constituency for almost 50 years from 
1914 to 1967 with the exception of some five years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the previous members who have addressed this 
motion have indicated the participation by Mr. Wilf Gardiner in 
a variety of experiences during his lifetime and all those 
experiences were in the service of his community, to his family, 
and to the people of this great province of ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I truly would like to join the colleagues in this 
Assembly in expressing sincere condolences to the family of 
Mr. Wilf Gardiner on his passing. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too consider it 



2836 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

an honour to participate in this debate. I do so as someone who 
knew Wilf well and I also rise as a former resident of the city of 
Melville. And although I came to Melville after Wilf’s political 
career had ended, old-timers in the community certainly 
remembered him well and remembered when, as a very young 
man, he first ran in the Melville constituency in 1956. And at 
that time his father, the former premier, was the federal minister 
of Agriculture. 
 
And Tommy Douglas came to Melville at that time to complain 
at a CCF (Co-operative Commonwealth Federation) rally that 
he had heard of occasions when the father would buy a car for 
his son. He had even heard of occasions when a father would 
give a farm to his son but this was the first time he had ever 
heard of a father giving a seat in the legislature to his son. Well 
the people of Melville, as always, appreciated the Douglas wit 
but not the sentiment and Wilf was duly elected. 
 
I mostly remember Wilf from after his political career and I can 
tell you that he continued to be a fixture at Liberal conventions, 
at United Church conferences, and at a host of other community 
and public organizations. And may I say, Mr. Speaker, I think 
that is the true test of someone who is committed to public 
service. It is one thing for those of us during office to show an 
interest in the affairs of our community, our constituency, and 
our province. I mean after all, quite bluntly, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
what we’re paid to do. That’s our job. But when this interest 
and involvement continues long after one’s political career is 
over, then that is proof that it is very genuine. 
 
So I say he was always a fixture at Liberal conventions. He was 
also a frequent visitor to this House, as many current members 
will recall. However, Wilf was not a man known for his care 
and elegance in dress, and I think there were a few times he had 
some difficulties convincing security that he really was a former 
MLA. 
 
I know that his own high point of his political career was in 
1967 when he headed up the province’s contribution to the 
Canada centennial celebrations. 
 
He is remembered as his father’s son. But I think he also will be 
remembered for himself — for the man who came to claim his 
own corner in Saskatchewan politics — and his own memory 
for the people of the Lemberg-Abernethy-Melville area and the 
people of this province as a man who had deep and abiding love 
of this province, a deep and abiding commitment to the 
organizations to which he belonged, a commitment which he 
carried on as long as his health permitted and a commitment 
and an interest which certainly did not wane at the end of his 
active political career. 
 
And for that I am pleased to have this opportunity to pay tribute 
to the memory of Wilf Gardiner and to offer the condolences of 
myself and of my party to the Gardiner family. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like 
to be part of this motion and support this motion of condolences 
for the Gardiner family. 
 
It’s quite interesting at how people will intersect with your life 
in ways that aren’t always explainable. And Wilf Gardiner has 
been a part of my life for my whole life because he happened to 

be a classmate of my mother at high school at Luther College in 
the early ’40s in Regina. And there were a number of very 
interesting people in that class that she would talk about and 
Wilf was one of them, in the sense that when I would meet him 
— I met him later in life — she, my mother, would say, well 
Wilf is very much the same as he was in high school. 
 
And he was involved with the community, he was concerned 
about people, he was a good politician. And then I think later he 
always was part of contributing to what the community was. 
 
And I would have to say that when I got into politics, Wilf was 
somebody who, because he knew this long connection to the 
family, he would come and give me advice. And it was not the 
ordinary kind of advice that you would get, but the advice of 
somebody who understood all of the different kinds of things 
that would happen in the community. 
 
So I’m very pleased to offer my condolences to the Gardiner 
family, and from my family, because of the long connection 
that we’ve had. Thank you. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
would ask that this Assembly records with sorrow and regret 
the passing of a former member of the Assembly and express its 
grateful appreciation and contributions he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to the province, Mr. George 
Joseph Trapp. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Upon the 
conclusion of my motion, I would ask that the House receive 
this motion on behalf of the government member from Yorkton, 
seconded by the Leader of the Opposition from 
Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

Mr. George Joseph Trapp passed away on November 25, 
2002, and was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1964 until 1967, representing the constituency of 
Touchwood for the Liberal Party. 
 
Mr. Trapp was born on June 5, 1909 in Kamsack and grew 
up on the family farm. He attended local schools in Lipton 
before pursuing his studies at Luther College and Normal 
School in Regina. Several years later, he completed a 
bachelor’s degree in Education at the University of 
Saskatchewan. Mr. Trapp was married to Bessie Stewart in 
1933, and Mr. Trapp is survived by two children, seven 
grandchildren, and six great-grandchildren. 

 
Mr. Trapp was a teacher by profession. He taught at 
schools in Dysart and Cupar and served for 21 years as the 
principal of the Punnichy school. Mr. Trapp’s devotion to 
his chosen profession was exemplified by his lengthy term 
as a councillor with the Govan school unit, and his election 
as the executive member and later president of the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation. 

 
In 1961 he was named the Canadian College of Teachers 
. . . or to the Canadian College of Teachers. Mr. Trapp was 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2837 

 

elected to the Assembly in 1964 and appointed minister of 
Education. In later years he served as director of continuing 
education with SaskPower until his retirement in 1980. 

 
Mr. Trapp was an active participant in sports circles in the 
community of Punnichy. He also . . . He held positions on 
the Punnichy Board of Trade, the golf club, and the home 
and school club. He was superintendent of the Sunday 
school. 

 
Mr. Trapp served with the Army Reserve during the World 
War II and later led the Punnichy Memorial Association. 

 
An avid gardener, Mr. Trapp continued to tend to his own 
garden in the ’90s. 

 
In recording our deepest sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly express its most sincere sympathy to the 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
Accordingly moved by the member from Yorkton, seconded by 
the member from Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret on the 
passing of the former member of the Assembly and express 
its grateful appreciation of contributions he made to his 
constituency, his community, and to the province. 

 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to join with the member from Yorkton, the Deputy Premier, 
in passing on the condolences on behalf of the Saskatchewan 
Party caucus to the Trapp family. As the motion indicated, Mr. 
Trapp represented the constituency of Touchwood which now 
makes . . . which is now part of the constituency I represent of 
Last Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
And also I must say that I didn’t personally know Mr. Trapp but 
my family certainly knew Mr. Trapp. I remember my parents 
speaking about Mr. Trapp. And when Mr. Trapp ran for the 
Liberal . . . was the Liberal candidate in the 1994 . . . ’64 
election, back in those days it was customary for the candidate 
to make arrangements to come to an area and then have 
someone who was familiar with the area take them about and 
introduce them to constituents in that particular area. 
 
And my parents were always politically aware but never really 
actively involved. But I guess it was about that time that my 
father decided that perhaps he should get somewhat involved 
and he had agreed to show Mr. Trapp around and so on. 
 
And I’m not sure whether they had met prior to that but I can 
remember in subsequent conversations saying . . . my father 
saying that he was very impressed with the ability of Mr. Trapp. 
And as history has recorded, he, Mr. Trapp, went on to win the 
election, win the seat, and become the minister of Education in 
the Ross Thatcher government. 
 
Mr. Trapp, although being born in Kamsack, spent a good part 
of his life in the Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency and 
particularly in the area near my home. In fact he taught in Cupar 
and Dysart; he started his teaching career at a small country 
school called McDonald Hills. And so, Mr. Speaker, it’s fitting 
that in fact his final resting place is in the small community of 

Dysart which was originally and still is part of the Touchwood 
constituency and Last Mountain-Touchwood constituency 
today. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, as I would like to say as I mentioned when I 
first started speaking about Mr. Trapp, on behalf of the 
Saskatchewan Party caucus, we would like to offer our sincere 
condolences to Mr. Trapp’s family. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Once again it is 
my honour to rise and speak to the condolence motion as a 
tribute to George Trapp who served as Saskatchewan’s minister 
of Education from 1964 to 1967. I want to express my 
sympathy to the family and also to point out Mr. Trapp’s love 
of life, teaching, and caring for children. 
 
After attending Normal School and then the University of 
Saskatchewan where he received his Bachelor of Education, he 
taught school for 34 years, all in small Saskatchewan 
communities. 
 
He was a counsellor of the Govan School Unit and was elected 
president of the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation in 1959, a 
position that he held for five years. 
 
Mr. Trapp was the principal of Punnichy School when he was 
elected to the legislature in April 1964 and became the minister 
of Education in the cabinet of Premier Ross Thatcher. 
 
Mr. Trapp held the Education portfolio until his electoral defeat 
in 1967. He then went on to work for Saskatchewan Power 
where he was director of continuing education and remained in 
that position until his retirement in 1980. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Mr. Trapp and his late wife Bess had two children, Murray and 
Marjorie. It is interesting, Mr. Speaker, to note that Marjorie 
married Gordon Staines, the son of Hubert Staines who had 
served as the minister of Education from 1941 to 1944 in the 
cabinet of the Hon. William Patterson — Marjorie’s children 
had two ministers of Education as their grandfathers. George 
Trapp had a great compassion for children and was devoted to 
the well-being of his students. He once said, and I quote: 
 

I have never found a problem child, but always a child with 
a problem. 

 
So, Mr. Speaker, I join with my colleagues in this Assembly 
today to offer our sincere sympathy to Mr. Trapp’s family and 
friends. With his passing we have lost a man who had a vision 
as Education minister that focused on the importance of the 
well-being of the children in the education system — not just 
the importance of the curriculum. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, I 
would ask: 



2838 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

That the Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly and 
expresses its grateful appreciation of the contributions he 
made to his community, his constituency, and to the 
province, Mr. Arthur Lee Smith. 

 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, upon the completion of the 
reading of the motion I would move, seconded by the member 
from Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the Opposition: 
 

Mr. Arthur Leslie Smith passed away on November 11, 
2002, and was a member of the Legislative Assembly from 
1982 until 1986, representing the constituency of Moose 
Jaw South for the Progressive Conservative Party. 
 
Mr. Smith, known as Bud, was born on June 14, 1919 in 
Cardross. He received his education at schooling at 
Marigold in Cardale. Mr. Smith was predeceased in 1966 
by his wife, Irene, and in 1985 by his second wife, Goldie. 
He is survived by his third wife, Mary, whom was married 
in 1988, his stepdaughters, two grandchildren, and five 
great-grandchildren. 
 
Mr. Smith’s first career was a farmer. He farmed in the 
Cardross area for 32 years. In the late 1960s he took up 
carpentry and was employed at Kos Construction for a 
time. Later he moved with his second wife, Goldie, to Swift 
Current and he worked at the Healy Hotel for one year 
before moving back to Moose Jaw. 
 
Mr. Smith had a life-long interest in politics that was 
evident in his efforts to attract and encourage new members 
to join and participate in his party’s activities. His 
commitment to a political career deepened when he sought 
the election in 1975 and 1978 elections. Undeterred, Mr. 
Smith successfully sought elections to this Assembly on the 
third attempt in the 1982 general election. 
 
Mr. Smith saw himself as a constituency man and devoted 
much of his energy to addressing the concerns of his 
constituents. And particularly, he advocated for 
improvements in health and social services. Mr. Smith also 
had an interest in the operations in the Assembly and 
served for a period as the deputy government whip. 
 
In recording of our deep sense of loss and bereavement, 
this Assembly expresses most sincere sympathy to the 
members of the bereaved family. 

 
And moved by the member from Yorkton, and seconded by the 
member from Rosetown-Biggar: 
 

That this Assembly record with sorrow and regret the 
passing of a former member of this Assembly, and express 
its grateful appreciation of the contributions he made to his 
community, his constituency, and to the province. 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
speak to the condolence motion of the late Bud Smith. Bud was 
born in 1919 in Cardross, Saskatchewan, and educated nearby. 
 

Bud’s first career was that of a farmer in the Cardross area for 
some 32 years. In 1966 he was predeceased by his first wife, 
Irene. Bud Smith worked for a time as a carpenter and then 
moved with his second wife, Goldie, to Swift Current where he 
worked for a while at the Healy Hotel before moving to Moose 
Jaw where he became a bit of an institution. 
 
Bud was always interested in politics and ran for election in 
1975 and 1978 before being elected in 1982 as the Progressive 
Conservative member for Moose Jaw South. Apart from his 
government and caucus responsibilities which included deputy 
government whip, Bud did an impressive job for his 
constituents. Bud was always a strong advocate for 
improvements in social services and health care and any other 
issue that he thought would concern his constituents. 
 
Bud is survived by his third wife, Mary, a stepdaughter, two 
grandchildren, and five great-grandchildren. And it’s a pleasure 
and an honour for me to join in offering my condolences and 
those of my party to them. 
 
I didn’t know Bud well but I had met him on more than one 
occasion and I found him to be, and he impressed me as being, 
an honest, a sincere, genuine, and caring man. 
 
Bud will remembered by his former constituents as a man 
deeply concerned with their issues and he will be missed. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It is 
an honour for me to say a few brief words of acknowledgement 
of the contribution that Bud Smith made to this House and to 
the parliamentary system and to my home community of Moose 
Jaw, and also to express my condolences on behalf of the 
constituents of Moose Jaw North to his wife Mary, and his 
family, and his many friends. 
 
I first got to know Bud Smith in the election of 1982. It was my 
first venture into the world seeking public office and I was less 
than totally successful on my part, but was in fact totally 
successful on Bud’s part. And it’s kind of interesting to reflect 
back as to how Bud got himself there because I think it was not 
anticipated that in that election that when it was over that the 
member of the Legislative Assembly for Moose Jaw South was 
going to be one Bud Smith. 
 
Bud got himself there because he was a proud and loyal 
Conservative. And I think it’s fair to say he continued with 
exactly that view of what is best for his world till the day he 
died. 
 
Bud Smith was a workhorse and he was I think what some 
thought was perhaps the perennial candidate in a difficult seat 
to win. And it was a surprise to many that when Bud became 
the MLA for Moose Jaw South in 1982, if it was a surprise to 
Bud — and I don’t know that it was — you’d sure never know 
it because the next day he was hard at work. 
 
And it’s been referred to by others in the debate on this motion 
that he was a constituency man. And I would say that that 
would probably be the most accurate single phrase that would 
describe Bud and that Bud would say about himself with a great 
deal of pride. I have absolutely no doubt that the day after the 
election that in spite of his strong loyalties to the Conservative 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2839 

 

Party, that Bud saw all of his constituents as his constituents, 
without bias, and he went about serving them all well. 
 
He enjoyed . . . I came to learn as I came to the House in later 
years and would talk to young people who had met Bud while 
coming to this building to visit, that he took a particular joy in 
meeting with young people and helping them to understand 
what goes on here, and always took great interest in their 
questions and their comments. 
 
It was Bud’s way to make other’s concerns his concerns; 
other’s questions were his questions; other’s needs were his 
needs. And I think the greatest tribute that I can pay to Bud 
Smith, hon. member, and I underline the word honourable, hon. 
member for Moose Jaw South, was that he was one who, quite 
frankly, gave politicians a good name. 
 
He gave politicians a good name because he was, as has been 
said, he was a man who was honest, he was sincere, he was 
hardworking, and he made his constituents’ objectives his 
objectives through his term that he served in this House. 
 
And it is I think out of respect for Bud’s particular approach to 
a service, and his respect for the parliamentary institution, Mr. 
Speaker, that I would say that we would all be served well if we 
all served our own constituents with the same kind of 
commitment and conviction of Bud Smith. The Legislative 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, the Legislative Assembly of 
Saskatchewan could . . . would never suffer by having too many 
Bud Smiths, and I simply want to acknowledge his contribution 
in his time of office to the institution of parliamentary 
democracy, and also to extend my personal sympathies to Bud’s 
family and friends. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As the sitting 
member for the Moose Jaw constituency that was formerly 
known as Moose Jaw South, and the constituency that was 
represented by Mr. Bud Smith from 1982 to 1986, it’s an 
honour to rise in support of the motion of condolence at Mr. 
Smith’s passing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I didn’t have the opportunity to know Bud Smith 
personally during his political career, but I did have an 
opportunity a number of times in the community to meet Bud 
and his wife, Mary, once he was back in private life. 
 
Mr. Smith always struck me as a very kind, honest, very 
genuine person, and I’m told he was a very talented carpenter. 
And I know that for a fact because I know a number of people 
that he did some very wonderful work for. But I’m told by 
others who knew Mr. Smith better than I, during his political 
life that he served the constituency of Moose Jaw well and the 
citizens that lived there. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on behalf of the constituency of Moose Jaw 
Wakamow, I extend the condolences to Mary and to the Smith 
family. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to add a few words of 
condolence as well to . . . in the memory of Bud Smith. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was one of the few members who had the 
privilege of getting to meet Mr. Smith. When I was first 

nominated as a candidate back in 1985, Mr. Smith at that time 
was a member of the Conservative caucus. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, if you were to talk to Bud at that 
time, he would have told you, as he indicated to me, that 
winning the 1982 election was certainly a very special occasion 
and it was a momentous occasion I guess for the Conservative 
Party at that time. But it was also a little disconcerting. 
 
He said when you elect 56 members to the Legislative 
Assembly, it just makes the job of being a member of such a 
large caucus just that much more awkward to work with, and 
you get all kinds of individuals. And I can attribute to the fact 
that there were different personalities in that caucus of the day 
and I’m certain that the NDP caucus in 1991 probably felt the 
same way. 
 
But the one thing I did appreciate about Mr. Smith while I was 
just a candidate — didn’t actually sit with and serve as a 
member of the Assembly when Mr. Smith was a member — 
was the fact that Bud was an individual who made everyone 
feel welcome. And I appreciated the sincerity with which he 
represented his constituents and the way he spoke up in caucus. 
 
He was an individual who didn’t, many times didn’t say a lot, 
but when he stood up, you listened because he had something 
that was worthwhile saying. And he spoke to you as a friend. 
And as I indicated, when I first met him he came up and made 
me feel welcome in a very large caucus when there were a lot of 
different groups within that caucus but he made you feel 
welcome as a newcomer on the block, just as a candidate at the 
time. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, after his defeat and just going back to 
private life, whenever we were around Moose Jaw for dinner or 
whatever, as has been indicated, Mr. Smith’s interest in politics 
never waned. He was always there. And there again he would 
come over and he’d say, oh it’s good to see you and how are 
things going and what’s new and exciting in Regina these days 
— I’m just too busy to really have spent the time or to go down 
to see how things are. 
 
Bud was a down-to-earth individual who made you feel 
welcome, spoke well and highly of everyone he worked with, 
and certainly represented his constituents well. And I express 
my condolences to his family at this time, to Mary, and we 
certainly pray that you will just find comfort in knowing that 
there are people who still remember your husband for all his 
hard work and dedication. 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, just a very, very few words 
about my neighbour and friend, Bud Smith. I will not need to 
repeat what many other members have observed in the House 
this afternoon about Bud’s honesty, his ability to serve his 
constituents when elected, his genuine human decency. 
 
But I want to share with members of the House this afternoon 
how interesting political life is. When I first sought elected 
office in 1986 to this Chamber, I found myself running against 
my good friend and neighbour, Bud Smith. We may vary in . . . 
this often will be the case, and I expect to the day Bud died we 



2840 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

will have varied in our political persuasions — but when it 
came to friendship and neighbourliness, we counted each other 
friend and neighbour; even more so, even more so, colleagues. 
 
Bud was a very good, close friend of my mother’s. In fact in 
that 1986 election campaign, I will never know, Mr. Speaker, to 
this day who my mother voted for — her friend Bud or for me. 
And if she’s watching, I’ll be wondering that tonight. 
 
Bud was truly a neighbour and a friend to many of us in Moose 
Jaw — a man who was deep in his political conviction, but 
always civil, and always decent, and always a straight shooter. 
And there are many of us, including my own family, including 
neighbours on Iroquois Street, former . . . including neighbours 
across Moose Jaw who are going to miss Bud Smith. 
 
And so the condolences of this House go to Bud’s wider family 
but very, very particularly to Mary, his wife. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Leave to introduce a motion, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, I move, 
seconded by the member from Cannington: 
 

That the resolutions just passed, together with the transcript 
of oral tributes to the memory of the deceased, be 
communicated to the bereaved families on behalf of this 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I ask leave of the Assembly to move a resolution in regards to 
the final report of the Electoral Boundaries Commission. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

GOVERNMENT MOTIONS 
 

Electoral Boundaries Commission 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move, 
seconded by the member for Yorkton: 
 

That the final report with addenda of the Electoral 
Boundaries Commission, being sessional paper 422 of the 
third session of the twenty-fourth legislature laid before this 
Assembly by the Speaker, be approved and adopted. 

 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to talk a little bit about the process that this commission 
went through in establishing the new boundaries, the reasons 
why it took place, and the results, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, once every 10 years we hold a census in this 
country that takes in all of the population of Canada, including 
all of the population of Saskatchewan. And under the legislation 
that we have in this province, once that census is done, then a 

review of the boundaries for the political entity of the province, 
for the members who will represent the people of Saskatchewan 
in this Assembly, those boundaries are reviewed based on the 
criteria that is outlined in the legislation: basically, Mr. Speaker, 
that there be 58 ridings in the province of Saskatchewan; that all 
the ridings, other than the two northern ridings, will have 
approximately the same number of people in each riding; and 
that there be a variance of no greater than 5 per cent plus or 
minus. 
 
That was the decision, Mr. Speaker, that was made in 1995, I 
believe it was, in the passage of the electoral boundaries Act. 
 
Now I personally, Mr. Speaker, have a slight disagreement with 
part of that legislation, that dealing with the numbers that say 
that each riding shall have the same number of people, plus or 
minus. I think we would be better served, Mr. Speaker, if it said 
same number of voters plus or minus because then it gives an 
equal weight to each of the votes no matter where they are in 
the province excluding, Mr. Speaker, the two northern ridings. 
 
And in fact, if you look at the two northern ridings, the one in 
particular, Mr. Speaker, really doesn’t have that much of a 
difference in population numbers to the rest of the province. 
They have risen almost to the point where the one riding — and 
I believe it’s the one on the east side, Athabasca, I could be 
wrong on that, Mr. Speaker — that is almost to the point of 
being equal to the rest of the province. The other riding is not 
quite as heavily populated, Mr. Speaker, but does still contain a 
huge area of the province. The two northern ridings represent 
virtually 50 per cent of the geographic area of Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s a small complaint though, Mr. Speaker, that I have, that I 
expressed back in 1995 and have continued to express 
whenever the opportunity has arisen. The entire process though 
of the decision how to proceed with a Boundaries Commission, 
I think, took a turn to the better in this commission, Mr. 
Speaker, in that the Premier and Lieutenant Governor in 
Council have the ability to appoint representatives to the 
boundary commission. 
 
This time, the Premier made an invitation to the official 
opposition and to the people of Saskatchewan that two of the 
representatives on that commission would be: (a) a 
representative of the governing party’s choice; and (b) a 
representative on that commission would be someone chosen by 
the official opposition, Mr. Speaker, with a third person, the 
chairman, being independent of politics. 
 
And I think that was a very courageous move by the Premier, a 
very welcome move by the Premier, Mr. Speaker, because 
selection of boundaries can be very partisan. And that choice 
allowed, Mr. Speaker, I believe, a boundary selection that was 
not just about capital P politics. 
 
The selection of an independent chairman, Judge Gunn, Mr. 
Speaker, and Judge Gunn’s decision that the recommendations 
coming out of the boundary commission should be unanimous, 
I think goes a long ways to depoliticizing the boundaries 
selection. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, whenever you draw lines on the map you’re 
obviously going to have people concerned that they have shifted 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2841 

 

from one side of the line to the other side of the line and you 
have . . . whenever you draw boundaries, Mr. Speaker, you will 
intersect communities of interest, and that’s unfortunate but it’s 
unavoidable. 
 
The boundary commission, Mr. Speaker, drew its lines as best it 
thought would represent the people of Saskatchewan, meeting 
that criteria of having equal number of people in each of the 
ridings, and in trying I believe to represent communities of 
interest. But one of the things that you have to recognize in this 
province is that community of interest don’t run on straight 
lines. There are natural geographic boundaries that represent 
those communities of interest such as a line of hills or a river. 
 
The one set of lines though that doesn’t follow geographic lines 
that most people across Saskatchewan, especially those in rural 
Saskatchewan, recognize are municipal boundaries. And a 
boundary commission needs to take into account, Mr. Speaker, 
those kind of lines that people are used to dealing with, such as 
municipal boundaries. In a lot of cases, Mr. Speaker, the 
commission tried to do that. It wasn’t always possible. 
 
So after the presentation, Mr. Speaker, of the initial report from 
the boundary commission, the boundary commission asked that 
anyone interested — and obviously members of this Assembly 
are people who would be very interested — as well as the 
political parties, Mr. Speaker, both as a provincial entity and 
within the local constituencies, as well as communities at large 
and individuals, Mr. Speaker, who were paying attention to this, 
made presentations before the Boundaries Commission. 
 
Some of those presentations, those requests for changes to the 
boundaries, Mr. Speaker, were accommodated by the boundary 
commission; others were not. And I’m sure the Boundaries 
Commission had good reasons for both of their decisions on 
both sides — where the changes requested were successful and 
where the changes that were requested were unsuccessful. 
 
Because it’s not . . . you’re not in an envious position when 
you’re sitting on a commission like this, Mr. Speaker, where 
you have to make the decisions because of the restrictions on 
the numbers that you have to divide a municipality, that you 
have to divide a community, Mr. Speaker, because you can’t 
accommodate the entire community of interest within one 
constituency. It becomes a difficult exercise, Mr. Speaker. It’s 
not an easy process. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were a number of constituencies that were 
successful. Some of the ones that I can think of, Mr. Speaker, 
were Thunder Creek, Cannington, Estevan, Swift Current, 
Cypress Hills, Arm River, and I’m told some of the Saskatoon 
ridings had representations from the, either the government 
MLAs or from their party at least to make changes. Those 
changes the commission allowed to take place. 
 
I know in my own case, Mr. Speaker, we requested a change 
that a community that had been in the Cannington constituency 
for as long as I can remember, Mr. Speaker, be allowed to 
remain in. But that meant adjusting it someplace else to 
balance. And because the change was taking place with another 
constituency, only one other constituency, the Constituency 
Boundaries Commission allowed that change to take place. 
 

A community that had been in the Estevan constituency 
remained in the Estevan constituency, and a community that 
had been in the Cannington constituency remained in the 
Cannington constituency. And I’m hoping, Mr. Speaker, that 
both communities are happy with that. I certainly know that the 
Alameda community was happy to remain in Cannington. 
 
Some of the constituencies though that made representations 
were unsuccessful, Mr. Speaker, and I’m sure that those 
communities were disappointed with the outcome. The 
presenters who sought those changes were disappointed with 
the outcome, Mr. Speaker, but as I said earlier whenever you 
draw lines it’s difficult to make everyone happy. 
 
It’s always a challenge and, for those of us who like challenges, 
a welcome challenge when you have an opportunity to meet 
new people, to go into new communities and learn their 
interests, their desires, and their visions for the province. It’s 
also sad, Mr. Speaker, when you lose an area, a community, 
from your constituency because you lose friends that you’ve 
developed there. You lose contacts. And, Mr. Speaker, as well, 
you lose political supporters. 
 
And so while we look forward to the challenge of the new areas 
that we may have gained in our constituencies, it also saddens 
us to lose those areas that we’ve had an opportunity to represent 
in the past. 
 
Mr. Speaker, while the boundaries change, I believe the changes 
that were brought forward by this commission work well across 
the board. 
 
Our party, Mr. Speaker, has stated that we believe that the 
process was fair, that the decisions made by the boundary 
commissioners were appropriate, and that we accept the 
boundary changes that were brought forward, even though 
we’re sad to lose those people out of our areas. 
 
It becomes though at times more difficult to get around the 
constituencies as they become larger and larger. But, Mr. 
Speaker, that’s a fact of life when we have a population that is 
shifting from one area to another or a population that is leaving 
the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Perhaps sometime, hopefully soon, we’ll be able to turn that 
around and have people coming back into rural Saskatchewan. 
And at that point in time our constituencies can start to get 
smaller again so that we don’t have to spend three hours driving 
from corner to corner, Mr. Speaker. I look forward to that time. 
 
And I look forward to representing the people of the 
Cannington constituency, the new Cannington constituency, 
after the next election, if the good people of Cannington again 
so desire, Mr. Speaker. And I’m proud to have represented the 
past Cannington constituency. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, I too would like to take part in the comments on this 
motion. But unlike my colleague from Cannington, I will be 
speaking opposed to this motion because of the various things 
that have happened. 



2842 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, there’s no question that change has taken place in 
Saskatchewan. And there are people who continually ask the 
question, why are we undergoing a change at this time? Why 
are we redrawing the constituencies? 
 
And I point out to them, as my colleague has done, that this is 
contained in the boundaries Act, in The Constituency 
Boundaries Act that was passed in this Legislative Assembly in 
1993. And as my colleague has explained, it does not include 
the two northern constituencies of Athabasca and Cumberland 
who are excluded. And it’s referred to as south and north. 
 
When we talk about the southern constituencies, Mr. Speaker, 
we . . . the boundary commission is bound by the fact that it 
takes the numbers from the census data and it divides that 
number by 56 to obtain a quotient. And for the people of the 
province to better understand this, I want to explain to them that 
this quotient comes to 16,909. And as my colleague has said, 
that is the total number of people; it is not voters. 
 
That commission can also change that number by plus or minus 
5 per cent. So when we look at the area of east-central 
Saskatchewan — the area that I represent, Canora-Pelly — the 
area of Canora, Pelly, Kelvington, Wadena, Saltcoats, Melville, 
Last Mountain-Touchwood, Indian Head, that area of the 
province has lost about 16,000 people from the last census data. 
So there’s no question that there was a need to redraw the 
boundaries. And if you look at that number of over 16,000 
people, it’s understandable then that one constituency would be 
eliminated from that area of the province. 
 
When we took a look at the data from the communities of 
Warman and Martensville and Rosthern and that area of the 
north part of Saskatoon, it was quick to see that that area had 
gained over 16,000 people. So there was an understanding that, 
indeed, the constituency would be transferred when we 
recognized that 56 constituencies would remain in southern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, when the interim report came out and it was 
published in the paper, in the daily papers in the province, one 
thing that jumped out very clearly and very shockingly to the 
people of Canora-Pelly was that the constituencies of Melfort, 
Kelvington, Wadena, and Canora-Pelly were now becoming 
thin narrow constituencies. They were not the normally square 
or normally rectangular horizontal constituency that 
predominates Saskatchewan. And if you take a look at most of 
the constituencies, you’re right, Mr. Speaker, not vertical but 
horizontal. 
 
So when people looked at this they said what are they doing, 
why are they drawing up a constituency that does not represent 
transportation patterns of our railways and our highways? And, 
Mr. Speaker, in my area, I’m sure many people have travelled. 
They know that Highway 16 runs east-west; Highway 5, which 
is almost parallel to it, runs the same way; Highway 49 runs the 
same direction. There are railways that run the same way. 
 
There are health districts that have been set up. And I’ll make 
reference to the community of Foam Lake who belonged to the 
East Central Health Region for decades and decades and now 
belongs to the Sunrise Region. They are now no longer going to 
be part of the Canora-Pelly constituency. 

It does not take into account school division patterns as we see 
happening in this area as well that run east-west; does not 
recognize commercial trading patterns. 
 
But most importantly, Mr. Speaker, when you take a look at the 
map of Saskatchewan and you look at a map of east central 
Saskatchewan and you see this green block in the middle of this 
constituency and people say well, what does the green area 
represent, Mr. Speaker, that’s the Porcupine Forest. And what 
this constituency drawing has done, the map that has been 
created, has created a situation where the entire Porcupine 
Forest will divide the Canora-Pelly constituency into two 
blocks — residential area north of the forest and residential area 
south of the forest. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, if the goal was to encourage voter 
participation and involvement in a constituency, how does 
placing all of those people on the north side of the forest into 
the same constituency do that? 
 
Now the commission also recognized that there was a problem 
with the current boundaries in Native reserves. And no 
question, Mr. Speaker, we pointed that out to them by saying 
that the reserve of Keeseekoose had the current boundary drawn 
right through it, right through the middle. 
 
Well that’s not, that’s not going to contribute to actively 
involve. So the commission recognized this. And as a result of 
its final report, it has put the three reserves of Key, Cote, and 
Keeseekoose all in the same constituency — a very positive 
move. And we did indicate that to the commission. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when the information was published in the 
paper, the notice of hearings was talked about. And I want to 
read this into the record, Mr. Speaker, because it quotes a 
section of the Act. It’s section 20 of the Act that I just referred 
to. It says, in performing its duties pursuant to this Act, the 
commission shall sit at those times and places the commission 
considers necessary to obtain adequate input respecting the 
areas of Saskatchewan to be included in proposed 
constituencies and the boundaries of those constituencies. 
 
So very clearly, Mr. Speaker, an interim report is developed, 
and that is what it is. It’s an interim report; it’s ideas that have 
been put forward by the commission based on whomever they 
have asked for technical assistance. That commission then 
publishes that interim report and travels throughout the 
province to, I’m assuming, get an understanding from the 
people of the area as to whether or not they have done the right 
thing. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, when I travelled throughout the area of 
Kelvington-Wadena, Canora-Pelly, Yorkton, Melville, I heard 
very clearly that the reaction to the report was not positive; that 
indeed it had, it had missed the mark, if I can use that term. 
 
And there was suggestions from people to see, why don’t you 
look at an alternate map; why don’t you propose to the 
commission something that will make it more workable for the 
areas affected? And the areas affected that I’m referring to, Mr. 
Speaker, are the current Melfort-Tisdale, Carrot River Valley, 
Kelvington-Wadena, and the Canora-Pelly. 
 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2843 

 

So we . . . a proposal was put together, and it was accompanied 
by letters of recommendation from village councils and town 
councils. It was endorsed by members of school board and 
health boards who said that we must look at a situation that 
addresses what I just spoke about, as trying to create a 
constituency that was more geographically contiguous rather 
than long, narrow, and vertical in nature. 
 
So this proposal was put forward, Mr. Speaker, at the 
September 19 hearing, the very final hearing in Yorkton, at 
which time we proposed a . . . maps of the area that would not 
have a domino effect. They would not involve any other parts 
of the province because we recognize that once you adjust one 
constituency, it has great effect on all other constituencies. 
 
And that proposal was put forward with those endorsements 
from . . . even, if I can say so, a motion that was passed by the 
village council of the village of Invermay who said that it is 
more important to them to belong to areas that they are served 
by in the area of health, in the area of education, and 
transportation. 
 
But the other thing, Mr. Speaker, that was also interesting is 
that at the very same hearing a proposal was put forward by the 
executive of the New Democratic Party of the Canora-Pelly 
Association. And that proposal was very much similar to the 
one that was proposed by myself. It stated that the area north of 
the forest was just not . . . it wasn’t right to have that area 
having to join with a much larger populated area to the south, 
and it basically recommended the same thing — that that area 
be allowed to stay with Hudson Bay and that area of Carrot 
River Valley. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you have to remember that a village of 
Clemenceau, if I can use that example, if you look at the final 
report, the village of Clemenceau and the area between 
Clemenceau and Hudson Bay to a distance of about 10 miles 
south of Hudson Bay, is now part of the Canora-Pelly 
constituency. That is they are not going to be travelling to 
Preeceville or to Canora for shopping, Mr. Speaker; their 
community is Hudson Bay. Yet politically, through this process 
of representation, they are now going to be served by an MLA 
that is representing a different area. So the New Democratic 
Party executive proposed something very similar. 
 
In our discussions with the members, Mr. Speaker, the three 
commission members, I was surprised by the comment of one 
of the members who said, your proposal that you’re putting 
forth today really upsets the apple cart in terms of the changes 
that you’re recommending. And I asked him, what do you 
mean? And he said, well your proposal suggests that over 6,000 
people — if I remember his answer correctly, and it is 
contained in their records — are being affected. 
 
And I said, well no it doesn’t, because as of September 19, Mr. 
Speaker, if the Premier of this province would have decided to 
call an election, the boundaries that we would have been using 
would be the current existing boundaries that we have. In other 
words, nothing had been changed. Until this Legislative 
Assembly deals with the motion that is before you, nothing has 
changed. 
 
So I took a look at his numbers, and I said, why are you 

suggesting that our report is now making changes to the interim 
report? What we’re doing is looking at what existed and saying, 
can it be made better? And I’ve already indicated that the 
placement of the three reserves in the same constituency, 
drawing the fact that you have to deal with the loss of 
population, those were the positive things. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, in the area of those four constituencies that 
I’ve just mentioned, the commission’s proposal which we see in 
the final report means that 68 per cent of the people will be . . . 
that are going to be left in those constituencies were in their 
previous commission . . . in their previous constituency. 
 
In other words, 32 per cent are being moved. That is a huge 
number, Mr. Speaker. And I know that the Chief Electoral 
Officer has indicated that she’s concerned about the fact that 
less voters have turned out to vote in general elections in the 
province of Saskatchewan. And I’m sure you’re concerned, and 
so am I, Mr. Speaker, that this is not good, that we need to have 
more involvement by people. So the commission is 
recommending that in those four constituencies, 32 per cent are 
being moved to a different area. 
 
The proposal that we put forward, Mr. Speaker, said that 85 per 
cent would remain the same — 85 per cent would remain the 
same to the commission’s proposal of 68. So we weren’t 
drawing up something that was outrageous, that was different 
and hard to understand. It was trying to get a consensus on the 
trading patterns, trying to get a consensus on where people did 
their commercial shopping, where their transportations — both 
railway and highway structures — ran. 
 
(16:15) 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that proposal was also supported across 
party lines, because a very similar proposal was put forward by 
the New Democratic Party. Yet it seems that the only 
opposition to that proposal was that it was affecting the interim 
report. And I find that very hard to understand, Mr. Speaker, 
when the purpose of the hearings was to find out what was . . . 
what the people thought, what kind of alternate suggestions 
could be made to that proposal so that when we looked at what 
we had — which is our current position today — to what we’re 
going to have in this final report, what would be best served for 
the people of that area. And I don’t think, Mr. Speaker, that the 
final report that has been produced by the commission took 
those things into account whatsoever. 
 
And I think that the people of Canora-Pelly are going to be 
upset and be surprised to understand that a commission that did 
not consult with the people of Saskatchewan beforehand . . . 
And I talked to village councils, I talked to school boards and 
asked them whether they had been sent a survey by the 
commission before the actual interim report was released on 
July 30. Not one person said they had been contacted, and it 
produced an interim report that asked for input and yet not one 
bit on that information was taken into account, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I’m talking about, I believe, a flawed process. Not the fact 
that the commission didn’t do its work but the fact that there 
was a situation that allowed the commission to take a good look 
at the information, to take a good look at what would be best for 
the people of Saskatchewan and we put forward that proposal. It 



2844 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

was not met with any opposition by the commission members, 
in fact, there was comments by Madam Justice Gunn that the 
information that was provided was something that would be 
taken into consideration. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will not support the motion because I think 
the process that is in place in the Act is flawed. It needs to have 
a situation where before the actual preparing of an interim 
report there needs to be a public consultation process to ensure 
that the technical people that are involved with the commission 
understand what is required — they understand that there’s a 
geographical barrier called the Porcupine Forest, that they 
understand that the areas of transportation and the area of 
commercial trading patterns need to be taken into account. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, with those comments I would be indicating 
that I will not be supporting the resolution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want just to speak briefly to the referral motion and 
to the legislation, The Representation Act, as it relates to the 
receiving of the final report on the Boundaries Commission. 
And I want to go back, if I can, just through a bit of history. 
 
This Assembly on June 22 of 1993 adopted legislation that 
would ensure a number of things. First of all, that would ensure 
fairness as it related to the decision making of drafting of the 
electoral boundaries. And what it called for was an independent 
commission, an independent commission that would allow for 
the appointment of a member of that commission by members 
of the opposition which this three-party commission ended up 
being. One was appointed by the government and of course a 
member of the judicial system to ensure fairness — to ensure 
that in fact the commission would draw impartial boundaries. 
 
There was a process that was put in place as it related to 
consultation. And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, it may be that 
some members of the House are not satisfied but have had 
ample opportunity to make presentations to this commission as 
it relates to the new boundaries Act. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I note with interest that there were two 
members of the present opposition who were part of that debate 
in 1993. And so I’m assuming that they will be willing to 
support what I think is a fair and a reasoned process in terms of 
determining our electoral boundaries. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think we understood and everybody understood 
the changing nature of our demographics across this country. 
People are moving to urban centres. Rural communities are 
depopulating, not only in our province, but around this country. 
I think it’s evidenced by the fact that there are 35,000 fewer 
primary people . . . fewer people working in the primary sector 
of agriculture which means fewer people living in some of 
those smaller communities. So it would stand to reason that the 
populations will shift. 
 
And that’s the reason that this Bill was enacted with a plus or 
minus 5 per cent, so that it would ensure that fairness in terms 
of the principle of one person, one vote which is what this 
legislation and what these recommendations put to this House 
will in fact do. 
 

Now, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s fair to say that people of 
Saskatchewan want fair representation. I think there’s been 
ample opportunity for public input as it related to the process 
that we did in putting those boundaries in place. 
 
I think they want the concept of one person, one vote kept 
whole, which in fact the recommendation by the Boundaries 
Commission does as well. And I think they are expecting of the 
representation that they send to this legislature, Mr. Speaker, to 
recognize that they agreed and they support the principles under 
which this Boundaries Commission, the Act to provide the 
division of Saskatchewan into the constituencies, was put in 
place to do. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I know that all members of the Assembly 
have had time and ample opportunity to share their constituents’ 
views not only with the commission but to share their 
constituents’ views with other members of the legislature. And I 
know there’s been a lot of discussion as it related to that. I 
myself was part of that discussion. 
 
As you will know, there are some minor changes in the area that 
I represent and I was able to discuss these changes with my 
people of my political persuasion, people in my political 
organization. We were able to have a look at whether or not we 
felt they fairly represented the people of Prince Albert 
Northcote. I was able to hear through my constituency office 
from people throughout my constituency. 
 
And in my travels around this province I was able to hear, in no 
uncertain terms, that people wanted the principles of the Bill 
enacted. They felt it was the appropriate time to make the 
amendments, to make changes, and I hope and I believe that 
that’s what will be approved and accepted in this legislature. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I think it does reflect a changing economy and 
the boundaries will reflect that. It will reflect the fact that there 
are more people working in the professional services. I think it 
will reflect the fact that there are more people that are working 
in the forest industry. It will reflect the fact that primary 
agriculture has changed and that the secondary manufacturing 
as it relates to agriculture is growing. I think it will reflect the 
fact that our value-added as it relates to agriculture is a new part 
of our growing industry, and that there have been 25,000 jobs 
created outside of the primary side of agriculture in just the last 
short while. 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, it’s fair to say that people recognize 
that the job that you may have in 1995 may not be the job that 
you have in 2002 and that a different source of income, 
different job opportunities will take you to different places. But 
what needs to be maintained and needs to be ensured is the 
principle of one person, one vote, and there needs to be a 
process where a vote in urban Saskatchewan doesn’t count 
more or doesn’t count less than a vote in rural Saskatchewan, 
and that a vote in rural Saskatchewan is as important as a vote 
in northern Saskatchewan is, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so that’s why I can say that I supported this legislation on 
June 22 of 1993, which was almost 10 years ago now. 
 
And I can say that I supported it because it very much 
supported the principles of democracy. And I want to say that 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2845 

 

there was no recorded division. And I want to say that my 
caucus supported it and the cabinet of that day supported it 
because it was fair. It protected democracy. It protected this 
legislature from unfair boundaries drawing, which has been, as 
we well know, there is some history of that over this country 
and over the British parliamentary system. 
 
And the days of gerrymander, I think people of Saskatchewan 
felt, were well beyond us and that we wanted fairness and we 
needed elections fought on fair boundaries. 
 
People want to, Mr. Speaker, fight elections, not on a boundary 
system where your vote counts more than someone else’s or 
someone else’s more than yours. They want to debate issues 
and they want the debate. And they want politicians, I believe, 
to debate issues not based on, is my riding more secure than 
yours. 
 
I think what they want are economic development plans put 
forward by political parties. And as we go into elections, we’ll 
debate those issues. They will surely fight elections on 
government records, which is a reasonable thing. They will 
surely fight elections based on what opposition’s alternatives 
are. These are what elections need to be fought on. And I want 
to say that members of this House are very much here to protect 
the principles of democracy, which is what this legislation does. 
 
Now I want to recognize that no one likes change. I think that’s 
fair to say. Change is always difficult and it’s an imposition on 
the political associations who work on behalf of candidates to 
manage the political affairs of an election. I think it’s an 
imposition on people when they go to the polls, not knowing 
perhaps where they need to be in terms of exercising their 
franchise. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what I believe we have here is a process that 
all members of this legislature agreed to in 1993; to create an 
impartial boundary, to bring forth an impartial recommendation 
to this Chamber that protects democracy and that protects 
fairness and gives all Saskatchewan people an equal say in this 
Chamber. 
 
I think that no one can argue that the commission did a fine job. 
I think they did when I look at how the changes were made, for 
the most part. There’s a little swing in terms of the percentage 
of vote from previous elections. That’s one of the things that I 
noted. 
 
And the boundaries, although some changes were made that 
will be intrusive, and some communities, as the member from 
Cannington said, will not be aligned with others that they wish 
they could be, but overall what we have is a system that brought 
forth fair boundaries, boundaries that we, members of this 
legislature, could be and should be supporting. 
 
So I, Mr. Speaker, support the resolution to adopt the final 
report on the Boundaries Commission. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my pleasure to 
join with my colleague from Canora-Pelly today to express my 
frustration about the process surrounding the changes to the 
constituency boundaries. 
 

I want to . . . my colleague from Prince Albert Northcote 
seemed to suggest that we were not in favour of the changes 
because it had something to do with representation, and I want 
to assure him that of course we want to make sure that everyone 
in this province has equal opportunity to vote. We understand 
that the process happened because of the census, and there has 
been a movement of people within the province, so to ensure 
equal representation, this process had to take place. 
 
Representing people in Kelvington-Wadena has been a great 
honour for me in the past seven years, and this isn’t something 
that I’m objecting to, the actual changing . . . The people within 
the constituency isn’t a problem. 
 
But as the member from Canora-Pelly so ably stated, there 
should be an opportunity for some say by the citizens of this 
great province on where the boundaries should be. The draft 
proposal for this, for the boundaries, was circulated around the 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency and people actually shook 
their heads. They saw that there were three constituencies — 
Kelvington-Wadena, Canora-Pelly, and Melfort — whose 
boundaries actually ran north and south. They didn’t . . . they 
did not take into consideration the trading patterns, the 
professional areas, or the areas of interest. They didn’t even 
take into consideration the fact that they were going to run 
through, right through the middle, or through the edge of 
Kinistin Reserve. 
 
The rest of the provincial constituencies are based on east-west 
trading patterns, as is the transportation patterns. Many of the 
towns and villages and RMs (rural municipality) in the 
Kelvington-Wadena constituency and neighbouring 
constituencies wrote letters of support for a proposal that was 
put forward by a number of caucus members in both, and 
members from the NDP Party as well, that offered another 
proposal. 
 
And people ask me if they thought there would be an 
opportunity to actually change the people’s . . . the boundary 
commission’s mind. And I actually believed it would. I believed 
that their arguments made sense about trading patterns. I 
believe their arguments made sense about impacting fewer 
voters than the proposal that was put forward by the boundary 
commission would. I believe that because there was a smaller 
variance in population, that we were actually closer to the 
quotient than the proposal put forward by the boundary 
commission, made sense, and actually . . . and that we would be 
more geographically contiguous. 
 
(16:30) 
 
I guess making sense isn’t something that seemed to have 
happened now with the boundary commission because the 
interim report really reflects very little change from what was 
originally suggested. There seemed to be no desire to deviate 
from the interim report even if it went against the wishes of 
many of the constituents. 
 
I know that my members on this side of the House will be 
delighted to represent any of the constituents in this province. 
Our objections are not with the people in the province. Our 
objection is with the process that seems to stem around the 
inflexibility of the commission to look at some of the proposals 



2846 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

that were put forward by the people. 
 
I would like to suggest that the next time boundaries are drawn 
up that we leave room for public input. It’s something that I 
believe has not happened this time. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, I will not be supporting this resolution. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I want to make a few comments on this issue and will indicate 
that I am supporting this resolution. I think a lot of work, very 
good work, has gone into producing the report and I think the 
members opposite are right in pointing out that there were some 
real challenges in trying to define what the boundaries might be. 
 
But at the core of all of this was the principle of making sure 
that our democracy is as effective as it can possibly be; that 
every person eligible to vote, that their vote counts as much as 
every other person’s. So that was one of the very core principles 
that was being used in designating what these boundary lines 
would be. 
 
I think as well in setting up the commission, having Justice 
Ellen Gunn as the Chair of the commission and for the opening 
to be there for the Sask Party to put a name forward for a 
representative on that committee and to have a very good 
balanced committee with a representative who was put forward 
by the government as well, clearly we were trying to strike a 
good, broad balance to get an understanding of what both 
parties, what all of the key players were needing in this kind of 
a commission. 
 
I believe that the work that they did in there, basing the analysis 
on the census, is probably the best that could be done in terms 
of making sure that every person got an equal vote. And I think 
that when we look at some of the divisions on the boundaries, 
as I mentioned earlier, the members opposite, some of them 
have pointed out, that maybe it didn’t follow the natural 
movement of the communities — we’ve seen that as well in 
some of the divisions in the city where a natural community 
might have been divided. 
 
But all of that happened just simply to make sure that our 
democracy gave the best representation possible; that each 
person’s vote would count. 
 
Now I look at my own constituency, the constituency of Regina 
Qu’Appelle Valley. There will be some changes there and some 
of those changes I have some difficulty with. Mostly it’s 
because of the years of relationship that have been built up with 
people along No. 6 Highway, people who run businesses there 
and who farm along that area who I’ve come to know during 
the years. Some of those people will be outside of the 
constituency. And I’ll miss that relationship and the challenge 
and support that some of those people have given. 
 
I will also miss the . . . being able to represent the people of the 
community of Lumsden. The people out there have been a very, 
very interesting and supportive group of people. I’ve enjoyed 
building the relationship. But in terms of making sure that the 
rural constituencies are not overly large, there needed to be 
communities involved in some of those constituencies. 
Lumsden, being a larger community in the area, was added to 

one of the other constituencies. 
 
So ultimately, Mr. Speaker, I believe that the work that was 
done was done with the proper view in mind — to make sure 
that everyone’s vote counted the same in this province, to try 
and do that as accurately as possible, to look at the directions of 
growth in the cities. For example, in the northwest corner of the 
city we have significant expansion so there will be many new 
voters in the constituency, and we had to build so that those 
voters would not distort the view in the next years ahead of us. 
 
So I believe overall that a very good job was done by the 
commission. It was balanced by the fact that there were 
representatives of government and opposition on the 
commission, and that the Chair, Justice Ellen Gunn, did a 
tremendous job as Chair in trying to help make that balance 
work well. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to indicate that I 
will be supporting this motion and believe that we will have 
good boundaries and a very successful election process in the 
next provincial election. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I rise in support of the motion before this House, and I do have 
just one suggestion as to how I believe in the future the process 
could be strengthened. But as many speakers have already 
alluded to, this is an independent, non-political redrawing of the 
constituency boundaries and it is the process that we have to 
endorse and accept. 
 
May I say that on behalf of the Battlefords — and I realize 
obviously there are 58 ridings in the province, we’re only one 
— but may I say on behalf of the Battlefords, I know that the 
move to join North Battleford and Battleford again together as 
one constituency has the full support of the people of my 
community. And I’m sure of that because of when the 
commission came through the Battlefords, they actually 
cancelled the meeting that was to be held in the Battlefords 
because they had received no indication at all of any opposition 
to the move to rejoin us and nor have I heard a single, solitary 
person express opposition to that. 
 
In fact, the opposition we had in the Battlefords was 10 years 
ago when the decision was made to split our two communities. 
And that was very unpopular at that time and so we are pleased 
that that has been reversed. 
 
Incidentally, Mr. Speaker, the Battlefords will now be the 
largest constituency in the province in terms of population, so I 
will have more constituents than any other member of this 
House. However that is fine by me that I may have to serve 
more constituents than some of the other members, but 
fortunately that won’t be difficult for me. 
 
May I also say that it is the view of our community that a 
by-election for Battleford-Cut Knife is not a good thing. In view 
of the fact the vote today will wipe out that constituency, it 
seems a waste of money to have a by-election to elect 
somebody for a few months to represent a seat that already no 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2847 

 

longer exists. 
 
It would seem to make far more sense, instead of having a 
by-election, to have a general election. And then the 
Battlefords, as the people and the other communities of our 
province, can rule and give their approval or otherwise of a 
Premier who has now sat for two years with no mandate from 
the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
So we believe that there should not be a by-election, there 
should be a general election. And the Battlefords certainly 
supports that again we will have one representative in this 
House for both the city of North Battleford and the town of 
Battleford. 
 
I do have one suggestion though for how I believe the process is 
flawed, and I realize that my remarks apply as much or more to 
the federal redistribution that is also going on concurrently with 
our own. And it is simply this, Mr. Speaker — missing from 
both the provincial and federal legislation is any consideration 
of historic boundaries. In my view boundaries should be left 
intact and only changed insomuch as population shifts demand. 
The whole purpose of redistribution was supposed to have been 
that in the first place. The purpose of redistribution was to take 
account of shifting populations, it was not to totally reinvent the 
map of our constituencies every 10 years. 
 
Federally they have not only totally redrawn the map — they 
have not only totally redrawn the map — but they have changed 
the name of every constituency and in some cases, including the 
constituency the Battlefords will now be in, the names adopted 
are meaningless in terms of identifying where that seat is. 
 
Now the hon. member for Canora-Pelly made reference to 
declining voting rates. And that is true not only in 
Saskatchewan but throughout the western world. Now it may be 
a small piece of the puzzle but I believe that we encourage voter 
turnout when people get to know the community, the 
constituency they’re in, the people they are expected to work 
with, the people who the member serves; if there is some 
ongoing, continuing contact there as opposed to continually 
redrawing the map totally so that people involved in the 
political process, the party organizations, the members, are 
continually changing and they never have a chance to get 
comfortable with one another and to work with one another. 
 
So I believe that both federally and provincially the legislation 
should be amended so that when we set an independent 
commission, one of the considerations for that independent 
commission is the existing and historical boundaries and names 
of the constituencies, and then they should only be redrawn to 
the extent that population shift demands. There should not, in 
other words, be change simply for the sake of change in both 
the boundaries and the names. 
 
With that suggestion though I think that the independent 
Boundaries Commission report we have here, it would be 
irresponsible now to refuse it. It must be accepted and endorsed. 
 
By being endorsed we then can begin the work as members and 
as party organizations to have candidates and organizations in 
place for a provincial election, hopefully in the very near future, 
hopefully before we waste money on a by-election, and other 

by-elections as people over there bail. Instead of having 
by-elections as members opposite bail, we will have a general 
election so that all of the people of Saskatchewan on the new 
boundaries can elect a new MLA who speaks for and has their 
confidence. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I will be voting in favour of this report. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today to speak on behalf of the constituents of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy about their concerns about the decisions made by the 
boundary commission with regard to the constituency of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
And my concern is twofold, Mr. Speaker: firstly, the disregard 
for natural trading patterns; and secondly, the disregard for 
constituencies following RM lines. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, there 
will be nine RMs that are directly affected by the natural trading 
patterns that have been changed because of the boundary 
changes to the constituency. Some of these changes affect RMs 
that are taken out of the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency and 
even more affect those that will now be put into the 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, for those that will now be part of the 
Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency with the boundary changes, 
there are three distinct concerns here. Natural trading patterns 
for the RM of Terrell, Willow Bunch, and the west side and 
possibly all of the RM of Harte Butte is Moose Jaw, not 
Weyburn. The natural trading pattern for the RM of Elmsthorpe 
and Caledonia is Regina, possibly Moose Jaw, but certainly not 
Weyburn. And the third one is for the RM of Scott; the trading 
pattern would probably be 50/50 Regina and Weyburn. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the natural trading patterns for two RMs that 
presently were in the Weyburn constituency but now will not be 
part of the Weyburn-Big Muddy constituency are the RM of 
Wellington and the RM of Griffin whose natural trading pattern 
is Weyburn. And one that is of very grave concern is the RM of 
Laurier which will now no longer be part of the RM of . . . or of 
the constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy, but which will 
become part of the Estevan constituency. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the mayor, Darald Marin, of Radville made 
representation to the Boundaries Commission and as well 
expressed his concern on behalf of the town of Radville and the 
RM of Laurier because of the concern with the changing of 
Radville and the RM of Laurier being taken out of the 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy and put in the 
constituency of Estevan, which certainly is not their natural 
trading pattern. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the second concern which I am raising today and 
which is certainly a concern for constituents in my area is that 
the new constituency boundary lines are not drawn against RM 
boundary lines and in many cases they do not even follow along 
township lines, but are in fact drawn in the middle of a field 
somewhere. 
 
(16:45) 
 



2848 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this affects eight RMs that are in, will now 
be in the new constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy. Mr. 
Speaker, five of these RMs will have three townships and a 
third of three townships in the RM of Weyburn, and the rest 
will be in other RMs or other constituencies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably the one that is most alarming is that the 
RM of Fillmore No. 96 will be divided in four ways. The 
constituency of Weyburn-Big Muddy will have one township 
and approximately half of another township. The rest of the RM 
will be split between constituencies of Cannington, Moosomin, 
and Indian Head. So four MLAs will represent one RM. I think 
anyone can see that this does not make any sense. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the RM of Griffin will be divided one-third in 
Weyburn-Big Muddy and the other two-thirds in the RM . . . in 
the constituency of Cannington. Mr. Speaker, the RM of Griffin 
will now be represented by two MLAs. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the RM of Willow Bunch No. 42 would have 
approximately three townships in Weyburn-Big Muddy, the rest 
in the constituency of Wood River, and so now be served by 
two MLAs. 
 
The information regarding these eight RMs is self-explanatory. 
The initiative to use coterminous boundaries to deliver services 
such as health, education, social services within parameters 
already used by municipal government and provincial 
governments is widely supported. It makes good sense for 
delivery of service and enables better efficient use of time and 
resources. It also provides for a format for ideas, planning, and 
executing solutions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the boundaries for the Weyburn-Big Muddy 
constituency completely negate the use of coterminous 
boundaries. It is moving this important issue backwards. 
Further the changes do not even respect the historic relationship 
between MLAs and RMs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, probably though dividing the RMs does a 
disservice to MLAs and certainly to RM councils, but most 
importantly, it does a disservice to the constituents of those 
RMs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, constituencies must have a population within plus 
or minus 5 per cent of 16,909, and that is an accepted fact. But 
within this criteria, if we address this criteria, I would have 
thought that beyond that there would have been, the boundaries 
would have taken into consideration trading patterns and also 
regard for RM lines. And that this clearly was not reflected in 
the decision of the Boundaries Commission, and in this way, 
has been a great disservice to the constituents of these areas. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on behalf of the constituents of 
Weyburn-Big Muddy, I will not be supporting this resolution. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
certainly I would like to enter into the debate on the motion 
since the constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood will be 
changed significantly once these new boundaries are adopted. 
 
The constituency presently lies on a north-south axis, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and after the changes are put into effect the 

constituency will run on an east-west axis. We will be losing 
the north half of the constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and 
gaining a large area on the east side of what now is Last 
Mountain-Touchwood which will take the constituency to the 
doorstep of the city of Melville. 
 
I guess one of the most significant changes is that we will be 
losing the largest town in the constituency. Last 
Mountain-Touchwood is by its very nature a rural constituency, 
with the largest town at the moment in the constituency is the 
town of Wynyard which has a population of around 2,000 
people. Once these changes are implemented our largest, the 
largest town in the constituency will be the town of Strasbourg 
with a population of 760. 
 
So we will be, if you’re looking for a definition of a rural 
constituency, I think Last Mountain-Touchwood will certainly 
be that definition. 
 
It is with a bit of regret, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that I view these 
changes to the constituency in that the part of the constituency 
that we are losing was responsible for my involvement in the 
political process, and is probably the reason why I’m here 
today. 
 
It was a group, three individuals from the town of Wynyard, 
who drove into our yard on a sunny January day back in 1999. 
They had called earlier and asked if we were going to be home 
and if they could visit us. And Marlene and myself — my wife 
— we said well certainly, we always will welcome visitors in 
our home. And these people arrived at our home, we had coffee, 
and talked politics a bit. And at that point in my life I really 
wasn’t involved in the political process in any official manner. 
 
I certainly always kept a keen ear and eye as to what was 
happening at both the provincial and federal level, but that was 
about the extent of it, and really had no idea or no real desire to 
really get much more involved than that. But these three 
individuals, they asked if we would buy a membership, and we 
thought it’s about time to get involved at least to that level, and 
purchased a membership in the Saskatchewan Party. And then 
from that point they asked some time . . . a few days later, 
whether we would organize a bit of an informational meeting. 
And to make a long story short, I am here today discussing this 
motion, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — So it is with a bit of regret that I see the town of 
Wynyard being removed from Last Mountain-Touchwood, 
along with the villages of Wishart and Bankend. And those 
towns are in the north part of the constituency. But we are also 
losing some towns who have been long . . . who have . . . as 
long as I can remember, have been in Last 
Mountain-Touchwood and now they are being removed, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And I certainly regret that change. Towns like 
Govan and Duval, Raymore and Quinton, along with two First 
Nations communities of Kawacatoose and Day Star. And 
certainly I enjoyed working with the people in those areas and 
will continue to serve them as long as this session continues, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, having said that, I certainly look forward because I 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2849 

 

intend to continue in the political process. And I am confident 
that new constituency of Last Mountain-Touchwood which will 
now have towns like Ituna, Balcarres, Abernethy, some of the 
beach communities of Fort San and Katepwa, along with some 
First Nations communities of Little Black Bear, Star Blanket, 
Okanese and Peepeekisis and also the First Nations community 
of Standing Buffalo which seems to move in and out of Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, will now return back to Last 
Mountain-Touchwood. 
 
And as I said, I fully intend to continue in the political process 
and I’m sure the people of those communities, along with the 
people remaining in Last Mountain-Touchwood, will see fit to 
have their . . . and retake or regain their traditional role of 
always electing a member to the government side of the House. 
 
And I look forward to representing the Saskatchewan Party and 
a Saskatchewan Party government after the next election, Mr. 
Speaker. And so therefore I will be supporting the motion. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to enter into the debate on the constituency boundaries 
resolution. 
 
I think the previous speakers, Mr. Speaker, have done an 
adequate job of explaining the process and the mechanisms that 
were used to get us to where we are today and the resolution 
that we have before us. 
 
I have to admit that I have a certain degree of sympathy with 
the Opposition House Leader, Mr. Speaker. I agree with him 
that population should be based on number of voters and not 
number of people. But perhaps that is a debate best left for 
another day. 
 
My observation, Mr. Speaker, is that this particular process has 
probably been the fairest to date. And as indicated by our House 
Leader, an invitation was extended to the official opposition to 
recommend a representative to the commission. That invitation 
was accepted. And I think at the end of the day we have a 
process that was fair and that the people of Saskatchewan can 
have a degree of confidence in. 
 
Mr. Speaker, after the interim report was issued I consulted 
with all of the stakeholders in what would be the new 
constituency of Carrot River Valley and found that for the most 
part, people were very, very satisfied with the 
recommendations. The only issue seemed to be with people 
outside the constituency wanting to be inside the constituency, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
There seemed to be areas that thought they might be better 
served had they been part of Carrot River Valley. And while 
that all is certainly very flattering, one has to remember that 
Carrot River Valley is now the third largest constituency in the 
province. Only Cumberland and the city of North Battleford 
have larger populations. So it certainly would have been very 
difficult to have included more area and increase that 
population. I think it would very quickly have gotten outside of 
the acceptable variance. 
 

I think the new boundaries for Carrot River Valley much better 
reflect traditional trading patterns and reflect a more historic 
constituency configuration that people are very, very 
comfortable with. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I would like to congratulate Justice 
Gunn and the other two members of the commission on a job 
well done and indicate that I will be supporting the resolution. 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s a 
privilege to enter into the debate on the resolution put forward 
with regards to the boundary commission. 
 
It certainly has been an interesting two years, I would say, 
because we’ve been expecting for probably a year the 
Boundaries Commission to be struck. For a number of months 
we weren’t quite sure how many constituencies there were 
going to be. I was quite relieved when the Premier decided to 
leave them at 58 and just look at the population and redesign 
the boundaries. 
 
I do want to give the Premier another pat on the back, I guess I 
would say, for making the commission as non-partisan as 
possible; for choosing the people that he chose on the 
commission. Certainly I heard over and over and over again, in 
the lead-up to the naming of the commission, the fact that . . . 
how would it be drawn up? Was it only going to be drawn up 
with NDP people on the commission? And I want to give him 
credit for not doing that. 
 
The sentiment of the general public out there, the cynicism of 
the general public to this government was certainly that it was 
going to be an NDP-driven commission. And so I want to give 
him credit on this one issue that he decided to look at it as 
objectively as possible and name people from each party . . . not 
necessarily each party but more of an objective viewpoint to 
redraw the boundaries. 
 
Certainly when you look at redrawing boundaries it’s never 
easy because it entails change, and none of us at times want to 
see change. And after listening to a couple of the members 
speak before me, it’s not just change, it’s the way the change 
was made. And they have very good reasons why they are 
concerned in the areas that they represent, and in maybe the 
greater picture, the way the province was redrawn up. There is 
some concern with the process that was used, Mr. Speaker. And 
I think any time that you enter into a redistribution or changing 
of the boundaries, you’re going to run into problems like that, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I do know that different places that I was at, and when we 
were talking about should there be 58 MLAs representing this 
province . . . And some people think that that’s too many; some 
people were in favour of dropping it down from 58. They didn’t 
know whether the province was big enough to hold . . . for 58 
constituencies. And the easy answer back is maybe they’re 
right. 
 
It’s about this time this province started to grow and match the 
number of representatives that we have in this province, Mr. 
Speaker, because for the last 10 years we’ve been seeing the 
population decline out of this province. And certainly that’s 



2850 Saskatchewan Hansard December 9, 2002 

 

where the sentiment has come is that people start wondering, 
we’re seeing a declining population — do we need the same 
amount of representation as what we’ve had, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And some of the comments and the mixed messaging that’s 
been coming from this government over the last year or so, I 
can certainly see why there is some real scepticism out there as 
to whether we’re wide open — our future’s wide open, or 
whether we’re just too small for certain things. And there is a 
real mixed message coming from this government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(17:00) 
 
And certainly the 58 constituencies need to be well represented, 
but what we need is a population in this province to start 
growing again which we haven’t seen over the last number of 
years. 
 
I think one of the problems, that when we start redrawing 
constituencies and the boundaries, is the fact that I know for 
myself over the last three years we’ve built up some real 
relationships with people in the various areas that will no longer 
be in the constituency of, let’s say, Indian Head-Milestone, but I 
think you could put that over every constituency as the 
boundaries change. No one constituency was left the same and 
as a result there are going to be people that are going to be no 
longer in your constituency that you really felt were great 
people to work with, gave you great advice. And so that’s going 
to be a real interesting process, once this boundary change starts 
and once we start reconfiguring constituency associations and 
that type of thing, how all of that is going to work together, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But I guess, echoing maybe the thoughts that the member from 
North Battleford mentioned when he was talking about the 
by-election that was going to be needed in Battleford-Cut 
Knife, and whether it’s going to be on the old boundaries . . . of 
course it will, the next general election, will be called on the 
new boundaries. And I guess what I would do is charge the 
Premier with the fact that as the Premier of the province, run as 
the Premier of the province on the new 58 constituencies as 
soon as possible. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The division bells rang from 17:02 until 17:06. 
 
Motion agreed to on the following recorded division. 
 

Yeas — 53 
 

Calvert Addley Atkinson 
Hagel Lautermilch Serby 
Melenchuk Cline Sonntag 
Osika Lorjé Kasperski 
Goulet Van Mulligen Prebble 
Belanger Crofford Axworthy 
Nilson Junor Hamilton 
Harper Forbes Jones 
Higgins Trew Wartman 
Thomson Yates McCall 
Hermanson Kwiatkowski Heppner 
Julé Gantefoer Bjornerud 

Toth Wakefield Stewart 
Elhard Eagles McMorris 
D’Autremont Wall Huyghebaert 
Dearborn Brkich Wiberg 
Weekes Harpauer Hart 
Allchurch Hillson  
 

Nays — 3 
 

Krawetz Draude Bakken 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave from the 
Assembly to move first reading of Bill No. 82, The 
Representation Act, 2002. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Representation Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — So, Mr. Speaker, I move first reading 
of Bill No. 82, The Representation Act, 2002. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, ordered to be read a second time later this day. 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Representation Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Representation Act, 
2002. 
 
Members of this Assembly will be aware from the debate which 
has already occurred with respect to the final report of the 
Constituency Boundaries Commission, that this Bill constitutes 
the last step in the important process of providing new 
constituency boundaries for the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The Representation Act, 2002 does two things, Mr. Speaker. 
The Bill sets out 58 newly redrawn constituencies for the 
province of Saskatchewan as the replacement for those 
constituencies previously established by The Representation 
Act, 1994. And the Bill also provides that these constituencies 
will come into force on the day following the day on which the 
twenty-fourth Legislative Assembly is dissolved for the 
purposes of a general election. 
 
On behalf of all members of this Assembly and the people of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, please allow me to extend our 
genuine thanks to the members of the Constituency Boundaries 
Commission for their hard word in providing us with a report 
upon which these constituencies are based. 
 
The Hon. Justice Ellen Gunn, chairperson; Stuart Pollon, deputy 
chairperson; and Larry Deters, member, served with distinction 
in performing their roles in the production of constituency 
boundaries for the province of Saskatchewan in a manner that is 
demonstrably fair and independent. 
 
Following an extended period of hearings and deliberations, the 



December 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 2851 

 

Constituency Boundaries Commission provided a final report in 
compliance with The Constituency Boundaries Act of 1993, in 
which no constituency in the province of Saskatchewan is more 
than plus or minus 5 per cent larger or smaller than any other 
constituency according to the recent StatsCanada general 
census. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an impressive accomplishment that ensures 
Saskatchewan voters can be certain that a vote cast anywhere in 
the province is of equal value to that of a vote cast elsewhere in 
the province. It’s a central tenet of a healthy democracy that the 
electoral process itself operates with the full confidence of the 
citizens it’s intended to represent. 
 
It’s with great satisfaction, Mr. Speaker, that I’m able to present 
to the people of Saskatchewan a Bill to implement new 
constituency boundaries that truly deserves the confidence of 
the Saskatchewan electorate. 
 
I’d invite all members of the Legislative Assembly to join me in 
supporting passage of this Bill. Mr. Speaker, I move second 
reading of An Act respecting Representation in the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and, by leave of the 
Assembly, referred to a Committee of the Whole later this day. 
 

COMMITTEE OF THE WHOLE 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Representation Act, 2002 
 
The Chair: — I invite the Minister of Justice to introduce his 
official. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I’m pleased to 
introduce on my left someone whom you all will know, but he 
wasn’t sure whether I would know him — Darcy McGovern 
from the Justice department. 
 
Clauses 1 to 4 inclusive agreed to. 
 
Schedule agreed to. 
 
The committee agreed to report the Bill. 
 
(17:15) 
 

THIRD READINGS 
 

Bill No. 82 — The Representation Act, 2002 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the 
Assembly, I move that Bill No. 82, The Representation Act, 
2002 be now read a third time and passed under its title. 
 
Motion agreed to, and, by leave of the Assembly, the Bill read a 
third time and passed under its title. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 17:17. 
 


	Government Information Technology Arrangements
	Government Information Technology Arrangements

