















































Hansard: May 28, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1619 
 May 28, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of residents of northeast Saskatchewan who 
are concerned about the condition of Highway No. 23, west 
from Junction 9 to the town of Weekes. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
immediate action and make necessary repairs to Highway 
23 in order to avoid serious injury and property damage. 

 
This petition, Mr. Speaker, is signed by citizens of Weekes and 
Porcupine Plain. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present a petition on behalf of citizens throughout this 
province who are concerned about the loss of their 
community-based ambulance services. And the prayer reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to not 
implement the consolidation and centralization of 
ambulance services as recommended in the EMS report, 
and affirm its intent to work to improve community-based 
ambulance services. 

 
And the signators on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from the 
communities of Cudworth and Prud’homme. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
address concerns from people who are concerned about the 
prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 

Whereby your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are from Weekes and 
Nut Mountain. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise this 
afternoon on behalf of citizens who are concerned about 
deficiencies in the government anti-tobacco initiative. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 

any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
The signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, this afternoon are 
from Archerwill, Tisdale, Meadow Lake, and Porcupine Plain. 
 
I’m proud to present on their behalf. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
today to do with people concerned about — from the Saltcoats 
constituency — concerned about the overfishing at Lake of the 
Prairies. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Spy Hill, Stockholm, Churchbridge, and 
Langenburg. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with the condition and 
capacity of the Avonlea dam. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
reconstruct and expand the Avonlea dam to meet current 
water supply demands, allow for sufficient water supply to 
accommodate proposed economic developments, and 
reduce flooding that has caused significant hardship in 
previous years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals from the 
communities of Truax and Avonlea. 
 
And I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here dealing with 
the high cost of prescription drugs: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens that live at Emerald Lake: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 



1620 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

modify the exorbitant rates of telephone hookup to these 
cabins and provide regular cellular telephone coverage. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the citizens of Saskatoon, Shellbrook, Osler, and 
Martensville. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition today about citizens concerned about the 
condition of Highway No. 15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious condition of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And the petition, Mr. Speaker, are signed from citizens from 
Simpson, Nokomis, Humboldt, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional paper 
nos. 7, 11, 18, 23, 24, 132, 134, and no. 142. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 54 ask the government the following questions: 
 

To the Minister of Government Relations: does the 
Government of Saskatchewan pay grant in lieu of property 
taxes to municipalities on non-leased, provincially owned 
Crown land? 

 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 54 ask the government the following question: 
 

Who won the tender for painting contract on casino portion 
of Moose Jaw casino project and what was the amount of 
the successful bid; and further to that, what are the 
government rules for tendering process for subcontractors? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Peters: — Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to you and 
through you to the members of the legislature, 24 students from 
the Cut Knife — sitting in the east gallery — from the Cut 
Knife Elementary School. They’re here with Mr. Dupuis, the 
principal of the school; Mr. Runalls, the vice-principal. Darlene 
Veikle and Gail Churchman and Eric Kitching are the 
chaperones. 
 
I wish that the Assembly would welcome them here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
last week it was my privilege to make a statement in the 
Assembly with respect to two Saskatchewan students who were 
going to Montreal to participate in a competition. This was the 
E-spirit competition which was organized by a federal agency 
and was intended to assist Aboriginal youth develop business 
plans, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, those two students that I talked about in fact went 
to Montreal and won that competition. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — And it’s my privilege today to introduce 
them to the Legislative Assembly, along with others who have 
joined them here today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, first of all, I would like them to stand and be 
acknowledged, and that is the two students in question, Katie 
Delorme and Kristen Francis. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — As I mentioned that time, they’re 
accompanied by their counsellor, Tyronne Fisher and their 
teacher, Sandra Mann. They are also here and I would ask that 
they be recognized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Now as you all know, Mr. Speaker, 
successful students have a very strong supporting cast in family 
and community. And I would like to introduce to the 
Legislative Assembly, Ronald Crowe, who is the chief of the 
File Hills/Qu’Appelle Tribal Council, Chief Murray Ironchild 
of the Piapot First Nations, Gerry and Jacqueline Francis, Lisa 
and Jaylene Francis, Gerald Francis, and Virginia Desnomie, 
who are all here in honour of our two students. 
 
Would you please join me in giving them a very warm welcome 
today. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 
and through you to all members of this Hon. Assembly, I’d like 
to introduce to you three of my constituents. Seated in your 
gallery are Doug Turnbull from Estevan, and Doug was my 
campaign manager in the last election. And with him are Jack 
and Harvey Kleiman of Hirsch. So I ask all members of the 
Assembly to join me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s just such a 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly, sitting in the west gallery, 46 wonderful, smiling, 
energetic students from Balgonie School. 
 
As I mentioned, the grade 4 students are here today to view 
some of the proceedings and they’re going to go on a tour and 
I’ll be able to speak with them after their tour. And I’m looking 
forward to the questions they might have. 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1621 

 

Today they are accompanied by teachers, Ms. Deidre Mallett 
and Ms. Audrey Templeton-Schultz. And along with them also, 
parents and chaperones: Mrs. Komaike, Mr. Lapchuk, and Mr. 
Cudmore. 
 
I would ask all my colleagues to give these students from 
Balgonie School a warm welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, I too would like to join the 
member in welcoming the two first top-notch students who won 
the award at the national level. And of course, I’ll give them a 
Cree welcome and say Ta wow. 
 
And I would like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I . . . as I listen to 
many of the First Nations leadership from the federation from 
the tribal councils from the First Nations communities, that 
many of them have stated that economic self determination is a 
key to this new century. 
 
We are proud of these students. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
In Cree, we say . . . 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the new century, the spirit of a new century. 
Thank you. 
 
Again, welcome to the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’d like to 
take this opportunity also to congratulate the students on their 
wonderful achievements. To commend you on your 
perseverance, your determination to forge into the future with a 
great deal of knowledge. 
 
I’d also like to take the opportunity to welcome all members of 
the First Nations here as well as the chief sitting with us in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And once again, I ask the Assembly to welcome these fine 
people here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Although we are 
neighbours we don’t get to see much of one another. 
 
That’s why I want to take the opportunity to welcome, and ask 
everybody once again to welcome my good neighbour, Chief 
Ron Crowe, to the Assembly. 
 
And it also gives me the opportunity since we don’t get to see 
one another too often . . . Ron, I can’t remember whether you 
have the Rototiller or I do, but I need it. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Building Independence Improves Access to Child Care 
 

Mr. Van Mulligen: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
was proud to attend with the member for Moose Jaw North an 
event at Cochrane High School in my constituency. At that 
event new funding for child care, through the building 
independence initiative, was announced to assist low-income 
parents participate in the workforce and improve services for 
high-needs children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, affordable, accessible, and quality child care is not 
only important in terms of ensuring children get the best 
possible start in life, initiatives such as this also improve or 
remove a significant barrier to participating in the workforce for 
low-income families. 
 
Yesterday’s announcement means 150 new child care spaces 
will be developed in Saskatchewan. This includes a new child 
care centre at Cochrane High School that will accommodate 14 
toddlers and infants, and expansions to the YMCA (Young 
Men’s Christian Association) child care centre and the Queen 
City Kiwanis infant care centre. 
 
Mr. Speaker, further investments were announced which will 
improve child care services for special needs children, and 
increase the early childhood services grant to help child care 
centres retain child care workers through improving their 
wages. 
 
Helping families, and especially children, to leave social 
assistance by eliminating barriers to employment is worthy of 
our support. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Foam Lake Science Fair Winners 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, firstly 
I want to extend my appreciation to Edna at North Battleford 
for her concern, and I want to tell her I’m fine as far as my 
health is concerned. 
 
Secondly, I ask all members of the Assembly to join with me in 
congratulating four very talented students from Foam Lake 
Composite High School. All four of these young people 
representing the parkland region were recent winners at the 
Canada-wide Science Fair held at the University of 
Saskatchewan in Saskatoon. 
 
They are Ambrely Faye, a grade 11 student who picked up a 
gold medal in senior engineering and a Petro-Canada Peer Prize 
for Innovation; Terri Lynn Paulson, also a grade 11 student who 
won a silver medal in senior biotechnology, as well as a 
Manning Innovation Achievement Award, and a Suncor Energy 
Foundation Award; Stephan Kowalchuk, a grade 9 student who 
won a bronze medal in intermediate engineering; and Brittany 
Faye, a grade 7 student who picked up a silver medal in junior 
engineering, as well as a Science Communication Award and an 
AECL (Atomic Energy of Canada Limited) Award for 



1622 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

Excellence in Science. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Mr. Speaker, Terri Lynn’s project is worth special mention. Her 
project, the water analysis wizard, found that ions in poor 
quality water tie up the ions in herbicides, preventing the 
chemical from killing the targeted plants. What makes this even 
more interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that after Terri Lynn 
discovered this, she also found that there was no step-by-step 
guide for farmers to apply this new-found information, so she 
created one. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, not only was she a winner at the science 
fair, but her work also caught the attention of — and I 
encourage the members opposite to listen closely to this — the 
PFRA (Prairie Farm Rehabilitation Administration) and Sask 
Water. This just goes to show you, Mr. Speaker, how 
innovative Saskatchewan’s young people are and how vital they 
are to helping us grow the province. 
 
Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Credit Union Central of Canada Hall of Fame Inductee 
 

Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. A friend and 
former colleague of mine, Mr. John Vinek has been inducted 
into Credit Union Central of Canada’s Hall of Fame. 
 
In reviewing the information, the committee was quite 
impressed with the selfless giving of Mr. Vinek. The Hall of 
Fame Awards Committee inducted Mr. Vinek into the Credit 
Union Hall of Fame at the annual general meeting of Credit 
Union Central of Canada on May 9, 2002, this past . . . this 
month, in Victoria, BC (British Columbia). 
 
The award is given to honour the volunteers and employees of 
the credit union system who meet criteria in regard to 
international, national, local, and provincial services. Mr. Vinek 
has served 37 years of dedicated service to the credit union 
system and contributed both locally and nationally to forward 
the credit union movement. 
 
In addition to these accomplishments, Mr. Vinek was the 
general manager of the Lloydminster Credit Union for 31 years. 
He was both a president and director of the Credit Union 
Central of Canada, and served as past president and director of 
the Co-op Trust of Canada from 1982 to 1983. 
 
I am sure that all members of this Assembly wish to join with 
me in congratulating the accomplishments of Mr. John Vinek. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Humboldt Constituency Football Player Recognized 
 

Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to recognize a remarkable young man from the Humboldt 
constituency, Jason Biehn. Jason Biehn is among the top 

prospects in high school football. And his situation is so 
remarkable, Mr. Speaker, because Jason has been deaf since 
birth. He can’t hear anything but he sure can play football. 
 
He led the Humboldt Collegiate Institute Mohawks with 13 
picks in his graduating season in nine-man football. He was 
selected to play in the senior bowl at Griffith Stadium on the 
45-player northern squad. And despite his hearing impediment, 
Biehn will go on to play for the Saskatoon Hilltops this season. 
 
While Jason cannot hear what is happening on the football field 
as he is not able to wear his hearing aids during practice or 
games, he can read the quarterback’s eyes very well. And Jason 
says and I quote: 
 

When I look into the quarterback’s eyes, I can usually tell 
where the ball is going. I’m pretty fast and pretty good with 
my angles so it’s a combination of reading the play and 
adjusting. 

 
Jason’s high school coach Shaun Gardiner credits Jason with 
being an all around nice young man who has walked through 
some difficult obstacles. Gardiner had some concerns at first 
about coaching Jason, concerns that he may get hurt and how to 
deal with that. 
 
Jason has applied to enter the University of Saskatchewan in the 
fall. He is also anxious to join the defending national champion 
Saskatoon Hilltops. The Hilltops are also anxious to have Jason 
play with them and I would stand today once again, Mr. 
Speaker, and ask all members of this Assembly to acknowledge 
this remarkable young man. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Celebration Honouring First Nations Veterans 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday, May 25 I had the pleasure of attending a very special 
celebration on the Key Indian Reserve. 
 
The Key Indian Band honoured their last two surviving World 
War II veterans of their reserve, Mr. Albert Crane, and Mr. 
Raymond Brass. 
 
Although the focus of the celebration was on Mr. Crane and Mr. 
Brass, it was extended to the veterans of the neighbouring 
reserves Keeseekoose and Cote, as well as all First Nations 
veterans from the two world wars and Korea. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know as a result of the treaties, First 
Nations people are exempt from military service, but when war 
was declared a large number of First Nations young men 
volunteered to serve their country. 
 
Recognition was brought to the veterans by Chief Perry 
Bellegard, the Chief of the FSIN (Federation of Saskatchewan 
Indian Nations); Grand Chief Howard Anderson, a World War 
II veteran himself, and a tireless worker for First Nations 
veterans’ rights; Chief Ted Quewezance, Chief of the 
Keeseekoose Reserve; and Chief Tony Cote, Chief of the 
Yorkton Tribal Council and himself a veteran of Korea. 
 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1623 

 

I want to congratulate Key Indian Band and Mr. Dennis O’Soup 
for organizing this very great celebration in honouring the 
tributes, the contributions and the sacrifices made by our First 
Nations veterans. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

10th Annual Estevan Bruins Celebrity Sports Dinner 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 10th 
Annual Estevan Bruins Celebrity Sports dinner was held in 
Estevan last Saturday night. This event also includes 
presentations of the male and female athletes of the year. 
 
Female Athlete of the Year was Nikita Jundt. Nikita competes 
in speed swimming, she works as a lifeguard, and her 
involvement on the water polo team has taken her to different 
parts of Canada and the United States. 
 
Male athlete of the year went to Ed Turnball. Ed has been 
involved in stock car racing in Saskatchewan and the United 
States for many years, and he was instrumental in the building 
of Estevan Motor Speedway. And incidentally, Mr. Speaker, Ed 
is the son of Doug Turnball. 
 
The Kim Anderson Award when to Kevin Rappel. Kevin has 
displayed a willingness to learn and good judgment in his role 
as junior official. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the 500 people present enjoyed guest speakers: 
Byron Smith, who climbed Mount Everest; curling champion, 
Ed Lukowich; Norm Lenardon, who was the member of the 
1961 world hockey champion Smoke Trail Eaters; and last but 
certainly not least, Darryl Sittler, former member of the Toronto 
Maple Leafs and 1989 inductee to the Hockey Hall of Fame. 
 
Hats off to the executive of the Estevan Bruins Hockey Club 
and everyone who made this dinner the success it was. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Artists of Erindale School Project 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the new 
neighbourhood of Erindale is mostly in my constituency of 
Saskatoon Sutherland. As we in this young province know, 
establishing a sense of community identity does not happen 
overnight. But I want to tell members about a very special 
project undertaken by the teachers and students of Dr. John 
Egnatoff School which will inform them about their local 
community and much about the history and culture of the larger 
city and of their province. 
 
It is called the Artists of Erindale project and it is funded 
through the Saskatoon Foundation and its Art Smart program. 
The project begins with the fact that the streets of Erindale are 
named after renowned Saskatchewan artists: Hurley, Bentham, 
Perehudoff, Linder, Kenderdine, and others. 
 
Grade 2 teacher Christine Todd and her colleagues at Dr. John 
Egnatoff School have developed a curriculum which integrates 
art instruction into a study of their community. Each class 

undertook the study of one of the artists. They not only studied 
the work and the technique of the artist, but also the influences 
and circumstances of their life and art. This led to an 
appreciation of our history and culture. 
 
Fortunately some of the artists have relatives who attend the 
school. In one case, three generations of artists contributed: 
William Perehudoff; his daughter, Catherine Fowler; and 
grandson, Charles Fowler. 
 
Also the students were assisted in their research by the Mendel 
Gallery and the University of Saskatchewan art department. 
 
I’m happy to say I was able to use a painting by one of the 
students, Ashley Steier, for my Christmas greeting card. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this project which, with variations, could be 
repeated in students . . . schools across the province. I’m proud 
to acknowledge this unique undertaking by these excellent 
students and teachers. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Saskatchewan Government Growth Funds 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Saskatchewan Government Growth funds were set up to take 
immigrant investment money and invest it in Saskatchewan 
businesses under the federal immigrant investor program. This 
money is to be invested in Saskatchewan small-business 
ventures that contribute to business expansion in this province. 
The problem is not all the money is going into Saskatchewan 
businesses. 
 
According to the Provincial Auditor, almost $50 million has 
been sucked up by the NDP (New Democratic Party) 
government in the last two years to buy things like cars and 
computer equipment for the government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is a violation of the rules governing the 
immigrant investment program. Mr. Speaker, my question is, 
why is the NDP taking millions of dollars of growth fund 
money that is supposed to go to small businesses in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much. Mr. 
Speaker, I want to say to you, to the members opposite, to the 
people of Saskatchewan, that the auditor has recognized in his 
report that it had not met some of the requirements under the 
immigration regulations, and the SGGF (Saskatchewan 
Government Growth Fund Ltd.) management has been, they 
inform me, taking some initiatives to improve compliance. 
 
The SGGF’s ability to invest the required amounts of money 
within nine months of receipt is somewhat hindered by the 
requirement that 50 per cent of it is to be allocated for 
government operating leases. And the fact that the five-year 
interest rates have been falling make it slightly more attractive 
for government to borrow rather than leasing. So the 
requirement is 50 per cent would be assumed by government. 
We have not been able to achieve that target but we’re working 



1624 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

towards that end, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’m 
just trying to figure out how the NDP tried to weasel around 
these federal regulations. First they set up two numbered 
companies owned by the government and dumped $40 million 
into these numbered companies. The federal government ruled 
these investments were ineligible because the money is 
supposed to go to businesses, not government. 
 
So then the NDP set up two supposedly private companies 
whose only function was to access SGGF money, buy cars and 
equipment, and then lease them back to the government. Again, 
the federal regulations say this is against the regulations and the 
NDP is just trying to get around the rules. 
 
Mr. Speaker, instead of coming up with new and creative ways 
to get around the rules, why doesn’t the NDP just keep their 
grubby hands off the money and invest . . . let SGGF invest in 
businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say to the 
members opposite that there are some requirements with respect 
to money being put to government purposes, to secure 
government purposes as it relates to the rules around the 
operations of the growth funds and the management thereof. 
 
I want to say to members opposite that the managers of these 
funds I think have done a very adequate job for the people of 
Saskatchewan. There have been many businesses that have been 
funded by growth fund equity and I want to say many of them 
have been successful because of that. 
 
Now if this member is alleging that there is inappropriate 
actions that have been taken by management of the growth 
fund, I can tell that member that I will look directly into it and 
find out what the true facts are, sir. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
NDP continues to try to get around the rules. The Provincial 
Auditor has indicated that they are breaking the rules. And I 
want to quote from the auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker. And he 
says this: 
 

(SGGF) . . . Management Corporation invested $39.9 
million of SGGF . . . monies in . . . numbered . . . 
(corporations). 
 
The Federal Government ruled . . . these investments . . . 
ineligible because of the Provincial Government’s control 
of those companies . . . 
 
In 2001, Cajon Leasing made two lease agreements with 
two Crown corporations, (Saskatchewan Liquor and 
Gaming and . . . (SPMC)) totalling 9.3 million . . . The 
Immigration Regulations do not deem these kinds of leases 
as eligible investments. 

That’s the end of the quote, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why has the NDP government invested nearly $50 
million of SGGF money in ineligible government leases? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — I am told, and it is stated on page 
37 in the auditor’s report, that the manager of the corporation 
has told the auditor that Cajon Leasing and the two Crown 
corporations are in the process of changing the lease 
arrangements to ensure that the leases qualify as eligible 
investments. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to say that Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order. 
 
(14:00) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, the auditor also goes 
on to say that: 
 

. . . we understand that by June 2002 the Federal 
Government is to review the corrective measures taken by 
Management Corporation’s to comply with the 
Immigration Regulations. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if the member is alleging that there is 
inappropriate expenditure of immigrant investor funds and that 
these monies are somehow being funnelled into inappropriate 
. . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order. Order. Order. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I want to say that if 
the member opposite is alleging that money is being 
inappropriately spent, he should stand in this House and say so. 
 
I want to say that we will be working with the auditor, comply 
to the rules. And, Mr. Speaker, I stand behind the management 
decision. They are expending these dollars in a very appropriate 
way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that the Minister of 
Industry and Resources is going to be looking for another 
scheme as soon as the federal government delivers their 
decision. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is, what did the . . . did 
Cajon Leasing buy last year for $9.3 million for SLGA 
(Saskatchewan Liquor and Gaming Authority) and SPMC 
(Saskatchewan Property Management Corporation)? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I will respond to that 
question. I will be calling up the details of the expenditures of 
the leases. I will be sharing them with the members opposite. 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1625 

 

But I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I believe that member is 
alleging that there’s inappropriate expenditure of immigrant 
investors’ funds and if that is what he is saying, he should not 
only say it in here, he should go out in the rotunda and say it 
where . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, I want to indicate that the 
auditor has said that: 
 

The Immigration . . . (rules) do not deem these kinds of 
leases as eligible investments. 

 
I quote from the auditor’s report, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the bottom line is this. This money is supposed to 
go to Saskatchewan businesses, not the NDP government. The 
NDP has tried two different tricks to try to get around the rules 
and they got caught both times. But have they learned their 
lesson? Absolutely not. 
 
Now they’re using SGGF money to buy their new government’s 
airplane. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this money is supposed to be invested to grow 
Saskatchewan businesses. Why does the NDP keep snatching it 
away to buy cars and airplanes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well, Mr. Speaker, I note that the 
member opposite is quite interesting in how the lease 
arrangements for the new government aircraft were arrived at. 
And I want to say that he might want to consider that every time 
he’s on that plane flying around this province. 
 
I want to say that the immigrant investors fund in part is to 
ensure that there’s security of investment, and part of that is in 
government initiatives, Mr. Speaker. That member knows that. 
He is trying to portray wrongdoing by people who work with 
the Saskatchewan Government Growth Fund; and if he is 
alleging that, I’m asking him to go outside in this rotunda and 
repeat just exactly that out there where he can be dealt with by 
senior management people who have done a good job in 
stewarding this immigrant investment money. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, let’s 
take a look at the summary of SGGF fund investments, funds 
III to VIII. Those funds had about $93 million invested at the 
end of 2001. Over $51 million — or 55 per cent — was 
invested in government leases — ineligible investments, Mr. 
Speaker. I repeat: ineligible investments according to the 
federal government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s not just that these investments are against the 
rules. What’s . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 

not just that these investments are against the rules. What’s 
really sad is that the NDP has this huge pool of private 
investment money to invest in Saskatchewan and the best idea 
they can come up with is to buy cars and planes for the 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP have so little faith in 
Saskatchewan businesses? Why are they using SGGF money to 
invest in government instead of business? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, if investment in 
government to create some security for immigrant investors’ 
funds is a difficult circumstance for that member to agree to, 
then we’ll have to disagree. But I think the fact that we’re using 
it to fund the lease arrangements for some of the assets that 
government needs in terms of operating, that creates more 
stability for immigrant investment dollars, I don’t think is an 
unreasonable circumstance. I think, Mr. Speaker, the people of 
Saskatchewan would understand clearly why those investments 
have been made. And the auditor has outlined quite clearly in 
his report exactly why they have done it, and that’s to create 
some stability for the investment . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. You know, Mr. 
Speaker, it’s a pretty sad admission when the NDP has millions 
of dollars of private venture capital fund to invest in 
Saskatchewan businesses and the best idea they can come up 
with is to buy cars and planes for the government. How does 
that help small business? How does that help Saskatchewan 
grow? 
 
Mr. Speaker, if the idea . . . NDP’s idea of growing the 
economy is to buy cars and planes for the government, we need 
a new government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — We need a government that believes in 
Saskatchewan businesses. We need a government that will 
invest private sector money in the private sector, not 
government cars and airplanes. We need a Saskatchewan Party 
government, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Speaker, why does the NDP have so little 
faith in Saskatchewan businesses that it is breaking the rules to 
keep private investment dollars away from Saskatchewan 
businesses? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, finally we come to the 
issue. Every day those members stand up here and malign 
private sector investors with respect to ethanol — every day, 
Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, investment into the ethanol industry 
that goes into their communities across this province, they stand 
up and they attempt to chase out of this province, Mr. Speaker. 
 



1626 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, when this government was . . . (inaudible) . . . to 
partner with private sector investors in communities like 
Shaunavon, and in Belle Plaine and in Melville, these people 
say, you shouldn’t ought to do it; you cannot put any public 
sector investment to make economic development happen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we take immigrant investment dollars and 
use them to create some secure leases, whether it’s for vehicles 
or whether it’s for an airplane, Mr. Speaker, they oppose that. 
 
You know what, Mr. Speaker? There isn’t a thing that this 
administration does that they won’t attack. There isn’t a thing 
that they won’t do to attempt to gain political power. But you 
see, Mr. Speaker, the people don’t trust them because they are 
duplicitous. They will say one thing in here . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question 
is for the minister responsible for the Information Services 
Corporation. Mr. Speaker, late last year the NDP was trying to 
explain away the fact that the amount of money that ISC 
(Information Services Corporation of Saskatchewan) would be 
borrowing from taxpayers had soared over $20 million what 
they forecasted just months before in the spring budget. 
 
The government said the $20 million was needed for computers 
for the Information Services Corporation. The NDP had said 
that they originally thought they could cook up a deal through 
the Saskatchewan Government Growth funds that would be 
used to buy the computers and then they would be able to lease 
them back, Mr. Speaker. Obviously the government was willing 
to go to great lengths to try to portray ISC as something other 
than the taxpayers’ money pit that it had become by that point, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm that this attempt to 
lowball the skyrocketing debt at ISC through the SGGF lease 
arrangement, could he confirm that it failed because the federal 
government was putting a stop to this government’s 
mismanagement of the SGGF funds? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Well you see, Mr. Speaker, they 
attack it all. They cannot stand the fact that we are developing 
one of the most advanced computer technology . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, there 
should be no . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, whether it’s investing 
in computers to develop the technology that ISC is putting 
together, or whether it’s investing in vehicles, or whether it’s 

investing in an aircraft, you see, Mr. Speaker, they can’t stand 
any of it. Mr. Speaker, they don’t like any of it. 
 
Do you know, Mr. Speaker, what they like? Mr. Speaker, what 
they like is privatization. Sell off the Crowns to fund tax 
reductions that aren’t sustainable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to tell you that we have faith in the 
businesses in this province, public sector and private. And I 
want to tell you that we have faith in the people who are 
managing the immigrant investor funds. And the fact that some 
of the immigrant investor funds has been used to supply leases 
for computers and for vehicles and for aircraft should not 
offend those members. What they need to do, Mr. Speaker, is 
get on page with the rest of the people of this province, who see 
a future for this province and understand that this government is 
managing their assets very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, last week the minister asked me to 
lend him my ear, Mr. Speaker. And I’m loath to do that because 
in just a few short months the taxpayers of this province are 
going to throw this government out on their ear, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, since the minister, since the minister is now 
proudly answering for the Information Services Corporation, I 
would ask . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. Order, 
please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, since the minister is now proudly 
answering questions for the Information Services Corporation, I 
wonder if he could stand in the legislature today and confirm 
that yesterday the president of ISC has resigned. And if he has 
. . . That’s Mr. Fraser Nicholson. And if Mr. Nicholson resigned 
yesterday, would he inform the Assembly why he resigned, 
when it takes effect, and what the government will be doing in 
his stead? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I can confirm that the president of ISC resigned yesterday to 
take up a position in the private sector in Nova Scotia, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He was not looking for work, Mr. Speaker, but people came 
looking for him. And, Mr. Speaker, I think what that shows, Mr. 
Speaker, is that Fraser Nicholson . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, as I was saying Mr. 
Nicholson was headhunted away from ISC. What that tells me, 
Mr. Speaker, is that the private sector recognizes the skill, the 
knowledge, the expertise of our heads of corporations, and 
that’s why he’s gone, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Workers’ Compensation Board 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1627 

 

responsible for Workers’ Compensation Board. 
 
Last Friday the Saskatchewan Party asked the government 
about the financial disaster at WCB (Workers’ Compensation 
Board). We pointed out that WCB lost $56 million last year, but 
the minister said she was proud of the financial disaster at 
WCB. No problem at all. Don’t worry; be happy, she said. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, today the Provincial Auditor’s released his 
report on the WCB and he wasn’t smiling. 
 
Why would the minister tell everyone in Saskatchewan there 
were no problems at WCB when she knew that there was 
massive financial mismanagement that was taking place at the 
WCB? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I don’t recall 
saying there was no problems at the WCB. But what I do 
remember saying, Mr. Speaker, was that Saskatchewan is a very 
well run WCB. They have weathered their way through some 
very tough times during the mid-’90s and will continue to 
manage well during these times. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we provide excellent services to injured workers 
in Saskatchewan — rehab, vocation. And, Mr. Speaker, we do 
boast the second lowest rates in the provinces right across 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. That answer by the 
minister shows that she’s totally out of touch with her 
department, with WCB, and the people of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Provincial Auditor’s report reveals a stunning 
level of financial incompetence at WCB. According to the 
auditor, nobody at WCB knew about the financial disaster that 
was taking place last year. The auditor says board members 
were not given accurate monthly financial updates on the cost 
of existing WCB claims. And without monitoring expenses and 
liabilities on a month by month basis, the NDP’s hand-picked 
board chairman, John Solomon, kept everyone in the dark about 
what would eventually add up to a $56 million loss in 2001. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why wasn’t WCB board chairman, John Solomon, 
providing accurate monthly updates to other board members? 
Why wasn’t the WCB monitoring monthly expenses to ensure 
that they stayed in the black? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker, despite the good 
record of the WCB in Saskatchewan, there was some financial 
difficulties last year with the drop in the markets and the 
reduced revenues, and also the actuarial adjustment that took 
place at the end of the year. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I’m finding it very 
difficult . . . members, it’s becoming very difficult to hear both 
the questions and the answers. And I would ask members’ 
co-operation. 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Mr. Speaker, when you look at the WCB 
monthly board meetings, there is financial information that is 
provided at these meetings. But, Mr. Speaker, the Provincial 
Auditor has made comments that it’s not detailed enough. And 
the WCB and the board and the board chairperson have taken 
steps to alleviate that and to fix the problem. 
 
Mr. Speaker, monthly statements of operations that are prepared 
for the WCB board members will highlight actuarial 
adjustments as a line item, comparing the budgeted adjustment 
to ongoing future liabilities, costs, changes over this fiscal year. 
 
And based on the first quarter trends, all the monthly reports to 
the WCB board members will contain year-end claim-cost 
forecasts with accompanying written analyses explaining 
budget variances. And by the summer, and, Mr. Speaker, by the 
summer of 2002 the Workers’ Compensation Board will receive 
ongoing, expert advice from a University of Regina faculty . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. If the Auditor 
General had been given detailed reports maybe the minister and 
the WCB officials should provide more information to the 
auditor. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the net result of the NDP’s gross mismanagement 
of WCB is that they underestimated compensation claims by a 
whopping $49 million. They underestimated benefits liabilities 
by $69 million. And in the first year under the incompetent 
management of NDP hack, John Solomon, the WCB posted a 
huge $56 million operating loss. 
 
And now business groups are saying that the minister is 
warning them to expect double-digit increases in WCB 
premiums this year. Mr. Speaker, is that true? Will the NDP’s 
financial incompetence at WCB result in double-digit rate 
increases in WCB rates this year? 
 
Hon. Ms. Higgins: — Well, Mr. Speaker. I don’t have a lot of 
experience in question period, but these last couple of weeks 
have been bizarre. We have gone from the opposition criticizing 
the processes of volunteer boards and esteemed institutions in 
this province that provide good services. 
 
I said they criticize everything, Mr. Speaker, from criticizing 
whether we do investigations on people who may be suspect of 
fraud to a few months ago, Mr. Speaker, where they wanted to 
throw minors into boot camps, for crying out loud, for minor 
offences. From boot camps . . . I mean from one extreme to 
another, Mr. Speaker, they criticize things that people in this 
province have worked hard to build. And, Mr. Speaker, they’re 
way off base. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 



1628 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 57 — The Automobile Accident Insurance 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 57, The Automobile Accident Amendment Act, 2002 
be now introduced and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

TABLING OF REPORTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, before orders of 
the day, I just wish to advise members that I have for the record 
tabled the 2002 Spring Auditor’s Report silently before the . . . 
right after prayers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I seek leave of the House to 
introduce several motions related to membership of certain 
committees. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on Committees 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Government House Leader, that: 
 

The name of Ms. Doreen Hamilton be substituted for Mr. 
Mark Wartman on the list of members composing the 
Standing Committee on Municipal Law. 

 
The Chair: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move: 
 

That the names of Ms. Judy Junor and Mr. David Forbes be 
substituted for those of Mr. Andrew Thomson and Ms. 
Janice MacKinnon on the list of members composing the 
Standing Committee on Constitutional Affairs. 

 
Seconded by the Government House Leader. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Government House Leader: 
 

That the names of Ms. Pat Atkinson and Mr. Keith Goulet 
be substituted for those of Ms. Debbie Higgins and Mr. 
Andrew Thomson on the list of members composing the 
Standing Committee on Education. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Government House Leader: 

That the name of Ms. Carolyn Jones be substituted for that 
of Ms. Debbie Higgins on the list of members composing 
the Standing Committee on Non-controversial Bills. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Government House Leader: 
 

That the name of Mr. Kevin Yates be substituted for that of 
Ms. Janice MacKinnon on the list of members composing 
the Standing Committee on Privileges and Elections. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Government House Leader: 
 

That the names of Ms. Doreen Hamilton and Mr. Kevin 
Yates be substituted for those of Mr. Buckley Belanger and 
Mr. Andrew Thomson on the list of members composing 
the Standing Committee on Health Care. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Government House Leader: 
 

That the names of Mr. Graham Addley and Ms. Doreen 
Hamilton be substituted for those of Ms. Debbie Higgins 
and Mr. Andrew Thomson on a list of members composing 
the Standing Committee on Communication. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move by the Government 
House . . . seconded by the Government House Leader: 
 

That the name of Mr. Kim Trew be substituted for that of 
Mr. Mark Wartman on a list of members composing the 
Standing Committee on Environment. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by the 
Government House Leader: 
 

That the names of Mr. Glenn Hagel and Mr. Kevin Yates 
be substituted for those of Ms. Debbie Higgins and Mr. 
Ron Osika on a list of members composing the Special 
Committee on Rules and Procedures. 

 
Motion agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, finally I move that, seconded 
by the Government House Leader: 
 

That the names of Ms. Judy Junor and Mr. Graham Addley 
be substituted for those of Ms. Debbie Higgins and Mr. 
Andrew Thomson on a list of members composing the 
Special Committee on Regulations. 

 
Motion agreed to. 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1629 

 

(14:30) 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table responses 
to written questions 210 through 226 inclusive. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 210 to 222 are tabled . . . to 226 
are tabled inclusive. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 11 — Development of the Forest Industry 
 
Mr. Goulet: — Mr. Speaker, following my comments, I would 
like to move the following motion, seconded by the member 
from Regina Dewdney: 
 

That this Assembly congratulate the forest industry for 
making great progress in creating thousands of jobs and 
attracting new investments of nearly $1 billion in the last 
three years. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when you look at this province, automatically, of 
course, you recognize the impact of agriculture as well as 
mining. But a lot of people also recognize that forestry is indeed 
one of our top three industries in this province. 
 
As we look to the new century, we look with a certain degree of 
optimism amidst the challenging times of the softwood lumber 
issue. I would like to look at the progress, you know, that has 
been made in ’99. But as I do the progress report, I’d like to say 
that since 1999, we’ve been able to look at $1 billion worth of 
projects, which meant 3,400 direct jobs and 6,700 indirect jobs. 
 
In more specific terms, Mr. Speaker, we had a $350 million 
project from Weyerhaeuser in Prince Albert in upgrading the 
mill there so that indeed, that cogeneration facility that was 
there would deal with the order from the mill and that has 
helped, you know, quite well over the years, Mr. Speaker. And 
also it improved in regards to the process of the overall 
development. 
 
We also had a $100 million Big River Saw mill where we 
would have 420 direct jobs as well as 840 indirect jobs. We also 
had a $220 million dollar Hudson Bay oriented strand board 
mill. There was also the partnership with Weyerhaeuser and the 
First Nations people through the Wapawekka Lumber company 
of 27 million. I remember the time they did the opening with 
the best in modern technology utilizing computerized systems 
in terms of making better use you know of the timber itself. 
 
There is also a $220 million OSB (oriented strand board) with 
Tolko and its partners. And again there it’s 260 jobs, with 520 
indirect. 
 
On the smaller businesses up in the North Country, we had a $2 
million development in Dillon, in the saw mill as well as in La 
Loche. There was also a $10 million independent operator’s 
development since that time. 

Mr. Speaker, when we were doing the development we looked 
at the concept of sustainability. And we made sure that as we 
did the development you know prior to ’99, we made sure that 
we upgraded our legislation to make sure that we had the best 
forestry policy to make sure that not only did we have 
sustainability in terms of jobs, that we would have sustainability 
in terms of the environment. 
 
And when we looked at the law that we created, it was very 
important to recognize that we would have a more stringent 
type of guidelines in regard to land use planning and a greater 
degree of consultation processes, and integrating the people 
from the forestry industry on a community level. 
 
And we also had in that Act the new idea of auditing. We have 
the regular yearly checks that were there on the forestry 
development, but we were looking at an addition of an audit 
that would be made on five-year levels in regards to the forestry 
development. 
 
We knew we would . . . we were taking approximately 1 per 
cent you know of our available forests were being used for 
development, and our planning was to move to about 2 per cent. 
A lot of the people at that time thought that it was quite a bit 
moving to 2 per cent, but in comparison to forest fires, 
sometimes a forest fire developments ranged anywhere from 17 
. . . 7 to 15 per cent you know the forests burn on a yearly basis. 
 
So we were looking at quite a sustainable type of approach in 
regards to forestry development. 
 
We also looked at the jobs side in terms of the planning. I 
remember on the first phase we did geographic information 
systems. We trained some people from Montreal Lake Band 
and the surrounding areas, and we did a training program 
through Woodland Campus and there we had people with 
technical skills on geographic information systems where they 
could utilize the computer to look at the topography of the land, 
you know, what type of trees there were, what type of 
vegetation, and also paying due respects to the First Nations 
gravesites and all other special areas, you know, of 
consideration at that time. 
 
So it’s a very important program for not only the people of the 
North and surrounding area in Prince Albert, but it was an 
important program in terms of the level of development for 
forestry anywhere in the world. It was also at that time that the 
ideas came into make sure that we had a forest ecosystems 
technologist program and that has now been started. We also 
had an integrated resource management program. 
 
So when you’re looking at forestry development, there has been 
fairly good preparation that was done in terms of law, in terms 
of training, in terms of making sure that the proper preparation 
was there. 
 
When I looked at the jobs, as I mentioned before we had 3,400 
direct jobs and 6,700 indirect jobs, we recognize that in addition 
we have a tremendous forest firefighting program which is 
headed up by somebody from Cumberland House; and he’s, of 
course, been involved in forestry for many, many years and his 
name Murdoch Carriere. And, he started out doing forest 
firefighting, you know, a little after I did my forest firefighting 



1630 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

stint. 
 
I remember when I did my forest firefighting stint we were 
making $4 a day in forest firefighting. And that’s quite a few 
years. Of course, you know, it’s been improved since that time. 
 
And Murdoch and his key staff have done wonders in regards to 
not only involving northern people a lot better, and Aboriginal 
people, but also in terms of building up the levels of skills and 
making sure that our people were not only top-notch within this 
province, but they were being hired elsewhere in the different 
provinces and looking forward to even long-term goal of even 
the American fires. 
 
So I think that that type of approach was being taken very 
carefully by key strong people in the forestry sector. 
 
There was also a policy made on northern procurement. It 
meant that when we were doing the businesses, a lot of the 
northern businesses said that it was very good for the larger 
cities to get a lot of the benefits, and much the same idea that 
we had in mining. And a lot of our entrepreneurs at the local 
level in the North wanted a shot at a lot of the contracts that 
came out, for example to supply the food, to supply a lot of the 
goods and services that were required. 
 
So we came out with a northern procurement policy so that we 
have a better and strong partnership with people of the North 
and that has been proven to be quite successful. And I know 
that when you combine the strategy on forest fire fighting 
where we have a First Nations forest fire protection system, as 
well as a new one for northerners, it bodes quite well in terms 
of how we compare with the rest of Canada. 
 
We also have in addition to the creation of jobs and the training 
programs and trying to get people in management systems in 
forestry, what is very important to the new development is that 
. . . the concept of lease agreements. It used to be that lease 
agreements used to be held by the large-scale corporations. And 
true enough, the large-scale corporations had tremendous skills 
on marketing internationally, etc., and also large enough to 
withstand the softwood lumber issues, even by the right wing 
Republicans in the United States. 
 
But I think that in many cases as we were doing this 
development it was very, very significant that we went into this 
lease agreement idea on a strong partnership level. It’s the first 
time that it happened in Canada or in North America, where a 
group of people in a particular region — and we use the term 
northerners — who yes, used to get jobs and yes, used to get the 
smaller contracts, but never did they participate in the lease 
agreements. 
 
And for the first time in the history of this province, for the first 
time in the history of Canada as a nation, we have seen this 
strong partnership build. And the strong partnership is not only 
with northerners, but First Nations people. We now have First 
Nations people being part of the lease agreement under Mistik 
Management and their developments on the west side. 
 
We will be adding a lease agreement in regards to La Ronge, 
Lac La Ronge Indian Band, as well as Zelensky Brothers, and 
they will form a partnership with a major industrial partner. 

And also . . . (inaudible) . . . from Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation 
will have a partner at the larger industry level. Now that’s a new 
development anywhere. 
 
And I noticed that about a month ago there was Quebec 
development with the Government of Quebec, where they said 
it was the first time that they were going to move into lease 
agreements. But they probably didn’t know that we had already 
moved in that direction in Saskatchewan and we were actually 
the first to move in on not only the importance of jobs, the 
importance of training, the importance of business 
development, but to be part of the strong aspect of lease 
agreements. 
 
So that is a very important thing that I am very proud of, having 
worked in . . . as a former minister of Northern Affairs and 
working with the Environment minister and also working at that 
time with Janice MacKinnon who was the minister in charge of 
Economic Development. 
 
So these were the plannings and we’re seeing it move forward. 
Of course we’re a little bit on a tough situation now with the 
challenge not only of September 11 but actually the . . . a lot of 
the people thought that the new election of a more right-wing 
government, the Republicans, would be a plus in terms of 
economic development in the Free Trade Agreement. They 
thought that’s what would happen. And I know that our friends 
from across probably cheered when the Republicans got elected 
because they’re cousins. 
 
But a lot of people didn’t know that the Republicans would 
become extra-protectionist in regards to what took place in the 
United States. And that’s what we have come to see in what 
first we saw, the softwood lumber at 19 per cent and 29 per 
cent, and we saw the situation in agriculture, you know, the 
tremendous amount of subsidies that they’re having. 
 
And it’s going to hurt not only, of course, the forestry 
community which . . . I know in the community of La Ronge, 
Zelensky had to do layoffs, you know, this past year. But it . . . I 
know of some other people slowing, you know, the process 
down. But it shocked a lot of people when they thought that the 
right wingers who were supposedly in charge of free trade 
ended up to be more protectionists, you know, than the 
Democrats who were around prior to the last election. 
 
It’s very, very important that as we’re doing of course the 
development, we see our provinces coming together with a 
national level of government dealing with the issue on 
agriculture. We see a special approach in Western Canada. 
We’re seeing an approach of getting together in regards to the 
forestry side of the debate as well. But I think it’s very 
important. It’s not only a question of dealing with the legal side 
of the question but the importance of politics and in 
communication and informational side of the question. 
 
So those are the types of things that are very, very, very 
important, you know, for our people to stay together on a 
unified fashion as we deal with the softwood lumber issue. And 
when we’re dealing with the future, Mr. Speaker, there will 
come as we’re resolving this issue, there are aspects of the 
lumber industry that are not necessarily only on the softwood 
lumber side. There are other aspects that we could move in on 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1631 

 

developments and we’ve seen that already starting to take place. 
 
But I think it’s very important to recognize that that’s where we 
need to move during the transition phase as we try and settle 
this softwood lumber issue. 
 
(14:45) 
 
But I’m very, very pleased as a member from Cumberland and 
being from the North to see the tremendous levels of 
improvements that the forestry companies have had as part of 
their impact to northern development. You know, the billion 
that they have put in has been very, very significant for us in the 
North. Many times we look to, as I’ve said earlier on, the 
mining side as well as the other developments but it was very, 
very important for us to see this forestry development side. 
 
And I note it with a bit of a . . . always a cautious optimism that 
there is another company that has moved in. I noticed that over 
the past while we’ve seen the Alberta Newsprint Company. I 
mean they’re considering a 650 million capital investment as 
well as . . . possibly in conjunction with others. If it does good, 
there’ll be a couple of saw mills — about $800 million 
altogether. And that will as well bring in about 600 jobs. 
 
So we’re starting to look at it and to remain very, very positive 
in regards to the development, trying to encourage that 
development. There seems there have been more in regards to 
our development on the forestry Act. They saw that 
development in regards to the forestry centre. They know that 
the government is onside in regards to developing a very, very 
positive partnership within industry as we move to the future. 
 
And from time to time there will be challenges that we face, 
such as the softwood lumber issue. But over the long run, I am 
an optimist. I mean I think that the level . . . the challenges that 
these businesses have faced before they have faced in different 
context, they will be able to face those challenges. 
 
And we as a government will be trying to get at the best side of 
getting at the training side, the policy-making side to make sure 
that indeed we have a strong leadership on forestry 
development in this province. 
 
So I’m very, very proud therefore, Mr. Speaker, to move this 
motion and seconded from the member from Regina Dewdney. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
pleased this afternoon to second the motion made by the hon. 
member from Cumberland and to once again thank the 
investment put forward by our business community in building 
the forest industry in Saskatchewan. And of course, thank 
northern communities and the people of the North for working 
so hard in this very, very important industry in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the people in our communities across the province, across 
this country, Mr. Speaker, understand the importance of the 
forest industry in Canada. And in particular, we want to focus 
today on the forest industry in Saskatchewan. And although it is 
an industry under a fair amount of challenge as we look at the 

scope of it today and not only do we have extremely dry 
timberlands today in northern Saskatchewan but we also are 
facing a massive US (United States) subsidy issue, but despite 
those challenges in the forest industry today, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker . . . or, Mr. Speaker, pardon me, we are making 
significant progress and we’re undergoing growth. Growth that 
will help build the economy of this province to a world-class 
economy in the lumber industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Today we have more than $850 additional million being 
invested in our province. And as the third anniversary of that 
announcement some three years ago approaches, we’ve 
exceeded those expectations, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
To date, we have 16 projects in the forestry sector that have 
been completed and there are currently more in progress. 
Overall, these projects will result in more than $1 billion in new 
investment in our province in the forestry sector alone, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. And that doesn’t speak to all the spinoff 
results of that massive increase in the forestry sector. 
 
It will create more than 3,400 direct jobs and more than 6,700 
indirect jobs, Mr. Speaker, for 10,100 new jobs in the forestry 
sector. Mr. Speaker, that is very, very significant. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we face a number of challenges, as I talked 
about, in the issue of developing our forestry industry at this 
particular period of time. Because in a period of uncertain 
futures due to subsidies and the uncertain future this year due to 
the extremely dry conditions in the North, we are still moving 
forward in developing projects in our industry . . . lumber 
industry and forestry industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
I’d just like to talk about a few of those projects that have been 
completed over the last three years and then talk about some 
that are in the planning and development stage today. People 
may be aware that there was a $350 million upgrade of our pulp 
and paper mill in Prince Albert owned by the Weyerhaeuser 
Company. Mr. Speaker, a significant improvement in the city of 
Prince Albert. 
 
At Big River, we had $100 million saw mill completed which 
resulted in 420 direct jobs and 840 indirect jobs in that area, Mr. 
Speaker. Hudson Bay, we have a $220 million OSB mill 
completed in December 2000, resulting in 640 direct jobs and 
1,280 indirect jobs in the community and area, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Prince Albert also saw a $24 million Wapawekka Lumber saw 
mill be completed which resulted in 80 direct jobs and 160 
indirect jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Lac La Ronge. The Lac La Ronge Indian Band and Zelensky 
Brothers had a $1 million expansion, Mr. Speaker. They 
doubled the capacity of their existing mill resulting in 60 direct 
jobs and 120 indirect jobs in the area. In Glaslyn, L&M Wood 
Products, $2 million for a saw mill and a new wood treatment 
plant, Mr. Speaker, — 40 direct jobs, 80 indirect jobs. 
 
And as we go throughout the industry, Mr. Speaker, we are 
seeing continued growth. La Loche, a new $2 million saw mill, 
Mr. Speaker — 50 direct jobs, 100 indirect jobs. Independent 
operators . . . small operators throughout the North, Mr. 
Speaker, put in over $10 million in capital investment and 



1632 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

resulted in 934 direct jobs and 1,668 indirect jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Other products that are just in the construction stage today, Mr. 
Speaker, include the Green Lake $5 million saw mill 
redevelopment which will result in 40 direct new jobs and 80 
indirect jobs, Mr. Speaker. Meadow Lake is seeing a $5 million 
new planer mill. Meadow Lake will also see a $220 million 
OSB mill resulting in 260 direct jobs and 520 indirect jobs, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Most recently, we’re also looking at an Alberta-based newsprint 
company that signed a letter of agreement that could lead to the 
development of a newsprint facility with a capital cost of over 
$650 million and the creation of more than 600 new jobs. If this 
project proceeds, the new investment in this sector will total 
over $1.6 billion, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, $1.6 billion in 
investment in the forest industry, Mr. Speaker — very 
significant for our province. 
 
We also have a number of projects that are in the planning 
stages today. Limestone Lake has a $45 million saw mill at the 
Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation will result in 200 direct jobs and 
400 indirect jobs, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Prince Albert again is looking at another development resulting 
. . . a $28 million development, a new saw mill expansion and 
finger jointer which result in 160 direct jobs and 320 indirect 
jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . Mr. Speaker, pardon me. This list 
goes on and on and on. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, we must talk about the good job that industry 
is doing in Saskatchewan developing the forest industry. And 
those individuals are doing more than just developing the forest 
industry, Mr. Speaker. They are providing jobs for northern 
citizens. They are providing a boost to our economy. And they 
are help develop the northern part of our community, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Because what are the spinoffs for communities in having a 
strong forest sector? Well it’s local jobs in local communities, 
Mr. Speaker, resulting in people remaining in their local 
communities, their children growing up in those communities, 
their children using the resources of those communities, staying 
in their home communities, Mr. Speaker — creating in the 
North a vibrant economy that helps provide opportunities for 
young people in the future, Mr. Speaker, things that our 
province very much needs and this government very, very, 
very, seriously wants to see occur in our northern sector, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the members opposite, they always want to talk about the 
doom and gloom in industry in our province, Mr. Speaker. But 
the forest industry in the last four years, it’s been nothing but 
good news, Mr. Speaker. But things that we can control within 
this province, development, working together to build an 
industry is working. Those things we can’t control, Mr. 
Speaker, US subsidy issues, the weather, those things that we 
are not in the position to control, Mr. Speaker, are in fact 
hurting the industry today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have a very active firefighting program in 
place to help deal with the challenges of weather to the forest 
industry in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and we spend millions 

of dollars each year protecting that valuable resource, the 
lumber in the North, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And we have more than 1,200 individuals involved annually in 
the firefighting, protecting the forest of our northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I would like to talk for a few minutes about the benefits of the 
lumber industry to Saskatchewan and in particular to northern 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker — talking about a portion of the 
province where, until a very short few years ago when mining 
and forestry took off, it had a great deal of unemployment, vast 
unemployment. 
 
What the forestry sector has done has created opportunities for 
those northern Saskatchewan residents to become involved in 
the economy, to make money, to feed their families, Mr. 
Speaker, because the best form of assistance in our economy is 
in fact a job, Mr. Speaker. So many people in northern 
Saskatchewan today have opportunities for jobs in the forestry 
sector that didn’t have an opportunity for jobs just a decade ago. 
 
And as this sector continues to develop, Mr. Speaker, we will 
see continued advancements of northern initiatives. We will see 
those communities thrive; we will see them grow. We will see 
their children have opportunity that just a short decade ago they 
wouldn’t have thought they would of had, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today as we talk about the initiatives of the forest industry, 
I think it would be remiss not to talk about the other 
contributions the companies that are involved in our forest 
industry in Saskatchewan contribute to our province, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
They contribute through participating in charities. They 
contribute by participating in their communities. They 
participate by working with the government in looking at 
strategic directions for the industry in the province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, they participate by also being part of the reforestation 
projects in our province to ensure that we have a . . . our . . . an 
unending supply of forest products for the future. 
 
As they’re out taking down the trees, Mr. Speaker; as they’re 
cutting them down and using them in the forest industry, they’re 
also replanting trees, Mr. Speaker. And as a result of the 
forestry plan that we have in this province, we have a very 
active nursery, as well, just outside Prince Albert, run by Pacific 
reforestation technologies, once a British Columbia company 
that decided that they could come to Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker, and build a state-of-the-art — state-of-the-art — tree 
nursery, Mr. Speaker, that has expanded to be one of the largest 
in North America. 
 
And who would have thought just a short few years ago that 
Saskatchewan, which has a very . . . relatively small forest 
industry compared to British Columbia, would be the home of 
the largest nursery in Canada, Mr. Speaker? And today that 
nursery employs a significant number of people, all part of the 
forest industry in our province, part of developing for the future 
and maintaining the fact that we will have a forestry sector for 
many, many years to come. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we have a number of initiatives that come 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1633 

 

out of the forestry sector as well. We have suppliers in the 
North benefiting by forest companies and their employees 
buying products in those home communities in northern 
Saskatchewan. And then through that growth, we’re seeing 
businesses, other businesses develop in northern Saskatchewan. 
We’re seeing initiatives in education being developed by the 
forestry sector to provide education and training opportunities 
for youth in northern Saskatchewan as a result of our forestry 
plan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And because of those initiatives, there is a future for our 
children in northern Saskatchewan that wasn’t there a number 
of years ago, Mr. Speaker. And it will continue to be enhanced 
as we move forward on our forestry initiative. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about what it means to create 
more than 10,000 jobs largely in northern Saskatchewan. It 
means that many, many individuals just a short . . . who just a 
short time ago would not have had an opportunity to be 
employed in northern Saskatchewan, in fact, can look after their 
families, can remain in those communities, can be educated in 
those communities, can in fact develop businesses in those 
communities, Mr. Speaker. And doing so means that the future 
for those individuals looks much brighter today than it did just 
10 years ago. 
 
(15:00) 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, have we done enough? We will always 
challenge industry and government to do more, to be more 
creative and to build a 21st century forestry, Mr. Speaker. But 
we will continue to develop the forestry in our province. We 
will work with industry. It’s our hope and theirs as well that we 
can continue to grow and prosper, and that we can move ahead. 
 
Mr. Speaker, planning will always continue with the objective 
of fully utilizing the province’s sustainable wood supply. 
Examining particular opportunities means that we need to look 
for new uses for those products. We need to look at 
opportunities for hardwood and small diameter softwood 
lumber manufacturing. We need to move into secondary and 
tertiary industries in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But those are all things that we want to do together. We want to 
build a forestry and secondary and tertiary industries around the 
forestry sector in our province, and it’s to all our benefit to do 
so. 
 
And those individuals and companies who have been the drivers 
of this in our province, Mr. Speaker, should be commended 
because they have done a yeoman’s task for our province. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great deal of pride that I second the 
motion that the member from Cumberland made, and that I 
believe we should all thank those for making such a great 
progress in our forestry sector over the last number of years and 
for attracting new jobs and investment of more than $1 billion 
in the last three years. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, with that I would second the motion made 
by the hon. member from Cumberland. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
pleasure to speak to the motion as put forward by the member 
from Cumberland. 
 
I’m glad to read in the motion, Mr. Speaker, that it reads, 
congratulate the forest industry. Because I think if the 
government was going to attempt in any form or fashion here, 
Mr. Speaker, to take any credit whatsoever for anything good 
that’s happened in the forest industry, that would be a tad 
disingenuous. 
 
Because if we were to go back in history a bit, we were to look 
at the NDP election platform in September of 1999, I mean we 
would see where they had promised to create 10,000 jobs in the 
forestry, 30,000 jobs overall. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, we all know now where that record stands. 
And sadly, Mr. Speaker, each month we are reminded by 
StatsCan as to which direction those numbers are going. And 
the latest figures, Mr. Speaker, show our province has lost over 
19,000 jobs for people between the ages of 15 and 44. 
 
And once again, I mean, we’re losing our best and our brightest, 
Mr. Speaker, our young people leaving the province. And, Mr. 
Speaker, this actually is something that I see at a very personal 
level very often because as a marriage commissioner I am asked 
to perform marriage ceremonies for some of these young 
couples throughout the province. And I guess it’s very 
frustrating for me that, you know, upon meeting with a couple 
prior to the marriage ceremony and asking what their plans are, 
you know, what I’m hearing more and more now, Mr. Speaker, 
is that those plans include leaving the province. 
 
And I know in one case in Hudson Bay last summer I did a 
ceremony and in talking to the couple they indicated that they 
were going to be going to Alberta. And a week or so later I ran 
into the gentleman who had been the groom’s best man and he 
had decided as well. So over the course of a single week, Mr. 
Speaker, we had lost 50 per cent of the wedding party to 
Alberta. 
 
So I certainly don’t think the government can take any credit 
whatsoever for any kind of positive developments that have 
occurred in the forestry industry, Mr. Speaker. As a matter of 
fact if anything, if we look at the areas of the forestry industry 
where they have meddled, we will see that in fact those have 
not been positive experiences. 
 
And I’m sure, Mr. Speaker, you will remember the 
government’s involvement in Hudson Bay through Crown 
Investments Corporation, Sask Forest Products, and now as you 
are well aware the situation has changed and all of the facilities 
in Hudson Bay are now owned by Weyerhaeuser. But the 
facility that had been owned by Crown Investments Corporation 
through the provincial government and was part of the original 
transaction, if you will, Mr. Speaker, the old OSB mill in 
Hudson Bay, has now been closed. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is directly as a result of the 
government’s meddling in an area where they had no right to be 
meddling and their need to politicize the forest industry in this 
province, probably to a greater degree than any other industry 
has been politicized in this province. 



1634 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

You know, Mr. Speaker, I will never forget in April of 1999 
when the announcement was made — or I believe it was made, 
Mr. Speaker — the announcement was made about the new 
OSB mill in Hudson Bay. The citizens of the community were 
treated to quite the show: a number of planes landing at the 
local airport, I believe it was five cabinet ministers arriving in 
the local arena in Hudson Bay, and the schools being asked to 
send the students over to the arena in order to fill it to capacity 
to provide an audience for the cabinet ministers. 
 
And interestingly enough, Mr. Speaker, I still get calls about 
that to this very day, about how there are parents who are very 
resentful that their children were used as part of the NDP 
propaganda machine. 
 
But I guess what was really frustrating about that is the day of 
the announcement I think if you listened very closely to the 
industry people, they were very forthright about what their 
plans for the community were. They were very honest about the 
fact that this new OSB mill at some point down the road was 
probably going to displace the old mill. 
 
But that was not true of the cabinet ministers and the various 
representatives of the NDP government that were there that day, 
Mr. Speaker. And just last Saturday I had an opportunity to visit 
with a couple of people in Hudson Bay, and they reminded me 
again that from that day forward until the day that the closure of 
the old OSB mill was announced in Hudson Bay, that this 
government and those cabinet ministers who had been in 
attendance left people with the impression that that mill would 
be around for 10 years. 
 
And I think not only did they mislead the community, Mr. 
Speaker, but they created a level of expectation that when the 
industry followed through with what had been their 
understanding of the situation, people were understandably 
very, very hurt and very, very disappointed. 
 
But I guess that brings us to today, Mr. Speaker, and it looks 
like that mill will be closed. All that remains now is to 
decommission and demolish the facility. But the new OSB mill 
is in fact up and running. It appears to be running at about 80 
per cent capacity. The plywood mill is still operating and from 
what I understand, Mr. Speaker, the company is very pleased 
with the state of the operations there. 
 
And I also understand, Mr. Speaker, that in the last while there 
have been a number of other private sector companies from 
Manitoba and other provinces who have been visiting Hudson 
Bay with a view to perhaps establishing some hardwood 
operations there over the course of the next while. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I can only say that I hope in those cases that 
if those companies are willing and interested to get involved in 
the community of Hudson Bay, that they leave that to the 
community and to those businesses, and that they don’t get 
involved or interfere in a way that will be detrimental in the 
long term. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, the forestry industry certainly has had its 
share of challenges over the course of the last few years. And 
now suddenly we are faced with the softwood dispute and the 
member from Regina Dewdney referred to the dispute and its 

impact on the industry and the province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I guess it’s interesting that I come from a constituency that 
will be feeling the effects of both of the events that are going to 
have the greatest impact on this entire province over the next, 
possibly number of years. And in my constituency, Mr. 
Speaker, we’re going to feel the effects of the American farm 
Bill and we are equally going to feel the effects of the softwood 
dispute. 
 
Because I would guess that in the constituency of Carrot River 
Valley we probably have probably one of the closest ratios of 
agriculture and forestry activity in the province that there is in 
any constituency. And I know that we are going to feel the 
effects of this in terms of employment and perhaps a lot of the 
economic kind of impacts that, in a way, may not be felt across 
the entire province. 
 
But with the softwood dispute, Mr. Speaker, I think that we 
need to make sure that everyone understands that we are giving 
it a profile equal to that of agriculture because the impacts are 
potentially as devastating. And I know that, you know, certainly 
through the Minister of Justice and another of ministers on the 
government side, they have been involved in the negotiations 
and they have been attempting to represent the interests of the 
province and the industry at the bargaining table. 
 
But I think, Mr. Speaker, that it’s gotten to the point where we 
are going to have to take some drastic action and we are going 
to have to raise the profile of the whole dispute perhaps to 
another level in order that . . . I think firstly, Mr. Speaker, in 
order that the people who will be affected understand that we 
are aware that — as members of the Legislative Assembly — 
that we are all aware of the harmful effects of the softwood 
dispute and that we are all as well committed to moving 
forward on this and to solving the dispute. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, as the Environment critic for the official 
opposition, quite frankly I would like to see an effort similar to 
that that has been put forward in the area of agriculture. I would 
very much like to see a concerted effort at the legislative level 
here in Saskatchewan, a united effort. And then I would very 
much like to see that effort expanded to include our 
neighbouring provinces as well because certainly there is going 
to be some very harmful effects and we’ve already seen those. 
We’ve seen those. We’ve seen saw mills have to announce the 
layoff of employees in this province already as a result of the 
dispute. 
 
Our caucus has had the opportunity to meet with representatives 
of a number of different companies and they’re providing us 
with various scenarios in terms of options that they have open 
to them if the dispute isn’t resolved. And I should inform you, 
Mr. Speaker, that none of them are pleasant options — that if 
this dispute isn’t resolved fairly quickly, we will be seeing a lot 
of negative impact shortly. 
 
And I guess when I look at the way that you know one could 
possibly describe it, I look at the way it was described by a 
Weyerhaeuser official not too long ago and he refers to it as a 
black day, Mr. Speaker, the day that the ruling was made and 
that the duties were imposed. 
 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1635 

 

And I would very much, as I say, Mr. Speaker, like to see us all 
take the effort and take the time to get to understand the issue in 
a way that we can develop the same effort around it as we are 
around dealing with the negative impact of the American farm 
Bill. 
 
And we’ve got Wapawekka Lumber in Prince Albert saying, 
Mr. Speaker, that possibly as many as 50 people will lose their 
jobs there. Zelensky Brothers in La Ronge have announced 
some layoffs. And I mean we’ve got entire communities that 
could be affected. And not just you know smaller communities 
scattered throughout the province, but there are some large 
cities, Mr. Speaker, that are affected very directly. And I believe 
that your hometown, Mr. Speaker, is one of those. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Prince Albert mayor, Don Cody, states in the March 23 edition 
of the Regina Leader-Post that the: 
 

. . . tariff will make it virtually impossible for . . . (the 
industry) to operate and (that) will result in the loss of . . . 
employees and worse than that, these industries may never 
come back . . . 

 
And I guess, Mr. Speaker, when you put it into that context, that 
if we aren’t proactive in terms of wanting to address the issue 
and if we aren’t proactive in terms of trying to meet the needs 
of the communities that are going to be affected, Mayor Cody, 
his words could prove prophetic and that is, is that these 
industries may never come back. And I think we have to do 
everything within our power, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that 
that does not come true. 
 
Bottom line, Mr. Speaker, is that as a result of the challenges 
that have been faced by the forestry industry, we do have a 
scenario whereby they aren’t probably able to grow and expand 
to the degree that they could or that they would like to. And we 
continue to lose young people to other provinces and we 
continue to not have the economic growth that I think is 
certainly possible. 
 
But having said all that, Mr. Speaker, the forestry companies 
have, I think they have done very, very well in managing to 
hang in there, if you will, and they have in a lot of communities, 
they have participated very strongly in the development of that 
community and they’ve done the absolute best that they can. 
 
The other issue that has faced the forestry industry, and this is 
something that once again was just confirmed again today in a 
meeting with representatives of a forestry company in this 
province, is that as well as this government’s tendency to 
meddle where it shouldn’t, as well as the softwood dispute, the 
other thing that seems to have caused a great deal of 
consternation in the forestry industry in the last, in the last 
number of years — and this isn’t just unique to the forestry 
industry, Mr. Speaker, this is probably unique to pretty much 
any business in Saskatchewan that you talk to — but is, is their 
. . . the regulatory impediments and the regulatory nightmare 
that they tell us that they have to deal with. 
 
Now certainly everyone understands that they . . . the forestry 
industry, as any other industry, needs to be regulated and that 

regulation is something that government does in the best 
interests of its citizens and keeping them safe. But when it gets 
to the point, Mr. Speaker, where you end up with duplicating, 
overlapping, contradicting, conflicting regulation — and I 
should probably add in there just plain confusing, Mr. Speaker, 
as well — when you get to that point, I mean it ends up just 
stifling, stifling a lot of the development that could be 
happening. 
 
And I think in the case of the different companies that we’ve 
spoken with, Mr. Speaker, some of the regulatory requirements 
that they’re being asked to meet in the last little while, they 
certainly aren’t saying, you know, it’s something we don’t want 
to do, but if you could just help us to figure out why it is that 
you feel that it’s necessary and what the end result is. But when 
they ask that question, Mr. Speaker, the government can’t 
provide an answer. And they get the feeling that they’re 
spending a lot of money in trying to comply with some of these 
regulatory requirements and they don’t see the long-term 
benefit in it. 
 
And as a matter of fact, there are forestry companies in this 
province, Mr. Speaker, that I know who can actually attach cost 
figures to the various regulatory requirements that they must 
abide by. And some of those are extremely costly and in some 
cases, Mr. Speaker, one could almost say exorbitant. 
 
But even at that, if there was a very clear purpose and if one 
could easily understand the end result, then I think it perhaps 
would even be easier to accept the cost factor. However, it’s 
very, very difficult to understand how it is that some of these 
companies are expected to spend these huge amounts of money 
in complying with these regulations. But at the end of the day, 
what’s to be accomplished? 
 
And if, in the case of the sample . . . the scale sampling project, 
Mr. Speaker, if at the end of the day the money is . . . or the 
information is gathered and it’s submitted to government, and it 
ends up not being used in any productive or constructive way, 
then why would the companies want to be spending this money 
and why would the government want to waste not only their 
money but the time of the department in collecting it? 
 
And I think if we could get to a point where we could be 
assured that this information was going to be used in a way that 
in the long term the industry would benefit and all of the 
stakeholders would benefit, then people might find it a little 
easier to swallow the cost. 
 
But the other issue, Mr. Speaker, that we understand is the 
environmental monitoring program. And I guess even though 
industry has asked, government has been unable to respond. 
They would like some answers. 
 
What exactly is the environmental monitoring program? What 
exactly are the different provisions of the program going to be? 
What is it that the companies are going to be asked to do? And 
what purpose will the program and the information that’s 
gathered from that particular program serve in the end? 
 
So I think, Mr. Speaker, if we could get to a point where we 
could solve some of the larger international issues around the 
softwood dispute; if we could allow the private sector to be able 



1636 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

to make the decisions that they need to be able to make in order 
to be successful; if government would stop meddling in a way 
that just simply restricts the industry’s ability to be able to move 
forward and to expand; and if we could get the regulatory 
nightmare that they have to live with, if we could get that 
cleaned up, Mr. Speaker, I think that those are probably a 
number of things that would allow the forestry industry to be 
able to move forward and to do a lot more great and wonderful 
things in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, one of the things that the member from 
Cumberland talked about when he was moving his motion was 
the Aboriginal involvement in the industry. And I think that in 
some ways he made the comment that the partnerships that have 
been established are groundbreaking and that we are ahead of a 
lot of other provinces in that respect. 
 
And I think, Mr. Speaker, in a number of ways he certainly is 
correct about that. However, I think there are a couple of issues 
that need to be dealt with here. And one is, is that there were a 
lot of partnership agreements in place in this province long 
prior to this government being on the scene, Mr. Speaker. As a 
matter of fact there was a previous administration that sold 
NorSask to the Meadow Lake Tribal Council and I think we 
need to remember that. I think when it comes to a lot of these 
partnerships and agreements and that sort of thing, this isn’t 
something that this government came up with. This isn’t 
something that’s unique to them. I think it perhaps is unique to 
Saskatchewan but it certainly is not unique to them. And when 
you look at Wapawekka and the operation there, I mean, that 
was in progress and announced long before the April 26, 1999 
announcement. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I think that if you were to talk to the First 
Nations community and the Métis community, I think they 
would tell you that they have made a lot of recommendations 
and they’ve made a lot of suggestions around developments in 
the forest industry where we could be a lot further ahead than 
what we are now. But they will also tell you that in a lot of 
instances a lot of those suggestions, a lot of those ideas, fell on 
deaf ears. And I think we have a pretty dynamic forestry 
community that is completely agreeable with the idea of 
partnerships and of looking at doing new and different . . . 
doing things in new and different ways. But I mean we need the 
government to be able to look at things in new and different 
ways as well. 
 
Now in the case of Wapawekka for example, I mean 
Weyerhaeuser owns 51 per cent, and as the member from 
Cumberland indicated, the Peter Ballantyne Band owns 49 per 
cent. There’s a buyout agreement, Mr. Speaker, that if 
Weyerhaeuser is in a position of buying out the partnership it 
would pay 110 per cent of the value at some point down the 
road. If Peter Ballantyne is a . . . is in a position to be able to 
buy it out, they will buy it out at 90 per cent of its value down 
the road. 
 
And Weyerhaeuser, through that partnership and through their 
involvement in the community, Mr. Speaker, have a tremendous 
amount of respect within the First Nations community and 
they’re viewed very, very positively for a lot of the initiatives 
that they have taken. And the . . . as a matter of fact, Mr. 
Speaker, the wood supply for the . . . for Wapawekka comes out 

of Weyerhaeuser’s existing forest management agreement. 
 
One of the observations that I’ve had made to me, Mr. Speaker, 
is that we have a number of conflicts, both I think 
interjurisdictionally within the province but between the 
province and federally that sometimes don’t allow some of 
these partnerships and maybe some of the new and innovative 
things to happen in a way that they could. 
 
And one of the relationships that I understand is particularly 
combative is the relationship between Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management and Indian and 
Northern Affairs Canada. I know that Indian and Northern 
Affairs Canada, they’ve put proposals together with First 
Nations to explore different forestry investments, the viability 
of different forestry investments throughout the province. And, 
you know, they’ll tell you almost every time, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that those proposals are confounded by Saskatchewan 
Environment and Resource Management. 
 
It seems they get the proposals in and right away there’s 
regulatory change, there’s criteria change, there are things that 
just somehow seem to be deliberately put in the way of the 
proposals to thwart them. And that hasn’t fostered a very 
positive relationship, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And as I understand it, we have some excellent First Nations 
consulting firms in the forestry industry, in the environmental 
services industry; some people who have all sorts of expertise 
and ability but they have a hard time sort of cracking that old 
boys’ network, if you will, of friendships. 
 
And we heard again today how this government operates only 
with its closest friends and the relationships have to be very 
special, if you will, in order for someone to be able to get a 
contract or to . . . in order to have a relationship with this 
government. 
 
And I understand that there are a number of firms that are 
having some difficulty in terms of getting their abilities 
recognized and the skills that they can bring forward to the 
forestry industry recognized. But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
certainly would bring a perspective from the First Nations 
community that might help us move that next couple of steps 
that we need to go in order to be able to expand and enhance 
some of those partnerships that the member from Cumberland 
was talking about. 
 
I think that, you know, we’ve also got opportunities that we 
miss on occasion, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Indian and Northern 
Affairs, the federal economic development fund has $175 
million for investing in First Nations projects in Canada. And 
with Saskatchewan’s First Nations demographics and the Indian 
and Northern Affairs Canada development strategy, we’ve had 
over $50 million — I’m sorry, excuse me, Mr. Speaker, my 
mistake — over $30 million per year allocated to economic 
development projects in Saskatchewan. 
 
(15:30) 
 
But Indian and Northern Affairs only invests in projects that are 
initiated and that are championed by First Nations groups and 
which result in First Nations partners having the economic 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1637 

 

development activity and that provides employment and 
capacity building. 
 
And it’s really interesting, Mr. Speaker, that right now, at this 
point, there’s 15 million of the federal economic development 
fund monies allocated to northern Saskatchewan and there are 
$15 million allocated to southern Saskatchewan. But from what 
I understand, Mr. Speaker, we haven’t been able to access any 
of that money in this province whatsoever. We haven’t gotten 
any of the $15 million allocated to northern Saskatchewan, any 
of the $15 million allocated to southern Saskatchewan, haven’t 
got any of the $45 million that’s allocated in total to the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So I think perhaps, Mr. Speaker, if this government is genuinely 
interested in seeing the forestry industry succeed, then I think 
we may want to do a number of things. One is that we may 
want to raise the profile of the softwood dispute. We may want 
to take that to another level, perhaps even to the level that we 
took the American farm Bill to, Mr. Speaker, in terms of getting 
all of the political leadership within the province together and 
united in terms of the approach that they’re going to take and 
then expanding that to other . . . perhaps other provinces as 
well, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
The other thing that I think the provincial government could do 
is they could look at removing some of the regulatory 
impediments that still certainly exist in this province and that 
are hampering the forestry industry from developing in other 
ways and perhaps even in other communities, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
I think the other thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
provincial government could also try and just resist the urge to 
keep politicizing the forestry industry. It just seems that that is 
just something that the NDP can’t resist doing. 
 
For some reason the forestry industry, on their part, seems to be 
some huge political opportunity as opposed to an economic 
opportunity, and if there is anything that has undermined the 
forest industry in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that’s 
what it is, is the NDP’s need to meddle politically in an industry 
that they know little or nothing about. 
 
And I think the other thing, perhaps, that the government could 
do is start working at establishing better relationships with other 
jurisdictions where resources, where expertise is available, and 
that could be used in terms of better developing the industry 
here in the province. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with that I still feel, however, that 
the forestry industry from its humble beginnings . . . And I think 
if you, you know, you look at what we have in this province 
today and you look at some of the large operations that we have 
in Hudson Bay and Prince Albert, it’s pretty easy to forget that 
the forestry industry in this province actually had some pretty 
humble beginnings. 
 
I mean we’re talking about small, little logging camps that were 
set up in the bush, miles and miles away from anywhere where, 
you know, almost all of what would be the mechanical work 
now was done by horses. 
 

And I know as a small child, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I used to sit 
in my dad’s barber shop and I used to listen to some of his 
elderly customers tell stories about the logging camps and how 
every small town was a point for gathering the wood, and how 
everybody at some point or another, you know, when the 
industry was just starting up, was either involved in the falling 
of the timber or the sale of the timber or . . . I mean, it was in a 
lot of ways I think, Mr. Speaker, it was as much a culture of this 
province and has become very much a part of the culture of this 
province as anything is. And we’ve certainly gone from there to 
what we have today in terms of a large vibrant industry with 
technology that is far beyond anything that anyone could have 
imagined back in the days of some of those fellows who used to 
sit around and tell stories in the barbershop, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
And given, certainly, given all of the difficulties that they have 
managed to face, I think we should also remember that there are 
a lot of people involved in having developed the forestry 
industry not just the companies, but there are the communities. 
There was all of the work that went into the people . . . into the 
attracting of those companies to those communities. And I 
mean, this has become very much a part of the lifestyle that we 
live in this province, Mr. Speaker. With that, I will turn over to 
my colleague from Saskatchewan Rivers. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It’s a 
pleasure to get up this afternoon and make a few comments on 
the motion brought forward by the member from Cumberland. 
It’s certainly timely at this time of the year, with all that’s going 
on in the softwood lumber throughout the world and certainly in 
North America, that the member from Cumberland has brought 
a motion to congratulate the forest industry. 
 
Certainly, we want to do that on this side of the House. We try 
to do that on a fairly regular basis; meet with the shakers and 
movers in the forestry industry, 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, to let them know that, on this side of the 
House, we don’t want to just make motions and just talk about 
it in the House, but we want to do it on a more personal level 
too, to congratulate the forest industry for all they’ve done in 
the province, for the jobs that they’ve created, for the 
investment that they’ve brought to this province, and the 
benefits that accrue from that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — the 
royalties that are paid, certainly the corporate taxes that are 
paid, the personal income taxes that are paid that contribute to 
the provincial coffers, to help to bring to the province of 
Saskatchewan all those benefits that we hold near and dear to 
our heart. 
 
More specifically, health care in this province. On this side of 
the House, we certainly hold health care very dear. And 
certainly education, it helps to fund education in this province, 
Mr. Speaker, and we hold that very dear on this side of the 
House. And certainly for the investment that can be brought to 
the province because of the benefits from forestry, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to infrastructure. To infrastructure, Mr. Speaker, be 
that the Department of Highways or the Department of 
Intergovernmental Affairs . . . or Government Relations, pardon 
me, Mr. Deputy Speaker. So that we can have the amenities, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we so very much appreciate in 
today’s society. And a lot of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can be 



1638 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

contributed to the benefits that are brought to Saskatchewan 
society because of the investment by the forest industry in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Now as we take a look at forestry and forestry practices 
throughout the province of Saskatchewan and the benefits that 
had been brought throughout Saskatchewan, I certainly want to 
recognize in my area of the world the benefits that have been 
brought to the constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers. I know the 
member from Carrot River Valley was very clear to the 
Assembly — and appropriately so — that the benefits that 
Carrot River Valley constituency has received from the forest 
industry over many, many decades, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
actually going back as far as the 19th century in the area of 
Carrot River. The Carrot River Valley constituency has 
benefited from forestry. Forestry has been a big part of the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
In fact just as a quick aside, it’s interesting to note at this time 
that at the turn of the, turn of the 20th century — the turn of the 
20th century, Mr. Deputy Speaker — in the year 1900 that the, 
at that time, the town of Big River, in 1900, had a population of 
5,000 — 5,000, Mr. Deputy Speaker. That’s an amazing 
number when you stop and look back at the history of 
Saskatchewan at that time. 
 
It was arguably one of the biggest communities in the province 
and certainly when you take a look at the community of Big 
River today and the great penance that has been paid by that 
community because this province has decided to have an 
NDP/CCF (New Democratic Party/Co-operative 
Commonwealth Federation) government for almost 65 years, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it brings a sad note to this debate knowing 
that the town of Big River in the year 2000 — 100 years later, 
100 years later, Mr. Deputy Speaker — has a population of now 
less than 900. 
 
That’s a sad commentary on today’s society that the forest 
industry has suffered greatly under this NDP government. 
 
But still, the forest industry, the industry itself, has faith in 
Saskatchewan. They still keep trying to come here despite, 
despite all the barriers that are put into place by this present 
NDP government, and certainly their predecessor, the CCF, 
under the former member from Weyburn, Tommy Douglas. It is 
a sad commentary that the forest industry have suffered to the 
extent that it has in the last many decades since 1944. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, my constituency of Saskatchewan Rivers 
certainly plays a large role and receives a lot of benefits from 
the forest industry. There are hundreds of families who benefit 
from forestry in my constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There 
are many, many people in my constituency, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, who work at the pulp mill in Prince Albert, for the 
Weyerhaeuser pulp mill, Weyerhaeuser pulp and paper. It 
brings many good jobs to the constituency and we certainly in 
Saskatchewan Rivers appreciate that very, very much. 
 
Also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are other forestry . . . forest 
industries in Saskatchewan Rivers that receive benefit from 
forestry operations in Saskatchewan. Inside my constituency is 
the . . . is the forest industry leader, Carrier Lumber based out of 
Prince George, British Columbia that bring a lot of jobs to the 

Prince Albert area, many of them inside my constituency, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Very good paying jobs by a company that is a 
very good corporate citizen, as is Weyerhaeuser, as is also 
Weyerhaeuser too, Mr. Deputy Speaker; two very good 
corporate citizens inside the constituencies where I, where I 
live, the area of Saskatchewan Rivers and of course the 
Weyerhaeuser is inside the city limits of Prince Albert. And 
they too are a very good corporate citizen, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
They bring a lot of assets to the city, a lot of investments into 
the city. They do a lot of investment in the community itself. 
They are a major, major contributor to the new arts centre that 
is being built as we speak, Mr. Deputy Speaker. On a day like 
today when it’s . . . we’re in the House and it’s almost 30 
degrees Celsius outside and as we speak the new arts centre is 
being . . . is going up nicely in the city of Prince Albert. And 
certainly Weyerhaeuser was a very large contributor to that 
project. And we certainly . . . and the city . . . the people of 
Prince Albert and the surrounding area in the constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers appreciate that kind of commitment. 
 
And again, Carrier Lumber is also a major contributor in 
helping out with those kind of projects, certainly not to the scale 
of a Weyerhaeuser but they’re quite willing to be a good 
corporate citizen, a good corporate citizen, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
in the Prince Albert region, and we certainly appreciate that. 
 
My history, of course, with forestry goes back a long, long 
ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My grandfather was in the forest 
industry. In fact at the turn of the last century, in the year 1900, 
my grandfather moved from Ontario to the Minnedosa area of 
Manitoba, and that’s what the family was involved in there at 
that time. 
 
(15:45) 
 
At a very young age, a very young age then, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, my grandfather learned the logging industry and after 
they left there and moved to Saskatchewan and spent some time 
in southern Saskatchewan until the early 1930s when the land 
was unable to sustain the size of family that was situated on 
their land, and he decided to move north. And moved north into 
an area north of Prince Albert that was again more forested. 
Again he took up some logging on a scale to help sustain the 
family farm. 
 
And so my history in forestry certainly goes back a long, long 
ways, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’m very proud of my family’s 
involvement in forestry and the way forestry has treated us, in 
allowing us the opportunities to be able to stay in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Because forestry certainly has done that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
has allowed our young people to stay in Saskatchewan to some 
degree, although more people are actually leaving 
Saskatchewan than are staying, which is unfortunate. But 
forestry has tried in its own way to be able to allow people to 
stay in Saskatchewan. 
 
And from my family’s perspective and going back as far as my 
grandfather, we certainly appreciate the opportunities forestry 
has brought to us. And we want to say a big, heartfelt thank you 
to the forest industry for all that they’ve done for all of us in the 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1639 

 

Saskatchewan Rivers constituency. 
 
Now certainly when we look at forestry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it 
ranges far and wide. In my constituency there’s very, very few 
communities that are not affected by the forest industry. 
Certainly the large part of my constituency is north of the 
Saskatchewan River, the North Saskatchewan River and the 
Saskatchewan River. 
 
And almost everyone there in that area of my constituency, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is affected by forestry, almost everyone is 
affected by forestry in many forms. There are many small saw 
mill operations that go on in my constituency, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
They operate either through private forest opportunities or they 
get small tracts in the provincial forests so that they can help 
provide some career opportunities for local people, and also to 
be able to supply lumber, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the markets in 
Saskatchewan and some of them even outside Saskatchewan. 
 
I have neighbours, Mr. Deputy Speaker, who have, in their own 
small saw mill operations, have sold product as far south as 
Colorado. And we sure appreciate the fact that forestry allows 
the opportunity for people from Saskatchewan Rivers to be able 
to do commerce with our large neighbours to the South. And 
forestry does a lot of that for us. 
 
It’s almost impossible, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to count the small 
saw mill operations that go on across my constituency. I can 
start on the east side at the small community of Love, where 
there’s two small saw mill operators there, either getting 
logging material from private lands — they do quite a bit of 
that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, through appropriate management of 
farm woodlots — that’s one thing we’re very proud of in my 
constituency is the management of the small farm woodlots. 
But they also at different times have, through the Department of 
Environment and Resource Management, have gotten small 
tracts — not very large, Mr. Deputy Speaker — but small tracts 
in the provincial forests so that they can continue to operate 
their saw mills on a regular basis. 
 
And when they do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they require help 
from the local community. And so they provide jobs for young 
people in the area. And so the people from Love, Saskatchewan 
certainly appreciate the fact that these smaller saw mill 
operators are able to, Mr. Deputy Speaker, bring some jobs in 
their own small way to their communities and help keep a few 
people in Saskatchewan. 
 
As you know very well, in the area of the eastern side of my 
constituency, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that there are a lot of young 
people from the area of Love that have left the province. 
They’ve either gone to Manitoba — it’s far enough east that 
some of them go to Manitoba and it’s hard to believe that with 
an NDP government there, there are still people leaving this 
province going to Manitoba — but most of them, most of them, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, go to Alberta. They just find that their life 
is better there. It’s unfortunate. I don’t know if life is better 
there or not but there are more job opportunities in Alberta. And 
certainly that’s a great loss to the community of Love when that 
happens. 
 

Certainly over in the Choiceland area there are about three 
small saw mill operators that live in that Choiceland area. Some 
of them get saw timber in the northern provincial forests. Most 
of them though, are able to get their saw timber in the Fort a la 
Corne Forest. And of course, Fort a la Corne Forest, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, as you’re well aware, has become quite 
famous throughout Saskatchewan. And certainly in the mining 
world, the Fort a la Corne Forest is quite well-known in the 
mining industry because as, we all know, that there’s been two 
massive diamond finds there that we’re hopeful someday will 
be viable operations, and help in their way to contribute to 
growing Saskatchewan by 100,000 people in the next 10 years. 
 
But these people in that . . . that log in the Fort a la Corne Forest 
are finding a great deal of discomfort at trying to log at this day 
and age, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They are being forced — being 
forced, Mr. Deputy Speaker — by the government to change 
their operating practices, their management practices. Not their 
logging practices. The government seems to be moderately 
pleased — this NDP government, Mr. Deputy Speaker — 
moderately pleased with how their logging practices are going, 
but their management practices they want them to change. 
 
These have been successful — small saw mill operations that 
have filled a very unique niche in today’s world markets for 
lumber, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s unfortunate that this 
government would literally force them — literally force them 
— out of business, because that’s what many of these small saw 
mill operators who operate in Fort a la Corne Forest are looking 
at. They’re looking at having to maybe move their operations to 
another provincial jurisdiction which would be extremely 
unfortunate. We lose that investment that they’ve brought to 
this province. We lose those jobs that they bring to this 
province. And just as importantly — just as importantly — Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, we lose a contribution to society. 
 
These are also good corporate citizens. They’re also good 
personal citizens of their community. They help with 
community events in their communities. They help invest in 
their communities. 
 
Certainly you take the village of Smeaton has built a personal 
care home and formed a new gen co-op. And it’s businesses 
such as these small saw mill operators that help bring financial 
stability to these new endeavours, so that the people from 
Smeaton and surrounding district can have their mothers and 
their fathers who have reached that stage in their lives where 
they need a little more quality care can stay in their home 
communities. 
 
But if we lose these good corporate citizens, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we lose a valuable, a valuable asset, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker in our communities to help sustain, help to sustain 
these social programs that are so desperately needed in modern 
society. 
 
Certainly we recognize that society not always, not always 
supported their senior family members as well as they could 
have, but today we’ve certainly become much more cognizant 
that it is our responsibility to do so. And the small forestry 
operators are a big part of helping communities to be able to 
sustain these kind of, these kind of small operations in their 
villages and towns in order that, in order that their family, 



1640 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

senior family members can enjoy a quality of life that they may 
not have been able to enjoy in past times. 
 
And as we continue to look at my constituency, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, we notice that even if we continue to move west, we 
can move up into the Candle Lake area of the province. And 
certainly Candle Lake, many of these people will know, is an 
extraordinary beautiful area, an extraordinary beautiful lake 
with miles and miles of beaches and a great resort area. But it 
also sustains, it also sustains an industry there also, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, and that’s the forestry industry. 
 
There are small operators that operate near Candle Lake. They 
make their home in the Candle Lake community in the resort 
village of Candle Lake, and in the close proximity. They 
operate their small logging industries. And certainly it is of 
great benefit to those communities. Those people again bring 
jobs and they bring investment. They need to hire some of the 
local young people to operate their small saw mills. And on a 
year-round basis they need someone to supply the timber to 
them, so they need someone operating in the Northern 
Provincial Forest to supply their timber. And again it brings 
jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But, again, they are facing the same problem as those people in 
the Fort a la Corne Forest. The government is forcing them to 
change their management strategies and it’s providing a great 
deal of disconcernment with those people, because all of a 
sudden now they have to realize that what’s going to happen is 
that the small profit margins that they’re realizing are going to 
have to be shared with someone else who is not going to be a 
. . . not going to take any significant role in the risk and the risk 
management of the company, but they’re going to have to share 
those profits anyway. 
 
And that’s really unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, because 
without some sort of profit in the forest industry, what we’re 
going to see is that these small saw mill operations are going to 
have to take a hard look at whether Saskatchewan’s an 
appropriate place to do business. 
 
And certainly they want to stay here. They believe in 
Saskatchewan as we do on this side of the House. As we notice 
day after day that those members on this side of the House, 
there’s certainly a lot more enthusiastic about the opportunities 
. . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for 
Battleford-Cut Knife on his feet? 
 
Mr. Peters: — Leave to introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you, sitting in the east gallery, and 
the one in the wheelchair, from Macklin School. They’re grade 
7 students and they’ve driven all this way. So I would like you 
to welcome them here, with a bunch of chaperones and 
teachers. 
 

Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 11 — Development of the Forest Industry 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And it’s 
certainly very nice that everyone agreed to allow the member 
from Battleford-Cut Knife to introduce his school group 
because we certainly appreciate having them here observing the 
proceedings this afternoon and having them to be able to listen 
for a few minutes in on the debate on forestry. I know it’s some 
very titillating conversation has taken place here today and 
certainly I want to keep that alive. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we continue looking at the 
community of Candle Lake and the benefits that forestry brings 
into that small area of the province in my constituency of 
Saskatchewan Rivers, forestry is very significant in that 
community and the jobs it provides and the young people there 
and the benefits that are brought to the community. 
 
I know the community at this time is trying to bring to their 
community a few more permanent facilities that will enhance 
community living in the city . . . in the resort village of Candle 
Lake. And certainly those people that are involved in the forest 
industry are very pleased, very pleased, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that . . . to be able to contribute, be able to contribute to enhance 
the quality of living in Candle Lake, and those people involved 
in the forest industry are a significant part of that. 
 
I recently attended an event in the resort village of Candle Lake 
sponsored by the Candle Lake Recreation Association where 
they are, as we speak, Mr. Deputy Speaker, helping to enhance 
the community living in the resort village of Candle Lake by 
building a curling rink, by building a curling rink, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. And certainly those businesses involved in the forest 
industry appropriately and with good corporate consciousness, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, stepped to the plate and helped to 
contribute in a . . . to a large degree in making the fundraiser a 
huge success. 
 
And we want to applaud those type of businesses for the help 
that they bring to communities such as the resort village of 
Candle Lake. And whether it’s the resort village of Candle Lake 
or certainly the village of Smeaton or the town of Choiceland 
and again the village of Love, is that these communities 
certainly appreciate the good corporate consciousness of the 
saw mill operators and the contributions that they bring . . . the 
contributions that they bring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to their 
communities. 
 
(16:00) 
 
But again we need to continue moving farther west. And 
certainly through my old stomping grounds, the village of 
Paddockwood where I was born and raised and raised a family 
there myself and continue to own farm land there, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that some of my neighbours . . . and actually there 
are a few neighbours there who have small saw mill operations. 
Some of them are full time, year-round, and bring much benefit 
to the community. Some of them are smaller, help to subsidize 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1641 

 

their farm operations which they appreciate greatly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
But again they do more than just that. They do more than just 
that. These small saw mill operators certainly bring an 
opportunity for young people in the community of 
Paddockwood to stay there, to stay at home and not have to 
move to Alberta, to stay there and work and maybe help to 
move towards a career in farming. And it gives them a chance 
to develop a . . . do some skill development in the area of 
logging and so then it becomes very important that these small 
saw mill operators remain viable. 
 
And certainly some of the practices of the NDP government 
lead us to conclude that they’re not as enthusiastic about 
viability for small saw mill operations in this province as those 
of us on this side of the House. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Why is the member for Canora-Pelly 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, with leave to introduce 
guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And I want to thank the member for Saskatchewan Rivers for 
allowing me to introduce to you and to all members of the 
House, a group of students that have just arrived in the east 
gallery from the community of Foam Lake, specifically the 
grade 5 students from Foam Lake Elementary School. I know 
they have a busy time for the entire day and in fact have arrived 
a little bit late. 
 
But I want to thank their teachers, Mr. Jim Hack and Ms. Ruth 
Gislason, for bringing the students. It’s been a custom here, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that we do get the grade 5s to the Legislative 
Building from Foam Lake I think on an annual basis for the last 
number of years, and it’s an opportunity for them to see the 
work in the legislature, as well as to see other sightseeing things 
in the city of Regina. 
 
So I’d ask all members to join with me in greeting the grade 5 
elementary students from Foam Lake, Saskatchewan. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 11 — Development of the Forest Industry 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And again, I want to congratulate the young children for being 
here today to listen to this riveting debate on forestry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to continue on talking about the 
opportunities in the area of Paddockwood, my home village, 
where forestry again plays a role in the development of the 

community. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, again I want to remind everyone that the 
small forestry operators, the small saw mill operators in the 
Paddockwood area, again very good, very good corporate 
citizens, have a very good corporate conscience, are very 
concerned about their communities and they’re willing to, 
willing to help in very large ways to help to contribute to their 
community and ensure that the community remains active and 
viable, not only for us now and for our children now, but for our 
grandchildren and our great-grandchildren. And certainly the 
forest operators in Paddockwood are very good at that. They 
help in many, many ways. And we certainly want to 
congratulate them and we appreciate, and we appreciate ever 
. . . very much what they do to help with the community of 
Paddockwood in enhancing its community living there. 
 
As we continue looking at my constituency north of the North 
Saskatchewan River, again as we move farther west . . . And 
again, at this point, we can start to move south because as we 
move to the Highway No. 2, there’s actually a portion of the 
provincial forest that is in my constituency, is very close, very 
close to the city of Prince Albert, very close to the city of Prince 
Albert. And actually it’s only a couple of kilometres, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, from the city limits of the city of Prince 
Albert. 
 
And so I think it’s important at this time that a few words are 
mentioned about that provincial forest and the opportunities that 
abound there and the state of that forest and how the forest 
industry, how the forest industry, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
looking for many opportunities to be able to take advantage of 
that old-growth forest. And there’s certainly a very, very 
old-growth forest as we look at forests in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and the opportunities that abound there. 
 
And how this restrictive NDP government has prevented an 
appropriate logging practices to be carried out in the Nisbet 
Forest, north of . . . immediately north of the city of Prince 
Albert. It brings a great deal of concern, a great deal of concern 
to the residents who live close at hand. There are many, many 
acreages that are very close to the forest. There are a few 
acreages inside the forest on private lands, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
and certainly the city of Prince Albert has development inside 
that forest, inside the Nisbet Forest. And they are also very 
concerned with the complete lack of forestry initiative by this 
NDP government and are very concerned for their property 
inside that provincial forest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Many times, many times, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve had 
proposals brought to my office — people coming to me almost 
as a last resort . . . (inaudible) . . . why, why would not this NDP 
government look at an appropriate logging practices inside the 
Nisbet Forest to help protect, to help protect the city of Prince 
Albert, to help protect the private property by trying to do 
logging in that provincial forest, to help protect that old-growth 
forest and to help protect that private property around it? 
 
Unfortunately this NDP government is . . . seems to be 
hamstrung for some reason or other when it comes to dealing 
with a forest that close to a major city in Saskatchewan. And 
we’re very concerned about that. And the people that live in the 
forest and close to the forest are very, very concerned also. 



1642 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

I know I’ve been speaking to people who are involved in 
firefighting in the Prince Albert area and they are developing 
practices to try to work jointly, whether it’s the rural 
municipality of Buckland and their fire co-op, and whether it’s 
the city of Prince Albert and their fire department, and certainly 
the provincial firefighting centre that’s situated . . . actually 
situated inside the provincial forest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
they’re trying to work collaboratively to come up with a 
protocol in order to be able to protect people should a major fire 
ever break out in that very, very old-growth forest. 
 
And I can’t reiterate that strong enough, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
This is a very old forest according to Saskatchewan standards. 
Because we have to understand that a tree in Saskatchewan has 
reached an old-growth stage at only 60 years of age in the 
softwood trees, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so it’s very unfortunate that this forest, which has not seen 
any major renewal in it since prior to World War I . . . In fact 
I’m sure the old-timers have told me that it was 1906, 1906 Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when the last time a major fire has gone 
through it. And that’s almost 100 years. 
 
This has gone beyond, beyond old growth, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And so that’s why I’m trying to impress upon the Assembly 
today that this is a very, very old old-growth forest and 
something needs to be done with it in very short order. 
 
I know many times when the members from Prince Albert — 
the member from Northcote and the member from Carlton — 
and I have the opportunity to go home on a Friday afternoon 
and we’re over top on the Nisbet Forest as we’re coming into 
the airport in Prince Albert, we often comment on the amount 
of dead forest, the amount of dead forest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that is actually inside the Nisbet Forest. And it is of a great deal 
of concern. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. I am having difficulty 
hearing the speaker with all of the background conversations 
going on. If I could just ask people to keep the noise level down 
and if they are going to have private conversations to please 
take it behind the bar. Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because I know that you are keenly interested in this 
scintillating speech of mine and so then I’ll try to be of some 
assistance and raise my voice a little bit so that we can carry on 
above the hubbub that can often be carried out by members of 
the House. 
 
Certainly, and I’ll reiterate again and start again where I was. 
Several times the members from Prince Albert and I have gone 
home on a Friday afternoon and as we’re coming into the Prince 
Albert airport and we look down into the Nisbet Forest we can 
see a lot of spots in the forest, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where death 
is occurring of the forest. 
 
The forest that is situated on a lot of sandy land, very, very 
sandy the soils there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And it’s causing a 
great deal of concern to the citizens of Prince Albert and area, 
that should the government and its present policies allow that 
forest to continue on at its present rate. It is becoming very old, 
very diseased, a lot of disease in it, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 

There’s a lot of pine, a lot of pine, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the 
forest. And of course pine, those in the forest industry know 
that when it becomes very, very old like that, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, is that it is extremely susceptible, extremely 
susceptible to dwarf mistletoe, Mr. Deputy Speaker, a disease 
that robs the tree of nutrients and eventually kills the tree off. It 
eventually spreads to trees around it and can actually wipe out 
large tracts of forest, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And again, as I mentioned earlier, this forest is in an area of 
very light soil, a lot of sand. To lose a forest like that in a sandy 
area is causing a great deal of concern that within the next 
generation, within the next generation, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that what we could end up with is our own set of sand dunes, 
our own set of sand dunes, Mr. Deputy Speaker, immediately 
north of the city of Prince Albert. 
 
So that’s why it’s important that we start to work with the forest 
industry now. We need to start working with them today — 
tomorrow is too late — to be able to develop appropriate and 
safe harvesting practices in the old growth forest so that it could 
be regenerated. It needs to be regenerated in an appropriate and 
aggressive manner so that we will continue to have that forest 
not just now, but certainly for our grandchildren and our 
great-grandchildren, and our great-great-grandchildren. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s people such as those on this side 
of the House who are interested in the promotion of forestry in 
this province, who are going to be willing to work with the 
people of Prince Albert and try to develop the appropriate 
policies that are necessary to be able to protect that forest, and 
ensure that it is there for many, many years to come. 
 
That way that forest will be there for the enjoyment by future 
generations, that people will be able to enjoy the Nisbet 
campgrounds that are there, that they will be able to enjoy the 
hiking trails, they’ll be able to enjoy the junior ski hill that is 
there. And I think it’s important that the people of 
Saskatchewan continue to recognize that it is only the 
Saskatchewan Party that is looking at protecting 
Saskatchewan’s forests, and certainly that Nisbet forest 
immediately north of the city of Prince Albert. 
 
Also in my constituency, as we can now move north through to 
the areas of what we affectionately refer to as Lakeland, is the 
Christopher Lake, Emma Lake area. There are many, many 
families there who are involved in the forest industry. 
 
There’s two small saw mill operations west of Emma Lake, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that do very well in the saw mill industry, and 
have supported families for many years through their logging 
and saw mill operations. And so it’s important that they be 
recognized for all the good work that they do in the forest 
industry and the jobs that they’ve provided. And also to 
commend them for being good corporate citizens, their having 
good corporate consciences in their communities. 
 
Again as I mentioned, in many of the other communities 
whether that be Love or Choiceland or Smeaton, Paddockwood, 
Candle Lake, and certainly close to Prince Albert, when we talk 
about the Emma and Christopher Lake areas, these citizens too 
have the good corporate consciences to be aggressive and 
community-minded people who are always there to help out 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1643 

 

when a community project is on. 
 
And it is because of forestry that has allowed these people to 
stay in their home communities rather than have to go to 
another provincial jurisdiction to ply their trade. And so 
because of forestry they’ve been able to stay in Saskatchewan 
and stay in the communities of Emma and Christopher Lake, to 
be good conscious citizens and support their communities. 
 
We can continue, Mr. Deputy Speaker. We can move farther 
west again out into the Mayview area. It’s a small community, 
unincorporated; it’s more of a district, more of a district, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. But again, again, there are small saw mill 
operations out in the Smeaton and Cookson area that . . . or not 
Smeaton, but the Mayview and Cookson areas that bring a 
small sense of prosperity, further prosperity into those 
communities. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, they provide a local, small local 
employment base so that young people can again, as I’ve 
mentioned earlier in other communities but also in these 
communities of Mayview and Cookson, give the young people 
who were thinking of staying home and maybe taking over the 
family farm a chance as young people to be able to work out a 
little bit and achieve some skills outside of farming in case that 
should fall through for them. And certainly the forest industry 
allows that, allows that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But again, these corporate citizens do the same thing for their 
communities, as I’ve mentioned earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
They have a good corporate conscience and are outstanding 
corporate citizens in their communities. Many, many times 
we’ve seen in the area of Mayview and Cookson where the 
small saw mill operators are always there to help when there is 
a community project on and certainly they can be expected to 
contribute not only financially but personally — personally, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
And so it’s important, it’s very important that we recognize 
these small saw mill operations who bring much to their 
community to help enhance their community. But as we look 
back, as we look back, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on all these small 
saw mill operations, be it right from Love right through to 
Cookson — and that’s . . . it’s almost a two-hour drive, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, across my community — and we need to 
recognize that these people bring more than just good corporate 
consciences to their communities, they’re also a contributor to 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
They are a contributor, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they are not a taker 
from the province of Saskatchewan. They contribute personal 
income tax through their employees; they contribute corporate 
tax through their companies which helps to sustain, helps to 
sustain, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the social programs that we on 
this side of the House find most appropriate in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly when we talk about social programs, it’s the 
portfolio of health and the portfolio of education that are 
extremely important, extremely important in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and are two programs that we hold very near and 

dear to our heart, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as you’re well aware of course, forestry 
takes place on a much larger scale than just in my constituency. 
And certainly the member from Carrot River Valley had talked 
to some degree about all the forest opportunities that are going 
on in his constituency, all the small saw mill operators that 
operate in his constituency, all the larger contractors that supply 
timber to Weyerhaeuser. And so the job opportunities exist 
right across the main in central and northern Saskatchewan. 
 
I guess it’s important at this time, as we continue to talk about 
and debate the motion by the member from Cumberland 
congratulating the forest industry for all they’ve done for this 
province, that we look at other corporate citizens right across 
the . . . northern Saskatchewan and certainly there are many of 
them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. There are many more — many 
more, Mr. Deputy Speaker — that would like to be good 
corporate citizens in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
We understand that the government is close to getting started on 
a new OSB plant, an oriented strand board plant in . . . close to 
. . . south of Meadow Lake, very close to the town of Meadow 
Lake. And certainly the people from Meadow Lake are going to 
be very, very pleased with that plant, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
It’s going to bring a lot of good-quality jobs to the town of 
Meadow Lake and the surrounding district south. And those 
people are going to be paying provincial income tax, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, into the provincial coffers to help provide the 
social programs and help fund the infrastructure that we often 
debate in this House, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But again an oriented strand board plant does much more than 
that. It’s going to require feedstock. It’s going to require 
feedstock, Mr. Deputy Speaker, from the forest, from the 
northern provincial forest, from the private forest lands. And, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, when that happens what these companies 
do and they pay a, they pay a royalty, they pay a stumpage fee 
to the province of Saskatchewan. And that again, that again 
helps out the General Revenue Fund again to provide a funding 
that is necessary for social programs and for infrastructure in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
But on top of that — on top of that, Mr. Deputy Speaker — of 
course there’s going to be a significant, significant investment 
by this corporation in the province of Saskatchewan. And of 
course, we’re all aware — significantly so on this side of the 
House — that when it comes to corporate investment is that this 
government is quite willing to tax corporations to some small 
degree, and actually they prefer to point it out, the corporations, 
from a corporate point of view, a large degree, their investment. 
We actually tax their investment in this province. 
 
So this large investment — we understand is going to be 
approximately in the $200 million range — is going to bring us 
significantly yearly dollars, yearly dollars starting almost 
immediately. 
 
Because as we know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the corporation 
capital tax has nothing to do with profit or it has everything to 
do with investment, so as soon as you make an investment in 
Saskatchewan you’re going to be taxed almost immediately. 



1644 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

And again this investment is going to bring dollars into the 
provincial coffers, into the General Revenue Fund, and so the 
province is going to benefit from that, again to fund social 
programs and infrastructure and the people of Saskatchewan 
will appreciate that. 
 
But once this OSB, this oriented strand board plant gets going 
and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’re also going to be creating 
wealth, and I’m not sure how much wealth it’s going to be able 
to create. It needs to create a profit and certainly as we talked 
about already with all the other impediments that are in place, 
with the stumpage fees and certainly having to hire people, but 
more importantly with all the regulations that are placed in this 
province they may be able to create a small profit. 
 
But when they do so of course there will be some provincial 
corporate tax on that and so again they’ll be competing . . . or 
contributing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the provincial General 
Revenue Fund and again to help fund social programs and 
infrastructure — infrastructure that is desperately needed in this 
province. 
 
In the area again around Meadow Lake there’s already two 
large saw mills there. One is actually closed at this time, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. We’re very unfortunate that one of them is not 
operating. A small group of investors saw a need, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that there was a lot of timber that was going to waste 
in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and this corporation took 
it upon themselves, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to be able to take 
advantage of salvage operations, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in this 
province. 
 
Actually at one time they were encouraged, they actually were 
encouraged by this NDP government to do that. Unfortunately 
this small investment company poured a lot of dollars into the 
Meadow Lake community, built a first-rate, medium-sized mill 
and wanted to operate for many, many years to come, providing 
outstanding jobs for the community of Meadow Lake. I know 
quite a few of the young people that were working there and 
they were talking about the wages that they were earning. And 
it was amazing that with the wages they were earning and the 
little bit of overtime that they were making, they were bringing 
a lot of wealth back in the community of Meadow Lake, and the 
community significantly appreciated that. 
 
There was almost 200, almost 200 jobs associated with that 
mill, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And one of the sad aspects is that 
this NDP government in its complete lack of wisdom allowed 
though . . . they allowed them to set up shop with the intent that 
they were going to be able to salvage lumber in the forest, in the 
northern forest, mostly after a fire had gone through, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, because after a fire has gone through the 
forest, it certainly . . . the timber is not good any more for pulp 
or for paper any more. 
 
So this company came in and made an offer, an outstanding 
offer that the government thought was good to begin with and 
allowed them to, allowed them to set up a business and to start 
to, to start to salvage timber in burnt areas of the Northern 
Provincial Forest. And then for some strange reason, the 
government decided to pull, to pull the pin on it and not allow 
them, not allow them access into the Northern Provincial Forest 
any more to salvage timber, which was extremely unfortunate. 

What was interesting about this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is that the 
PST (provincial sales tax), the PST alone on the salvaged 
timber that this saw mill, medium-sized saw mill was 
generating, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would have actually paid for 
the cost of fighting the fire — would have actually paid for the 
cost to fight — just the PST alone. That’s how much money 
was involved in the salvaging of timber in burnt areas of the 
Northern Provincial Forest. 
 
So a tremendous loss. A tremendous loss not only to the 
community of Meadow Lake, but certainly a tremendous, 
tremendous loss to the provincial General Revenue Fund 
because again there was corporate capital tax being paid, there 
was corporate tax being paid, there was personal income tax 
being paid to help fund . . . Again as I mentioned earlier many 
times, that what the forest industry does, it helps to fund social 
programs. 
 
The health care program that we have in this province, that 
we’ve come to expect and enjoy . . . We actually could have an 
outstanding health care plan in this province. To help fund 
education in this province so that our young people can get the 
appropriate education levels that are needed in today’s modern 
society. And to help support infrastructure — infrastructure, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker — that’s what forestry helps to do. 
 
The road system that we have in this province, it’s . . . 
(inaudible) . . . and a province such as ours has one of the 
largest road systems in the country of Canada and it’s corporate 
citizens that actually help to fund that and we appreciate their 
contribution to the General Revenue Fund. But for some reason 
or other this NDP government didn’t appreciate it as much as 
those of us on this side of the House. And again, once the 
Saskatchewan Party rises to power in this province in the next 
provincial election, we’re certainly going to take advantage of 
those opportunities again. 
 
Also in the town of Meadow Lake, there is another business. 
There’s NorSask saw mill that is owned in its entirety, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, by nine First Nations communities. It’s 
certainly one of the showcases, one of the showcases of the 
province of Saskatchewan, a saw mill that the nine northern 
communities bought in the ’80s, I believe it was in the 1980s, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, through an initiative by the local MLA in 
the Meadow Lake area at that time who was bound and 
determined that the saw mill that was owned by the government 
and losing money — losing money on a daily basis — could be 
operated in a private manner and help contribute to the creation 
of wealth in northern communities. 
 
And you know what, Mr. Deputy Speaker? It turned out to be 
an amazing, an amazing success. We’ve, on this side of the 
House . . . several of the members have met with the board of 
directors from NorSask lumber and they are extremely proud of 
their mill and the benefits that it brings to the community of 
Meadow Lake. 
 
They pay a significant amount of property tax. They pay 
property tax to the rural municipality. They pay, again, 
corporate capital tax. They pay corporate income tax. There’s 
personal income tax paid by the employees that are going into 
the General Revenue Fund, a fund that helps to support social 
programs in this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the health care 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1645 

 

in this province, the education in this province, and to help fund 
the infrastructure in this province — the highways and the 
water and sewer systems that we’ve come to expect in today’s 
modern society, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So corporations such as NorSask lumber bring a lot to the table 
in Saskatchewan and so we appreciate everything that they do. 
But on top of that they also create . . . they’re also still creating 
profit for their communities. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, in conversations with NorSask lumber 
they inform us that when they bought the mill that they actually 
funded the purchase through the private sector — through the 
private sector, Mr. Deputy Speaker. They did not have to use 
the Crown Investments Corporation. They did not have to use 
the Saskatchewan Opportunities Corporation. They used the 
private sector and the private sector was very pleased to become 
an intricate part as a business partner, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the NorSask lumber operation. And it’s been a very successful, 
very successful business, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
(16:30) 
 
As we know on this side of the House, and hopefully the 
members on the government side of the House will eventually 
begin to understand, is that the lumber industry in 
Saskatchewan is on a downturn. But when times are very good 
in the lumber industry, the board of directors was actually able 
to pay a significant, significant dividend to its ownership 
communities. In the one year alone, each of the nine 
communities received a dividend of $100,000, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. Let me repeat that — a dividend of $100,000 to nine 
First Nation communities who are the owners of the NorSask 
lumber mill in Meadow Lake, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — It is this good corporate citizenship that we 
need to recognize when we talk about this motion by the 
member from Cumberland to congratulate the forest industry. 
Again this is one of the businesses in Saskatchewan who brings 
a lot to the province of Saskatchewan, create a lot of good jobs 
— very good, high-paying jobs — and certainly we appreciate 
everything that they do for us. 
 
But the spinoff from NorSask lumber is even bigger than that, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, because it requires scores of people in the 
forest to supply the feedstock for this mill, and working hand in 
hand with the pulp mill which is actually across the highway 
from them, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Millar Western Pulp mill is 
right across the highway from NorSask lumber and so they 
work hand in hand with the forest operators in the bush 
receiving the . . . each one of them receiving the feedstock that 
is so desperately necessary for the operations of their mills. 
 
And so there are a lot of jobs attributed to these operations. It’s 
not only the mill themselves, it’s also the logging operations in 
the bush. And again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, these are good 
quality jobs in Saskatchewan and help to keep young people in 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Deputy Speaker, so that . . . Keeping young 
people in Saskatchewan is extremely important, as we continue 
to get data on a monthly basis, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that show 
that this government on a month to month basis continues to 

lose people to the jurisdiction of Manitoba, to Alberta, to 
British Columbia. 
 
As we see now that even . . . now that the NDP government is 
gone in British Columbia that their economy is turning around, 
their job numbers are up. And some of those job numbers are up 
because we’re losing people from Saskatchewan to British 
Columbia and that’s really unfortunate, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because certainly under the British Columbia government of 
Glen Clark and the NDP, is that they saw significant downturn 
and there was actually people moving from British Columbia to 
Saskatchewan. Although the only thing that was available for 
here because of the downturn in our economy, was welfare and 
that’s really unfortunate, where we could have turned to the 
forest industry to provide the quality jobs that were really 
necessary to help people move here, and to help keep people 
here over the many years that we’ve had job losses in the 
province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And certainly forestry has contributed in a large degree, a very 
large degree, to keeping young people in this province because 
they know that there’s been a significantly loss in this province 
of people. A loss in the last year or so that is second to none — 
second to none. We never saw losses like this, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, or Mr. Speaker, since the dirty thirties. Actually since 
the dirty thirties was the last time we saw job losses and people 
moving out of Saskatchewan such as this. 
 
And so . . . but the forest industry, the forest industry, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, has tried to play their role in creating jobs in 
the province of Saskatchewan and we want to congratulate them 
for all that they’ve done. 
 
And certainly as we continue to look at the town of Meadow 
Lake, again there’s a significant investment, help funded by this 
provincial government, who again seem to be able to pick losers 
on a fairly regular basis. They like to pick winners and losers, 
but they’re very good at picking losers. 
 
They have an investment in the pulp mill at Meadow Lake. 
Their meddling in that mill is causing some great deal of 
consternation in the town of Meadow Lake. But we know very 
well that once we get to be government and help them sort out 
their management problems, that they’ll become a very 
successful pulp mill, Mr. Speaker, in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And we certainly look forward to that, and they certainly look 
forward to that time when they won’t have to deal with this 
NDP government. And of course their plan is — and of course 
we can’t guarantee that — is that they may never have to deal 
with an NDP government again. 
 
But again they’re still paying taxes. They’re not doing that well 
financially because of the meddling of this NDP government, 
but they’re still paying taxes. Because you still have . . . 
whether you earn a dollar or not is irrelevant for a corporation 
such as this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, you still have to pay the 
corporate capital tax. 
 
Now the government is talking about increasing the exemption 
for the corporate capital tax — the $15 million for certain 
corporations; only certain corporations. And maybe this one 



1646 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

will be lucky enough to get an exemption increased to $15 
million. But on a very large investment, a very large investment 
like this, Mr. Deputy Speaker, $15 million is actually very 
negligible in their investment. 
 
And so they’re going to continue to pay on a yearly basis a very 
large corporate capital tax to the province of Saskatchewan, 
which again helps to fund social programs and infrastructure in 
this province — social programs that are very important to us. 
 
The health care plan that we have in this province is very 
important to the people of Saskatchewan. Very well 
mismanaged by this NDP government, and certainly the 
member from Melfort-Tisdale has come up with a very clear 
and significant plan to help improve health care in this 
province. 
 
But again, the other social program that we’re looking forward 
to really help fixing in this province because of the contribution 
such as our partners at Millar Western in the forest industry, is 
that they’re going to be able to help fund education — a plan 
that’s been put together very clearly by the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena. 
 
But again, again these corporate capital taxes from corporations 
such as Millar Western, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is going to help 
fund infrastructure, infrastructure in this province. And 
certainly in the town of Meadow Lake they’re going to 
appreciate that the taxes paid by corporations such as Millar 
Western in Meadow Lake are going to be a help with their 
infrastructure in Meadow Lake. 
 
Because towns such as Meadow Lake have water and sewer 
systems that are going to continue to age and they’re going to 
continue to need upgrading. And the taxes that corporations 
such as Millar Western are paying are going to help improve 
that over the years to come. And certainly the people of 
Saskatchewan and the community of Meadow Lake are going to 
appreciate, as they already appreciate that greatly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now as we look at what’s happening, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the forest industry there’s one more area that I’d like to talk 
about and that’s up in La Ronge. There’s again, a small- to 
medium-size mill very close to the town of La Ronge that over 
the years has shown a good deal of success, has provided a lot 
of good quality, good quality jobs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for the 
residents of La Ronge and surrounding area. And that’s 
Zelensky Brothers, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
And certainly the people of La Ronge appreciate this good 
corporate citizen and all the good works that they’ve done in La 
Ronge and the way they’ve benefited the town of La Ronge by 
providing jobs for their young people so that they don’t have to 
go to other provincial jurisdictions. 
 
But again they’ve also contributed to the town of La Ronge 
through their good corporate conscience, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
And the town of La Ronge certainly appreciates that to a very 
large degree, and on behalf of the town of La Ronge, I’d like to 
thank Zelensky Brothers for being the outstanding corporate 
citizen that they are. 
 
But again, Mr. Deputy Speaker, as we talk about the saw mill in 

La Ronge, the Zelensky Brothers, we need to remind ourselves 
that they actually do much more, much more than that, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. Even though they provide jobs and are a very 
good corporate citizen to the town of La Ronge — again, 
through the corporate capital tax and through the corporate 
income tax and through personal income tax that the workers 
from the mill have . . . contribute to the General Revenue Fund 
— is that they are also, they are also helping, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to contribute to the social program and to 
infrastructure, infrastructure programs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
La Ronge. 
 
We certainly know that the town of La Ronge certainly 
appreciates that contribution. Because the town of La Ronge 
has a very large challenge on their hands, being built in the 
Canadian Shield that infrastructure is a major challenge for 
them. And the contributions to the General Revenue Fund that 
are then transferred back to the town of La Ronge from 
corporations such as the Zelensky Brothers help the town of La 
Ronge to a large degree, very large degree, be able to provide a 
high quality of life to their citizens, some of who already work 
at Zelensky Brothers. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re talking . . . we’ve already 
talked about what’s going on in this province, what’s going on, 
and I have talked a little bit about the new oriented strand board 
plant that’s being built, talked about . . . there’s still talk about it 
being built south of Meadow Lake and we’re certainly pulling 
for that on this side of the House. We’d certainly like to see that 
oriented strand board plant built. It’ll provide a lot of good 
quality jobs at Meadow Lake. 
 
But I think we need to talk about other areas in the forest 
industry that brings a great deal of concern to those of us on this 
side of the House. And certainly I appreciate that the member 
from Saskatoon Idylwyld finds my speech so brilliant that he 
had to put his sunglasses on, but, Mr. Speaker, job opportunities 
in Saskatchewan could, could abound in Saskatchewan. I think 
we need to, we need to congratulate those people who in spite, 
in spite of the barriers that are put in front of them by this NDP 
government, continue to find ways to be able to appropriately 
provide jobs for their communities and be able to harvest our 
provincial forests in an appropriate manner and an 
environmental friendly manner so that they too can contribute 
to Saskatchewan’s society and for the benefit of all of us 
specifically in the areas of social program and infrastructure. 
 
Members on this side of the House have taken opportunities to 
be in northern Saskatchewan to meet with the people up there 
who have at different times come up with some outstanding 
business plans to create wealth for themselves and for their 
communities, for the people inside those communities, and help 
the province of Saskatchewan and certainly to help themselves 
become less dependent, less dependent, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on 
the province Saskatchewan. And unfortunately this government, 
through its arm of Environment and Resource Management, has 
stifled, Mr. Deputy Speaker, any new development in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
And I think it’s appropriate that as we congratulate the forest 
industry, we need to congratulate those individuals, specifically 
individuals in northern Saskatchewan who are stepping up to 
the plate in order to provide beneficial jobs to their 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1647 

 

communities that have been stifled, that have been stifled, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, by this NDP government. 
 
As we travel in the North and go to different events in the North 
— and certainly members on this side of the House have been 
to large seminars up there; we’ve been to conferences involving 
economic development several times, several times, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, on this side of the House — is that what we find, as 
we meet with people and we get in small-group gatherings with 
the people up there, that whether they’re from Green Lake or 
Beauval or Ile-a-la-Crosse or Turnor Lake or Buffalo Narrows 
or Turnor Lake or Dillon or St. George or La Loche, we find the 
same thing, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
We have found literally scores of people, scores of people, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that have spoken to us, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
about what it’s going to take, what it’s going to take to be able 
to have a Saskatchewan Party government allow them the 
business opportunities that they see are much more readily 
accessible in southern Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we actually met a gentleman who came up 
with an outstanding business plan and I’d like to explain that to 
you just for a minute, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or, Mr. Speaker. 
We met a man from the Beauval area, the member from Carrot 
River Valley was with me, the member from Thunder Creek 
was even with me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and certainly the 
member from Shellbrook-Spiritwood was with me. 
 
And we were visiting with this gentleman and he was telling me 
about a business opportunity that he happened to come across 
and tried to attain. A company in the city of Toronto was going 
to need a product, a semi-finished wood product. He had to 
opportunity to bid on it, he had an opportunity to win the 
contract. But he was going to require a small tract in the 
northern provincial forest in order to be able to log a few trees 
so that he could fill this contract. 
 
Well after six months, after six months, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
the firm in Toronto finally had to find another supplier. They 
had to find another supplier, Mr. Speaker, because they couldn’t 
wait any longer. Houses are being built in Toronto on a daily 
basis. They couldn’t wait, Mr. Deputy . . . or, Mr. Speaker, for 
this contract to be filled by this small contractor in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
(16:45) 
 
And he was very disappointed, very disappointed that he lost a 
contract in fact. But he kept, in good faith, he kept trying to get 
this small tract of land. He thought, well, I’ll get this, I’ll get 
this small tract of land in the northern provincial forest because 
maybe another opportunity, another opportunity will arise, and 
then I’ll have the logging in place and I’ll be able to fulfill the 
next contract that is after. 
 
Well lo and behold, Mr. Deputy Speaker, six months later — 
six months later — this NDP government finally, finally got 
back to this man from Beauval and told him, no, no he couldn’t 
have this tract of forest. Now it wasn’t a very large one; he just 
wanted a small tract. And the reason they, the reason they gave 
. . . Well I’m getting ahead of myself. There was no reason. 
There was no reason from this government why he could not 

have this tract of land. They just simply said no. He asked for a 
reason. There was no reason. They just decided, no, they did not 
want to have this gentleman have a business opportunity in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
This opportunity, this opportunity alone would have required 
loggers in the bush. Somebody would have had to go in there 
and harvest the forest — it wasn’t a large tract — they would 
have had to harvest the forest. This would have required a small 
saw mill operation. He would have required people working 
there, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And on top of that, some degree of 
manufacturing would have had to take place — all of this close 
to the, close to the town of Beauval. 
 
So this opportunity, this opportunity was lost because of the 
first . . . first, it was lost because of foot-dragging, 
foot-dragging by this NDP government, and then it was lost 
because they simply refused to allow someone to do the 
business in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But we on this side of the House want to congratulate, want to 
congratulate this gentleman for the outstanding job of the 
forward-looking attitude that he has that things can be better in 
northern Saskatchewan. 
 
And we’re going to . . . And he knows, he knows, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that when the Saskatchewan Party forms government, 
he is going to be able to work with us in a responsible and 
environmentally friendly manner to provide jobs for himself 
and his family and the people of Beauval. And we congratulate 
him for wanting to hang in there and wait for this NDP 
government to be thrown out of power until the Saskatchewan 
Party can help him out to create jobs in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s one instance, that’s one instant, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I 
want to tell you about another one. Actually this business was 
already in place, already in place, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And we 
want to congratulate this man for the work that he has done in 
the forest industry. 
 
Up near the community of Buffalo Narrows, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, there was a small operation going where a gentleman 
was harvesting, was harvesting birch, Mr. Deputy Speaker. He 
was harvesting birch timber, birch timber exclusively. He had a 
select harvest program where he was harvesting select mature 
birch. And what he was doing, what he was doing, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, was he was turning that . . . those birch into hardwood 
flooring — hardwood flooring, Mr. Deputy Speaker, hardwood 
flooring — selling it, selling it inside the city of Edmonton. He 
wasn’t . . . he didn’t have to send it to California or to Florida or 
anything like . . . all he had to do was get it to Edmonton. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that finished product, that finished 
product that was being created in . . . at the town of Buffalo 
Narrows providing jobs to the people of Buffalo Narrows, good 
quality jobs — high-paying jobs, I might add, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker — was bringing, delivered inside the city of Edmonton, 
$3,200, 1,000 board feet — $3,200. Almost 10 times, almost 10 
times the going rate for lumber in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
That’s the value-added opportunity this gentleman was taking 
advantage of, is providing jobs in the forest, jobs that were . . . 



1648 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

for logging to bring mature birch trees out of the forest to the 
saw mill. He was providing jobs at the saw mill site, jobs at the 
saw mill site, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
But on top of that, it was providing jobs in the manufacturing 
because he was creating hardwood flooring from this birch. 
And then on top of that, this birch had to be moved to, moved to 
Edmonton, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And so that was creating jobs. 
 
And so there was a lot of jobs being created here. Jobs that were 
creating a corporate income tax, that jobs were creating 
personal income tax, that were contributing, contributing to the 
Saskatchewan’s General Revenue Fund, which all of us greatly 
appreciate so that we can help to fund the social programs and 
infrastructure in this province that are so desperately, so 
desperately needed. Because as we know, as we know, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that forestry, which is the fourth largest 
industry in this province, is a major contributor to the 
Saskatchewan General Revenue Fund and certainly 
infrastructure. 
 
We take a look at highways. We took a look at the highways, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, which desperately need more funding, that 
this government is promising to fix or rebuild 700 kilometres of 
highway this year. And of course at that pace, they . . . we know 
that they’re going to be done fixing roads in this province in the 
next 50 years — it’s going to take them 50 years at the rate 
they’re going — and so then they’re actually going to continue 
to fall behind. 
 
But it’s companies such as this, it’s gentlemen such as this, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, who are trying so desperately to create job 
opportunities in northern Saskatchewan, but you know what 
happened to him? You know what happened to him, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker? The government, this Government of 
Saskatchewan, came in and shut him down. They came in and 
shut him down. They didn’t have a very good reason. Actually 
they didn’t have a reason. They did not have a reason at all, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. The fact of the matter is, is that this gentleman 
was doing very well and they could not stand to see prosperity 
in northern Saskatchewan so they actually shut him down. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to continue farther north looking at 
another community. The community of La Loche at different 
times has tried to get involved in business opportunities up 
there where individuals and the town and community members 
have decided that what they really need to do is to help create 
wealth and job opportunities in the town of La Loche. Because 
a very sad, very sad statistic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the 
town of La Loche is that unemployment, unemployment, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, in La Loche is at 90 per cent — 90 per cent, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. And certainly when we take a look at the 
forest industry and all the good things that could be going on in 
the forest industry, what we can see is that this town is being 
denied an opportunity to use the forest industry to create jobs 
and wealth in northern Saskatchewan. 
 
But again on this side of the House, on this side of the House, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we want to congratulate those people in 
La Loche who have decided that they’re going to fight and 
continue to fight on to utilize the forest resource in the La 
Loche vicinity to create jobs — they’re creating jobs, good 
paying jobs — Mr. Deputy Speaker, in town of La Loche and 

the surrounding communities. Because everyone, everyone in 
La Loche wants a job. They want a job, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
There are only two active, real jobs that are available to the 
people of La Loche. There’s a few people there that work in the 
uranium mines farther north from La Loche but there’s not a job 
for everyone. There’s not enough going on in the uranium 
mining industry to do that. 
 
But there is another job opportunity in the town of La Loche. In 
the last, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in the last round of municipal 
elections, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 54 people applied for 11 jobs — 
54 people applied for 11 jobs. Those 11 jobs, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, were on town council. They were on town council, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. The people of La Loche are so actively 
looking for good quality jobs that they considered town council, 
which does not pay a very high salary. It’s quite moderate, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker. 
 
What we need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is to allow the people from 
La Loche the opportunity to be able to utilize that forest 
resource, to utilize that forest resource, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
provide the high-paying, quality jobs that are so desperately 
needed, so desperately needed, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
I remember not that many years ago, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
being involved in a small business opportunity in the La Loche 
area where a gentleman had an opportunity to provide post 
material to Aallcann Wood preservers in Prince Albert. And it 
was a pleasure to be doing business with those people — 
outstanding businessmen. They made very good, sound, 
business decisions, took advantage of a forest opportunity. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, when they tried to expand that, when 
they tried to expand that, this government stopped them. They 
shut them down. Again when they asked for a reason, well there 
was no specific reason. It’s just that as far as they could 
understand, is that the Government of Saskatchewan didn’t 
want to be bothered with having to monitor someone who has a 
forest operation in the northern provincial forest. And that’s all 
they were able to understand from them. 
 
These are people who are very proud people, as we all are in 
Saskatchewan. We’re all very proud of this province. And they 
want to be able to provide the opportunities for the young 
people as much as the rest of us do — well more specifically, 
those on this side of the House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And certainly we want to applaud those people. I worked with 
the one gentleman very closely for the one summer, and it was 
an outstanding opportunity. I met a very good entrepreneur 
who’s going to continue, continue to push, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
to bring job opportunities to the La Loche vicinity. 
 
And we on this side of the House of course already indicated to 
them that when we become government that there’s going to be 
opportunity there for him and his other business friends to make 
use of that forest industry that’s there in the La Loche vicinity. 
And certainly they are very appreciative and can hardly wait, 
can hardly wait, Mr. Speaker, for the next provincial election to 
roll around so that this opportunity will be available to them. 
 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1649 

 

But we want to congratulate them. I think it’s very important, 
Mr. Speaker, to remind ourselves that we need to congratulate 
these people for the effort that they put in to work in 
Saskatchewan’s forests to bring wealth and job creation to 
northern Saskatchewan, and it’s so desperately needed, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
There was also another lost opportunity, a great lost 
opportunity, Mr. Speaker, in the La Loche area. What happened 
a few years ago — and it’s not that many years ago, I believe it 
was about 1997 — there was a very large fire very close to the 
community of La Loche and certainly the town of La Loche 
was able to protect their town from it. 
 
But in that loss, in that loss of that large tract of forest, Mr. 
Speaker, is that there was a lot of fire kill in there, Mr. Speaker, 
and the people and the entrepreneurs in the town of La Loche 
wanted to take advantage of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so what they did is they made a proposal, they made a 
proposal to this government that what should happen, what 
should happen, Mr. Speaker, is that a salvage operation could 
take place. A salvage operation, Mr. Speaker, that would 
harvest some 12 million board feet of timber for lumber, Mr. 
Speaker, and about . . . and thousands, tens of thousands of 
posts that could be harvested out of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But you know what happened, Mr. Speaker? I’ll tell you what 
happened. This government, this government decided in their 
complete lack of wisdom that it was inappropriate to harvest 
this tract of land. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. It being now past the hour of 5 
p.m., this House stands recessed until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


