















































Hansard: April 09, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 533 
 April 9, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 
 

Moment of Silence in Honour of Her Majesty 
Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother 

 
The Speaker: — Members of the Assembly, today has been 
declared as Canada’s National Day of Mourning for Her late 
Majesty Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother. 
 
Today representatives of people from around the globe gathered 
in London with the Royal Family to pay last respects to Her late 
Majesty Queen Elizabeth, the Queen Mother, fondly known as 
the Queen Mum. 
 
I now respectfully ask that all members rise for a moment of 
silence and reflection as a sign of deep respect we feel for the 
life impact of Her Majesty the Queen Mother. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 
The Speaker: — Thank you. Please be seated. 
 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today on 
behalf of constituents of Carrot River Valley concerned about 
certain inadequacies in the province’s tobacco legislation. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation so that it would 
make it illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed entirely, Mr. Speaker, by the good 
citizens of the town of Carrot River. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I stand 
today to present petitions on behalf of some very honourable 
members of Saskatchewan who have a concern that all the 
recommendations from the Committee to Prevent the Abuse 
and Exploitation of Children Through the Sex Trade be 
implemented. And the prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately implement all 49 recommendations of the 
final report as submitted by the Special Committee to 
Prevent the Abuse and Exploitation of Children through the 
Sex Trade. 

 

And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Regina, Swift Current, Eastend, Leroy, and Humboldt. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to ensure the responsible use of natural resources by all citizens. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The communities involved, Mr. Speaker, are Stockholm, 
Esterhazy, and Tantallon. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
people from Swift Current concerned about the tobacco control 
legislation in the province of Saskatchewan. The prayer of their 
petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are almost exclusively from 
the city of Swift Current save for an individual from Saskatoon 
and another from Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to also present a 
petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan who are 
concerned about the tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be found in 
possession of any tobacco products; and furthermore, 
anyone found guilty of such an offence would be subject to 
a fine of not more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And it’s signed by residents of Weyburn, Yellow Grass, 
Pangman, and Milestone. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
to halt crop insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions. 
The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 



534 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and district. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
from citizens concerned about the deplorable state of Highway 
No. 15. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious condition of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 

 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners, Mr. Speaker, are from Humboldt, Simpson, 
Watrous, Liberty; and there’s even someone from Jasper, 
Alberta, Mr. Speaker. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby received: 
 

A petition concerning qualifying income levels for child 
care subsidies from the current 1982 levels; and 
 
Addendums to previously tabled petitions, being sessional 
papers no. 7, 8, 11, 18, and 24. 

 
NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 

 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 22 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Health regarding magnetic resonance 
imagers: how many MRIs were operating in the province in 
2001; how many hours total did the MRIs operate in 2001; 
how many hours per day on average did each MRI operate; 
and how many MRIs test total were done in 2001? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Trew: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my great pleasure 
this day to introduce to you and through you to all members of 
the Assembly a couple of special guests of mine seated in your 
gallery, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I draw members’ attention to Janet Mitchell and Bill Wong. 
Janet Mitchell being one of Bob Mitchell’s daughters; Bob 
being well known to most members of the Legislative 
Assembly. 
 
Bill came to visit us, and actually I had a nice little visit in my 
office not that many minutes ago and I found out a few things 

about Bill. We both agree that we like Janet. We both enjoy 
golf. But Bill is a dancer and is looking forward to he and Janet 
going out to Danceland and doing some dancing there, and I 
know that they will thoroughly enjoy it. 
 
Bill is a nuclear engineer in Hawaii in the nuclear submarine 
program. And as I want to point out to everyone, Bill is not 
exactly here on business. I ask all members to join me in 
welcoming Bill Wong and Janet Mitchell. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s my 
honour today to introduce to you and to members of the 
Assembly some very distinguished members of Regina’s 
community who have joined us today. 
 
These citizens are here obviously to witness the statements 
which will be read shortly in recognition of Holocaust 
Remembrance Day. I’m very pleased to have eight members of 
. . . eight leaders of our Jewish community here in Regina 
seated in your gallery. I would just ask them to rise as I 
introduce them: Dave Abbey, Carol Abbey, Barry Braitman, 
Miriam Johnson, Jeremy Parnes, Dr. Alan Ross, Dr. Noa 
Schwartz, and Dr. Mel Weisbart. 
 
I would ask all members to join with me in welcoming them 
today on this very important day in our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to join 
with the member from Regina South in welcoming the members 
of Regina’s Jewish community here today. And as the member 
has indicated, this is an extremely important day. And in 
watching the events on CNN (Cable News Network) this 
morning and the way in which it’s commemorated in Israel, Mr. 
Speaker, it was a very . . . an extremely emotional ceremony to 
watch. 
 
And I would hope that the members and the guests enjoy, or . . . 
enjoy the proceedings this afternoon and their time in the 
legislature this afternoon. Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would also like to 
take this opportunity to welcome the representatives of the 
Jewish community. 
 
This sad anniversary is, of course, made even more sad by the 
outrage which occurred in Saskatoon last weekend. And it is my 
deepest hope — and I’m sure the hope of all members of this 
Assembly — that the members of our Jewish community will 
understand that that was the act of one deranged and sick 
individual and it’s no way representative of the feelings of 
respect which the vast majority of our citizens hold for 
members of the Jewish faith in our province and the 
contributions they have made to our province. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, to you 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 535 

 

and through you to the assembled members of this legislature 
and the guests here, I’d like to introduce two of my constituents. 
I don’t get to introduce people from the extreme southwest of 
the province very often — it’s a long trip. As the member from 
Athabasca has alluded to for his constituents, I feel similarly. 
 
In the west gallery today, appropriately, are Clare McNab and 
David Lilley from the town of Maple Creek. David, I met 
through his role as a journalist for the Maple Creek Advance 
Times. We’ve had several occasions to meet and converse over 
the years. 
 
And Clare is somebody I’m less familiar with, but she holds a 
position of some significance. I can’t pronounce the precise 
title, Mr. Speaker, but she is the individual in charge of the 
healing lodge in the community of Maple Creek — the first of 
its kind in Canada. 
 
And I would like you and all members of the House to welcome 
my constituents here this afternoon. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Remembering The Queen Mother 
 
Ms. Junor: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Today a solemn page 
in history has been written. Today we bury a monarch. Born 
August 4, 1900, Elizabeth Angela-Marguerite Bowes-Lyon 
became a royal upon her marriage to Prince Albert, the Duke of 
York. On May 12, 1937, she and her husband were crowned as 
King George VI and Queen Elizabeth. 
 
Soon after their coronation, we got our own glimpse of the new 
King and Queen when, for the first time a reigning monarch 
visited Canada, and as we are reminded of that by our 
commemorative plaque in the front of this building. 
 
However, these happy times would come to a sudden end. In 
September of 1939 the Second World War began. While heads 
of other European governments fled to Great Britain and then 
Canada, the Queen declined, choosing to remain in England. 
Her courage and resolve inspired countless Londoners to have 
faith that England and her allies would prevail and remain free. 
 
She inspired a nation and a Commonwealth in its darkest hour 
and garnered tremendous respect by touring and offering 
comfort to victims during the Blitz, especially after 
Buckingham Palace was hit in 1940. 
 
Of the 600,000 people that passed her coffin this week, each 
person had their own remembrance of the woman affectionately 
known as the Queen Mum — a patron of the arts, a military 
commander, that nice lady that visited our class, and a lady in 
every sense of the word. 
 
In the words of her daughter, Her Royal Highness Queen 
Elizabeth II, April 8, 2002: 
 

I hope that sadness will blend with a wider sense of 
thanksgiving, not just for her life but the times in which she 
lived — a century, for this country and the Commonwealth, 

not without its trials and sorrows but also one of 
extraordinary progress full of examples of courage and 
service as well as fun and laughter. 

 
Today we mourn her passing but we celebrate her life, as she 
herself would have wanted. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(13:45) 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
honoured also to rise in this Assembly to pay tribute to a very 
gracious and dignified lady, Queen Elizabeth, the Queen 
Mother. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a worldwide outpouring of 
sympathy and support for Britain’s royal family who have lost 
one of their most beloved members. Royalty from around the 
world attended her funeral earlier today and more than 400,000 
people stood outside Westminster Abbey to hear the services. 
They all came to mourn the little duchess who was perhaps best 
known for her kindness and her dedication to duty. 
 
The sight of her poor grandsons keeping a silent watch over her 
is a sight that many of us will not soon forget. 
 
For Canadians, the Queen Mother held a very special place in 
our hearts. In fact, Mr. Speaker, on the eve of her 100th 
birthday in August of the year 2000, she was made an honorary 
Companion of the Order of Canada. She was also a patron of 
the Canadian Red Cross Society and was grand-president of the 
Victorian Order of Nurses. 
 
Her visits to Canada were always cause for much joy and 
celebration. In true Saskatchewan style, the province made sure 
that her two stops, one in 1939 and again in 1985, were full of 
pomp and pageantry fit for the Queen. 
 
Mr. Speaker, her ties to the Commonwealth and to all of us 
have always remained strong and true. And now as she is laid to 
rest beside her beloved husband, King George VI, all of 
Saskatchewan and indeed all of Canada mourns with the royal 
family on the loss of one of the world’s most gracious ladies — 
the Queen Mother. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Yom haShoah 
 

Mr. Kasperski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is Yom haShoah, Holocaust Remembrance Day. This is a 
day for all humanity to meditate on the 6 million Jewish men, 
women, and children whose lives were cruelly cut short during 
the darkest period of human history. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is an opportunity for us to reflect on hatred and 
intolerance, evils that plague us to this very day as is sadly 
demonstrated in the attack on the Agudas Israel Synagogue in 



536 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

Saskatoon this past weekend. 
 
This day, Mr. Speaker, also provides us with the opportunity to 
reflect on our commitment to peace and harmony. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many of us in this province, indeed in this 
legislature, have our ancestral roots in an area once called 
Galicia that is now part of Poland and Ukraine. My roots are 
near a community called Buczacz that prior to World War II 
was the home of a thriving Jewish population of 10,000 persons 
that was destroyed during the Holocaust. 
 
Two of only a handful of survivors of the Holocaust from 
Buczacz, Michael and Mina Rosner, settled in Winnipeg after 
the war. In the late 1980s Mina Rosner wrote a book entitled, I 
Am a Witness, and her visit with her son to Buczacz in 1990 
was the subject of a critically acclaimed CBC (Canadian 
Broadcasting Corporation) Newsworld documentary. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to conclude my remarks with Mina 
Rosner’s own words: 
 

. . . Although the events I recount in this book took place a 
half a century ago, I feel compelled to speak about them 
now because of . . . recent occurrences. Increasingly, acts 
of intolerance and prejudice are brought to my attention. 
These have stirred an urgent desire in me to try to make 
people understand the consequences of hate. I have no 
desire to see the events of the past be repeated to destroy 
the lives of my children and my grandchildren . . . 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
today is international Holocaust Memorial Day, Yom haShoah, 
and countries around the world are commemorating this day in 
acknowledgement and respect of an unspeakable tragedy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is important that the victims of this horrific 
event and their families are never forgotten and that all people, 
regardless of denomination, stand together to ensure that such 
an event never happens again anywhere in the world. 
 
We must stand united and oppose acts of anti-Semitism, racism, 
and any other forms of discrimination and prejudice. The 
horrors of these acts can only be thwarted when men and 
women are prepared to take a strong stand against them and 
those who commit genocide. 
 
We must educate future generations about the evils of racism 
and prejudice and take steps to put an end to these kinds of acts 
in our society. The commemoration of this day is especially 
important with respect to the recent arson at the congregation 
Agudas Israel Synagogue in Saskatoon. 
 
As leaders in our communities and as members of this 
Assembly, we must make an important statement to let the 
people of Saskatchewan know that acts of violence and 
discrimination simply will not be tolerated in our communities. 
I know that people all over the world are attending rallies and 
church services to commemorate this day, and I ask, Mr. 

Speaker, that this Assembly hold a moment’s silence in 
remembrance of the Holocaust, the 6 million Jewish people that 
were killed, the survivors, and their families. 
 
The Speaker: — The member has asked that we hold a minute 
silence. Is leave granted? 
 
Leave granted. 
 
The Speaker: — Members, please rise. 
 
The Assembly observed a moment of silence. 
 

University of Regina Students Win Debate Competition 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, I believe that we in this 
Assembly of excellent and high-minded debate should 
recognize the accomplishments of two debaters from the 
University of Regina. 
 
Recently the team of Erin Weir and Christopher Taylor was one 
of five U of R debating duos competing at a contest hosted by 
the University of Saskatchewan. The prize was the prestigious 
McGoun Cup, emblematic since 1924 of debating superiority in 
western Canada. Erin and Christopher won seven of the 
preliminary eight debates and defeated a team from the 
University of British Columbia in the final. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am not familiar with all of the rules of formal 
debate, but I’m told that the speakers are only given the 
resolution they are to debate 15 minutes ahead of time, and 
must then formulate their arguments within that limited time 
frame. I suspect that some of us would find those restrictions 
daunting. 
 
Members on this side will not be surprised with Erin’s success 
because we have seen him in action as the past president of the 
Saskatchewan Young New Democrats. 
 
Christopher is an accomplished musician and gives bass lessons 
to many aspiring young musicians in Regina, including my son, 
Justin. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would ask all members to join me in 
congratulating Erin and Christopher on their achievement. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Tisdale Hockey Team in Air Canada Cup Finals 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Tisdale Trojans have secured a birth in the Air Canada Cup. 
 
After a three game round robin this past weekend in Steinbach, 
Manitoba, the Trojan AAA Midgets won the final game in the 
western regionals by defeating the Winnipeg Sharks. The 
Trojans will compete as Team Western in Bathurst, New 
Brunswick, April 22 to 28. Team Western will represent 
Saskatchewan, Manitoba, and Northern Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, and members, please join me in congratulating the 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 537 

 

efforts of these tremendous young men, their coaches, family, 
and fans. We wish them the best of luck later this month in New 
Brunswick. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Broadview Co-Operative Notes Sales Growth 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It was another 
successful year for the Broadview Co-operative which saw 
sales grow from over $2 million to $8.48 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 

Financially Broadview retail (sales) had a very strong year, 
thanks to you the members and your support and the 
dedicated staff who brought in record sales of over $8 
million — said president Garry Parker. 

 
But the news gets better, Mr. Speaker. The Co-op handed out 
equity cheques totalling $97,224.88 to its members. 
Non-member sales increased from 1.8 million this year to over 
2.8 million. This increase was due primarily to the new business 
from the new convenience store/gas bar. 
 
The Co-op is also planning renovations for the spring of 2002, 
Mr. Speaker, which will include an expansion and modification 
of the current chemical and feed storage. 
 
And finally, Mr. Speaker, a packed crowd was told at the 
annual meeting and supper at the Broadview Community 
Centre that sales will continue to grow through the remainder of 
the year. 
 
Again, another reminder to the opposition that this province 
works for its people. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Water Quality Improvements 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my question is for the Minister of Environment. 
 
Last year the people of Saskatchewan learned that the NDP 
(New Democratic Party) had adopted a cabinet decision item in 
the year 2000 dealing with the supply of safe drinking water in 
Saskatchewan. This document raised many concerns about 
provincial water supplies and set out a comprehensive strategy 
to deal with those concerns. The NDP government said at the 
time they were working towards the implementation of those 
recommendations. 
 
Yet in the report from the commission of inquiry studying the 
contamination into the North Battleford water supply, Justice 
Laing says, and I quote, “Financial resources committed to the 
program to date will not accomplish this.” 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP said they were going to get serious about 
providing safe drinking water after the public learned about the 
cabinet decision item last year. 
 
Will the minister explain why they did not and have not yet 

committed the financial resources to follow through. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, I’m not sure where that 
member was for the last several weeks when we stood up in the 
Assembly and we spoke about some of the accomplishments 
that this government had put in place for the last number of 
years. 
 
For the record, Mr. Speaker, last year it put $1.4 million into 
new funding. We hired 11 new inspectors in SERM 
(Saskatchewan Environment and Resource Management); 4.5 
new positions at the provincial lab to make sure that the test 
results for water is done quicker. We have mandatory 
certification of water treatment plant operators by 2005. And, 
Mr. Speaker, again $30 million to the CSIP program, that’s the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program to help assist the 
communities in meeting some of the water quality guidelines 
that we often talk about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And furthermore, Mr. Speaker, this year, 2002 and 2003, we 
have 18 new positions and $2.4 million in new funding, Mr. 
Speaker, bringing that total of over two years of $3.8 million 
and 33 new positions, Mr. Speaker. And that includes 9 new 
inspectors in Environment, 6 new public health inspectors, and 
. . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Mr. Speaker, I think everyone 
understands that last Friday what the minister did was he 
announced the redirection of $2.4 million towards plant 
inspections. His . . . Mr. Speaker, we looked into this fudge-it 
budget and we’d like to know where this money’s coming from. 
 
According to the budget, the Environment department as a 
whole has been reduced by over $10 million. Environmental 
protection which looks after air and water safety, water and 
waste management, mining, milling and just . . . that’s just to 
name a few of the areas, had an increase of only $76,000 for 
programming. Sask Water’s water quality component of the 
budget was cut by $1.1 million. So they can’t be moving it from 
there. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it simply doesn’t add up. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is to the Minister of Environment. Which is . . . where 
is the money in her budget for this extra $2.4 million 
expenditure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, once again I’ll talk about 
the progress made and the progress that has to be made, Mr. 
Speaker. Last year, Mr. Speaker, in 2001 and 2002, funding was 
approved for 57 water and waste water projects through the 
Canada-Saskatchewan Infrastructure Program. 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Order, please. Order, 
please. Members, there is far too much . . . Order, please. There 
is far too much yelling and hollering and screaming while a 
member is either trying to ask the question and to answer the 
question. And I ask members to tone it down a bit. 



538 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
Last year, Mr. Speaker, we helped fund 57 water and waste 
water projects throughout Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And 
some of the communities that got funding, Mr. Speaker — and 
some of the communities that we are now working with today 
to make sure they don’t have any of these problems in the 
future, and we will continue working with them — include 
Rama, Mikado . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — . . . Benson, Crooked River, Erwood, 
Fairy Glen, Gronlid, Gladmar, Herschel . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Just try this again. 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — . . . Ridgedale, Spruce Lake, and 
Zelma, Mr. Speaker. Those are a few communities that we 
continue working with, Mr. Speaker. And today there is good 
progress made in those communities, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And furthermore, we have some tough new regulations that 
many communities have to follow and we will work with these 
communities, Mr. Speaker. There is good progress being made. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
my last two questions have dealt specifically with the budget of 
the Department of Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management and yet the minister has sat glued to her seat. 
Surely she’s not going to allow the minister of Sask Water to be 
operating her budgets for her as well? 
 
Perhaps, Mr. Speaker, she will answer questions specifically 
about the regulatory changes coming. Because the NDP’s own 
media backgrounder says these roles and responsibilities will 
fall within Saskatchewan Environment and Resource 
Management. 
 
Justice Laing has recommended, and the NDP have said that 
they do intend to introduce, new safe drinking water 
regulations. These regulatory changes are expected to have a 
huge impact on municipalities — not just in the area of 
responsibility, but economically as well. 
 
Will the minister of SERM tell us when these regulations will 
be made public and when the province intends to have them 
take effect. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, on behalf of government 
I’m going to point out again that we’re not going to play 
politics with this file. We’re going to continue moving forward. 
There’s good progress being made; there’s some good rules and 
regulations that are being drafted up, Mr. Speaker; and there’s 
some good ministers handling the many complex files 
associated with water quality, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And furthermore, what aggravates the people of Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker, is that opposition. Because not only, Mr. Speaker, 
have they voted against the many budgets that we talk about in 

terms of the progress made, but they even went after the 
workers that we hired in the last couple of years because they 
didn’t want to see any public health inspectors. And now they 
have the audacity to get up and say hold it; well we made a 
mistake; we didn’t do this right and now we want to defend 
them. Well, Mr. Speaker, leadership is about standing up for 
things right from day one and not folding. 
 
And on this side of the House, we believe working in 
partnership with the communities and putting forward a plan of 
action — a plan of action, Mr. Speaker, to finally address some 
of the water challenges in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s amazing that the answers and the person providing the 
answers bore absolutely no relationship whatsoever to the 
question. 
 
Mr. Speaker, however, that minister keeps saying that 70 per 
cent of Saskatchewan people have safe drinking water. Well I 
ask him, Mr. Speaker, what about the other 30 per cent? Is the 
NDP just content to write those communities off? 
 
As one example, Justice Laing has recommended that if a 
municipality has a history of non-compliance in supplying 
bacteriological samples, SERM should appoint new 
management at the municipal level, at the municipality’s cost; 
or that SERM should rescind the community’s operating 
permits and licences. 
 
Right now in Saskatchewan, there are 33 communities that 
aren’t meeting minimal water standards; 44 communities in 
total that have boil-waters . . . boil-water orders in effect. Is 
SERM going to take these communities over right now and just 
bill the taxpayers, Mr. Speaker? What plans does the province 
have to help these communities meet the minimum water 
standards and be able to comply with the proposed regulatory 
changes? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, we have announced 
Friday and we’ll continue announcing over the coming weeks 
what our strategy and our plan is. 
 
We do have a plan, Mr. Speaker, and that plan talks about 
certification of operators; that plan talks about inspection; that 
plan talks about adding new people at the provincial lab; that 
plan talks about putting major dollars into the infrastructure 
planning; that plan talks about working alongside the 
community; that plan makes sure that all the community 
members know what their water system is all about; that plan 
provides transparency — that plan does a number of things, Mr. 
Speaker. That plan affords very thorough . . . a very thorough 
approach to meeting some of the water quality standards that 
this province needs and that this government is going to 
implement, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 539 

 

one of the proposed regulatory amendments recommended by 
Justice Laing is that the NDP make it an offence to knowingly 
operate a water treatment facility in contravention of the 
operational requirements set out in the operating permit. 
 
Right now 44 communities in Saskatchewan are under 
boil-water advisories, and another 120 have deficient treatment 
systems. Now the leaders in these communities know about 
their water problems. Is the NDP suggesting that these people 
should be charged? 
 
Already municipal volunteers across the province are ready to 
wash their hands of any civic involvement if the province 
insists on holding them criminally responsible for water quality 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain if the NDP are proposing 
to lay charges against people who don’t comply with their 
regulations and, if so, what the charges and the penalties would 
be. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — The opposition is fearmongering. What 
the commissioner has recommended, that we look at a series of 
steps to make sure that people are complying. 
 
And what I want to point out, Mr. Speaker, the 44 communities 
that are out on a boil-water advisory, that list remains fluid. 
Some come off and some go on. We’ll continue focusing on the 
30 per cent of the people in Saskatchewan that do have some 
challenges. And I can assure you, Mr. Speaker, that we’re going 
to continue building on the success we’ve had in the past couple 
of years through our plan. We have a plan on this side of the 
Assembly, Mr. Speaker, and that plan will be designed in 
concert with our partners. 
 
And I would say I’m offended — him being a former mayor — 
that he should know many mayors and many reeves and 
councillors take very seriously their role to make sure that safe 
water is delivered to their community residents. And I’m 
ashamed to see that kind of attitude come from that side, 
because mayors and reeves and councillors do a good job and 
they’ll continue doing a good job. And we’re going to work 
alongside of them to make sure they understand the rules and 
that the penalties are in place, and they’re fair, and that they 
protect the public health, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
The NDP’s don’t-worry, be-happy communications strategy is 
failing. The minister can talk all he wants about partnerships 
and working with communities to solve water problems. But 
those communities know full well that it was the NDP that 
slashed water quality monitoring programs, slashed inspection 
budgets. And they did all of this knowing full well they were 
compromising the quality of our drinking water. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they knew for over the last 10 years that they were 
risking the health of Saskatchewan people. The NDP knew; the 
NDP are responsible. And now the NDP are threatening to 
throw municipal leaders in jail if they don’t comply with their 

new regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Justice Laing said that for the last 10 years the 
NDP has been indifferent to water quality concerns. And their 
response to his report indicates that that indifference is 
continuing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when is the minister going to take responsibility 
for the contamination of North Battleford’s water supply and 
quit passing the blame on to Saskatchewan communities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Belanger: — Mr. Speaker, this is how silly this 
opposition is. First of all, yesterday they stood in the Assembly, 
and we all agreed in this Assembly that we would have a debate 
on water quality. And they accepted the recommendations of 
Justice Laing. 
 
Justice Laing done some good work. He found out what went 
wrong and how we can stop it from ever occurring again. And 
they stood up in this Assembly yesterday talking about the 
recommendations and how great a job he done and how these 
recommendations should be applied. And now today they’re 
saying well hold it; the recommendations aren’t that good 
because they’re going to charge civic leaders. 
 
Now what I would say to that opposition is — I’ve said it time 
and time again — shame on that member and shame on that 
opposition. They are playing politics with a very crucial issue, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is a federal, this is a provincial, this is a local, this is a First 
Nations co-operative effort to build a good quality water system 
for all people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, and shame on 
them for bringing politics into the picture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Investments by Saskatchewan Government Insurance 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is for the 
minister responsible for the Crown Investments Corporation. 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister confirm for the Assembly that 
the NDP through SGI (Saskatchewan Government Insurance) 
have made a major investment in an Alberta-based insurance 
company called Hi-Alta Capital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
was wondering where my critic was over the last number of 
weeks. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would certainly say to that member that . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. First of all, it’s getting a little 
loud again, but I would also bring to the member’s attention, 
he’s not to refer to the presence or absence of any member in 
the House. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — I was not . . . I was wondering where the 
questions were, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Crowns, as SGI has done, Mr. Speaker, invest 
in a number of ventures, Mr. Speaker, and SGI is no different 
than any of the rest of our Crowns. They’re spreading risk, 



540 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

they’re ensuring jobs back here in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, to the minister through you: yes or 
no — has SGI made a major investment in an Alberta-based 
company called Hi-Alta Capital? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, SGI has been working 
with Hi-Alta. Yes, they have, Mr. Speaker. But what they were 
doing, Mr. Speaker, is they’re spreading risk, Mr. Speaker. In 
fact, in addition to that, they’re keeping the rates low, amongst 
the lowest in all of Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
If you look at what happened in Alberta just recently with the 
increase there, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan people should be 
proud of what SGI has to offer here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I guess we’ll have 
to assume that the minister’s answer is yes. And that jives with 
what the official opposition Saskatchewan Party has learned, 
Mr. Speaker, which is specifically that in August of last year, 
the NDP invested about $1.7 million in a company called 
Hi-Alta Capital based in Alberta. And we also know, Mr. 
Speaker, that this particular company is currently competing 
with other Saskatchewan-based brokers. 
 
But what we’ve also . . . what we also know, Mr. Speaker, is 
that the government, the NDP have not made any 
announcement about this particular investment — neither the 
minister nor SGI. We have searched through the orders in 
council and there is no OC, Mr. Speaker, about this particular 
deal, calling into question whether even cabinet has approved it 
or not. And finally, we know that there has been no significant 
transaction report filed with the Standing Committee on Crown 
Corporations as is the NDP policy when such an investment is 
made. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is this: why has 
the NDP government not made any announcement about this 
deal? What are they trying to hide? 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, they’re absolutely trying 
to hide absolutely nothing, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, SGI . . . we’ve been very public about what SGI 
has done, Mr. Speaker. They’ve invested in a number of 
ventures to try and spread the risk across, across the ratepayers, 
the people that buy insurance through SGI. We’ve made very 
public our investments in Prince Edward Island, Mr. Speaker. 
We’ve made public our investments in Ontario. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is no different. We’re trying to spread the risk 
for Saskatchewan people to ensure that we get the lowest 
possible rate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. Once again there are too 
many people participating in the debate. It should be one person 
at a time. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, rather than criticize, we 
should be proud of what our Crowns have done. And in this 
case, Mr. Speaker, SGI is reducing the rates and spreading the 

risk. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The minister says he 
has nothing to hide. Will he then, Mr. Speaker, undertake today 
to table in the Legislative Assembly any public communications 
that either SGI or his office has made to inform the taxpayers of 
this deal. And will he commit today to table the details of this 
latest NDP investment in the province of Alberta. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I think it’s clear that 
the people of Saskatchewan support what our Crowns are 
doing, Mr. Speaker — that’s investing in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker; that’s investing outside of Saskatchewan to ensure that 
we can bring profits back into our province to ensure that risk is 
spread by SGI, Mr. Speaker. And that’s exactly what we’re 
doing. We’re ensuring we have the lowest rates, as evidenced 
by the rates that the people of Saskatchewan pay today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I’ve been 
contacted by a number of independent brokers here in the 
province of Saskatchewan. They’ve been made aware of this 
deal thanks . . . no thanks to the government, Mr. Speaker, but 
they have been made aware of this deal. And they have some 
very specific questions. 
 
Their questions are, Mr. Speaker, how could the NDP 
government take approximately $1.7 million, invest it in the 
province of Alberta in a corporation that has now since come 
into the province of Saskatchewan and is competing directly 
against independent businesses in the province of 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how could the NDP take 1.7 
million taxpayers’ dollars, invest it in an Alberta company to 
compete with Saskatchewan business men and women? How in 
the world can they justify that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, the hypocrisy of this 
argument just . . . I cannot understand it, Mr. Speaker. Now he’s 
against competition. The party of free enterprise is against 
competition, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Hi-Alta . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, I hear the members over 
there saying that competition is wonderful. I agree with them. 
You know that, Mr. Speaker? I agree with them. 
 
They’re saying that taxpayers’ dollars are being used for 
competition. I disagree. The last time taxpayers’ dollars were 
used, Mr. Speaker, was back in the early 1990s when we had to 
take money from the General Revenue Fund and move it over 
to Crown Investments Corporation to pay for the debt that they 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 541 

 

racked up in the Crowns, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, any one of us, anybody 
in the province can go into SGI today and you can get insurance 
to protect you from hail damage; you can get insurance to 
compensate you for maybe damage from a rainstorm; you can 
get insurance to compensate you from damage from a 
windstorm. But if SGI wanted to do the province a favour, Mr. 
Speaker, they would invent an insurance product that would 
protect us from the worst natural disaster that has occurred in 
the province of Saskatchewan — this NDP government. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — We need some NDP insurance, frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, if hurricane Maynard is going to continue to blow in 
the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, this province has lost 12,000 jobs in 
the last two years, while the rest of the country’s job market is 
on fire, as the local media are saying. 
 
Will the minister explain for the Assembly and the people of the 
province how investing in an Alberta company that competes 
with Saskatchewan business men and women — how does that 
create jobs in the province? How does that grow Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, maybe I need to 
speak more slowly; I’m not sure, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we do — individual Crowns, Mr. Speaker, 
they make investments, they earn revenue, they bring it back to 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, bring it back to Saskatchewan, 
which ensures jobs here in Saskatchewan. It’s no more 
complicated than that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Well the minister raises an interesting point, Mr. 
Speaker. He says that the profits from this investment will come 
back to the province of Saskatchewan. So will he inform the 
Assembly then, what part of this deal, what part of this 
investment in Hi-Alta Capital ensures that the profits that 
company makes in Alberta will come to the province of 
Saskatchewan? Will he outline that for the Assembly? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Again, Mr. Speaker, I’ll speak slowly 
again. 
 
It’s not complicated. When you make investments and you 
make profits on those investments, Mr. Speaker, that money 
comes back into the parent company, Mr. Speaker. That goes to 
supporting and securing jobs here in Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the minister says that we 

don’t understand competition. Well we understand something 
very clearly about competition. We understand, Mr. Speaker, 
that Saskatchewan business men and women are sick . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — We understand very clearly, Mr. Speaker, that 
Saskatchewan business men and women are sick and tired of 
competing against their own tax dollars, their own 
taxpayer-paid-for resources, thanks to this NDP government. 
That’s the kind of competition they’re sick of. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the question to the minister is simple. How does 
investing in an Alberta company that will then compete with 
Saskatchewan business men and women here in the province, 
how does that grow our economy? How does that grow 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — It’s very clear to me. Much like that 
member criticized SaskTel, now he’s starting on SGI, Mr. 
Speaker. And it will carry on with all the rest of the Crowns, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Their agenda is real simple, Mr. Speaker. It’s to so discredit our 
Crown corporations so that they can strip equity out of there, 
Mr. Speaker. They can try and convince the people of 
Saskatchewan, if they ever became government, that they 
should justify selling the Crowns. That’s their agenda, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, since we seem to have a bit of a bonus time here, we’ll 
give the minister a bonus question. And the bonus question goes 
something like this: if the minister is so convinced about the 
merits of this deal, why won’t he commit to lay on the table 
today both the communications the government made to the 
public about this investment they made on their behalf, and also 
the details of the latest NDP investment in the province of 
Alberta? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Does this mean I get a bonus answer as 
well, Mr. Speaker? Thank you very much. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with the exception of the 1980s and the early 
1990s, Mr. Speaker, when they were in government, Mr. 
Speaker, the reason we do this, Mr. Speaker, is we take 
revenues from the investments from the Crown corporations, 
we put them back into dividends and those flow into the 
General Revenue Fund to provide all kinds of service to the 
people of Saskatchewan. 
 
The only time that didn’t happen, Mr. Speaker, was back in the 
1980s and 1990s, early 1990s, Mr. Speaker, when they were in 
power and there was no revenue from the Crowns to flow back 
into the General Revenue Fund, Mr. Speaker. That’s why we 
make those investments, Mr. Speaker. 
 



542 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Collection Agents 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 21, The Collection Agents Amendment Act, 2002 be 
now introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased today on behalf 
of the many civil servants who worked long hours to put 
together the material to answer these few questions today, Mr. 
Speaker, to table responses to questions 70, 72, 73, 74, 75, 76, 
and 77, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I move that we convert for debates returnable. 
 
The Speaker: — Item 72 converted to . . . Item no. 72 
converted. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, before orders of the 
day, I would like to ask for leave of the Assembly to move a 
motion in regards to the membership of the Standing 
Committee on Crown Corporations. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTIONS 
 

Substitution of Members on the Standing Committee 
on Crown Corporations 

 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move: 
 

That the names of Mr. Harry Van Mulligen, Ms. Pat 
Atkinson, Mr. Kim Trew, and Mr. David Forbes be 
substituted for those of Mr. Graham Addley, Mr. Warren 
McCall, Mr. Andrew Thomson, and Mr. Kevin Yates on 
the list of members composing the Standing Committee on 
Crown Corporations. 

 
This motion is seconded by the member from Moose Jaw 
North. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Development of Ethanol Industry 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure this afternoon to move a motion that 

expresses support for the ethanol initiative that our government 
has announced in the last couple of weeks, Mr. Speaker. This is 
one of the most exciting new economic development initiatives 
that the province of Saskatchewan has announced and I’m very 
proud that our coalition government is moving forward with 
this, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Our vision is to build an ethanol industry for the province of 
Saskatchewan that will create new employment opportunities, 
that will create a more environmentally friendly transportation 
system, and that will see a future, Mr. Speaker, in which 
ethanol-blended gasoline is ultimately mandated in the province 
of Saskatchewan and used by all motorists in Saskatchewan, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this strategy, this strategy for a greener future by way of an 
ethanol-blended gasoline, Mr. Speaker, that future is one in 
which we envision, first of all, the opportunity to create 
employment in many parts of rural Saskatchewan. And the 
strategy is combined with other green initiatives in wind power 
and in energy conservation. So in effect, Mr. Speaker, this is 
one part of a larger green economic development strategy. 
 
Earlier this year, Mr. Speaker, our government announced a 
second wind power project, and at that time we said that we 
would build new wind turbines in the Gull Lake area. So we’ve 
completed the first set of wind turbines, Mr. Speaker, 17 new 
wind generators that are now operating in Cypress Hills, and 
we’re going to embark on the construction of 9 more turbines 
this summer. 
 
And combined with that, Mr. Speaker, we’ve announced a 
number of important investments in energy conservation. We 
have for instance announced that we will be providing, and are 
providing right now, prime rate loans for homeowners that 
install high-efficiency furnaces in their homes. 
 
(14:30) 
 
We’ve also announced a major investment in energy 
conservation in our senior citizens housing units in the province 
that are government-owned, Mr. Speaker. And we’re 
retrofitting 11,000 seniors housing units in the province of 
Saskatchewan — both to make those units more comfortable for 
the residents and also to save taxpayers’ money through 
reduced utility bills. And we’ll be cutting utility bills in those 
11,000 seniors units by 10 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We’re also undertaking major retrofit work in a number of 
government buildings — larger government buildings — 70 in 
all. And again that’ll be a savings of . . . on utility costs for 
taxpayers and a reduction of greenhouse gas emissions that are 
contributing to climate change. 
 
So we’re pursuing this green energy policy on a number of 
fronts, Mr. Speaker — in the front of wind power, in the area of 
energy conservation, and in the area of ethanol. And it’s the 
area of ethanol that I particularly want to speak to this 
afternoon. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, our government is . . . has outlined a 
comprehensive . . . 
 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 543 

 

The Speaker: — Why is the member from Moose Jaw North 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — To raise a point of order, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Would the member state his point of order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I’ve just had opportunity to 
consult with colleagues and . . . regarding a comment made by 
the hon. member for Swift Current in question period that I 
wish to bring to your attention, would ask you to rule. 
 
I believe it has been confirmed that my hearing was correct, or 
certainly shared by other colleagues, that in his comments 
during question period the hon. member for Swift Current 
referred to the hon. minister responsible for the Crown 
Investments Corporation as hurricane Maynard. 
 
I would suggest, Mr. Speaker, that that is a disrespectful 
reference which violates the rules of the House and the conduct 
in reference to hon. colleagues in the House. And I would ask 
that you would review the record and then call the hon. member 
for Swift Current to order for his violation of the rule. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — To respond to the point of order, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, as we all know, that 
hurricanes are named from A to Z and can have any name. And 
I’m sure that the member from Swift Current was simply 
picking a name at random, Mr. Speaker, of a number of 
different natural disasters that have occurred around the world, 
and this was simply just one example. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank both members for bringing their 
points of order to my attention. I shall review the record and 
bring back a ruling. 
 
Mr. Prebble: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s my pleasure now to outline in summation form the 
policy of the government as it pertains to the development of an 
ethanol industry in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And the first aspect of our new policy, Mr. Speaker, is that we 
are effectively eliminating the provincial fuel tax on ethanol 
that is both produced in Saskatchewan and consumed in 
Saskatchewan by way of a rebate. 
 
I want to clarify, Mr. Speaker, that we are not eliminating the 
tax on ethanol that’s imported outside the province. We’re 
eliminating the tax on ethanol that’s produced in Saskatchewan 
with the view to creating employment opportunities in 
Saskatchewan and providing an incentive for new ethanol 
production facilities to develop in this province, Mr. Speaker. 
And I think that’s a much sounder policy than simply 
eliminating the tax on all ethanol that’s sold in the province. So 
this is an incentive policy, Mr. Speaker, that’s designed to 
encourage the development of ethanol production facilities in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, we have introduced legislation into this 

Assembly to permit the mandating of ethanol-blended gasoline 
to be sold in Saskatchewan. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say that we are the first 
jurisdiction in Canada to introduce such legislation. And the 
purpose of this legislation, Mr. Speaker, is not that 
ethanol-blended gasoline will be immediately sold in the 
province, because we’re not in a position to do that yet. The 
purpose of the legislation is that when we have sufficient 
production facilities in the province of Saskatchewan producing 
ethanol to allow all gasoline that is sold in Saskatchewan to be a 
gasoline-ethanol blend, when we’re at the point where we have 
adequate production facilities to do this, cabinet, the cabinet of 
the day can immediately mandate an ethanol-gasoline mix, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think that’s going to be very important. This legislation is 
a clear signal to the industry that we’re very, very serious in the 
province of Saskatchewan about developing this industry. And 
as soon as it’s possible to mandate by law a blended gasoline, a 
gasoline-ethanol mix, we shall do so. Cabinet shall do so, shall 
do so. And that’s an important signal to producers of ethanol, to 
retailers in the gasoline industry, and to all Saskatchewan 
motorists and consumers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Third, Mr. Speaker, our government is committed to working 
with the federal government and other provincial governments 
to remove barriers on the export of ethanol from the province 
and from our country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We see a very promising market in the United States for ethanol 
and clearly the United States, Mr. Speaker, is looking to reduce 
its imports of oil from outside North America and particularly 
from parts of the world where there is less security with respect 
to supply and growing instability, Mr. Speaker. I think there is a 
real opportunity for Saskatchewan to supply ethanol to 
American customers, again for the purpose of blending it with 
gasoline to allow American motorists to have a blended 
gasoline mix. 
 
Fourth, Mr. Speaker, it’s our intention to encourage the 
Government of Canada to also legislate a mandatory blending 
of ethanol gasoline in Canada. We want to see legislation that 
goes beyond the legislation that we’ve introduced in this 
Assembly that will only pertain to Saskatchewan. And our 
vision, Mr. Speaker, is for a policy that would be adopted by the 
Government of Canada that would require mandatory blending 
of ethanol and gasoline that would be available to all 
Canadians. 
 
So we’re taking the first step here in this legislature mandating 
ethanol gasoline for all Saskatchewan residents as soon as our 
production facilities are up to speed. And it’s our intention at 
the same time to promote this same kind of legislation at the 
national level. Mr. Speaker, we’re also going to work with 
wholesalers and retailers to develop a market for 
ethanol-blended fuel, of course, in our province. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to turn to, first of all, discussing 
some of the environmental advantages of our new policy. And 
one of the things that I think is very exciting about a future in 
which we would see ethanol-blended gasoline mandated in this 
province is that we can anticipate, as a result of this, improved 



544 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

air quality for Saskatchewan residents and reduced greenhouse 
gas emissions from our transportation sector in the province of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Environment Canada, Mr. Speaker, has estimated that a mix of 
10 per cent ethanol and 90 per cent gasoline can reduce carbon 
dioxide emissions by as much as 30 per cent. It can also, Mr. 
Speaker, reduce carbon monoxide emissions by as much as 30 
per cent. 
 
So we’re looking at a very substantial reduction of both carbon 
monoxide and carbon dioxide, Mr. Speaker. And that is one of 
the major advantages of using ethanol. 
 
Ethanol, Mr. Speaker, also offers other important advantages by 
way of a reduction of toxins in our air and it’s a very important 
alternative to a lot of the octane enhancers that are currently on 
the market in Canada, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It can replace the use of MMT (methylcyclopentadinyl 
manganese tricarbonyl), which we know to be a very toxic 
carcinogen, Mr. Speaker, and it can also substitute for aromatic 
hydrocarbons which include the carcinogen benzene. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the introduction and promotion of ethanol in 
our transportation system not only offers us the opportunity to 
reduce greenhouse gas emissions but it offers us the opportunity 
to reduce other cancer-causing agents that we often find in 
today’s gasoline that is used as fuel in our cars, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So in terms of protecting the safety of those and reducing the 
risk of those who pump gasoline and reducing . . . and 
improving air quality in our cities, ethanol offers a very 
attractive opportunity for the people of Saskatchewan. And it’s 
for these reasons, Mr. Speaker, that as a government we’re very 
anxious to promote it. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I want to say a word about some of the 
economic opportunities that developing the ethanol industry in 
Saskatchewan offers the people of Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
And I want to start by saying that we are in a very good position 
here in Saskatchewan to take advantage of building an ethanol 
industry. 
 
We have all the basics that are required for a successful ethanol 
industry here in our province. Mr. Speaker, we have an 
abundance of the kinds of raw materials that are needed for 
ethanol. We have reasonably priced land. We have of course an 
excellent grain industry here in the province of Saskatchewan. 
We have relatively inexpensive electrical power. We have 
extensive water supply here in our province, and we have an 
extensive transportation infrastructure, both in terms of rail and 
road that are needed to move ethanol to market. And of course, 
Mr. Speaker, we have reasonably priced farmland. 
 
And the combination, Mr. Speaker, of all those things puts us in 
an excellent position to be . . . not only to have a strong 
made-in-Saskatchewan ethanol industry, but also to be 
competitive on the export market in terms of ethanol. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I also want to mention that there are attractive 
opportunities in terms of employment from this industry. If we 
agree with some experts and say that in the near future 

Saskatchewan could easily have a 400 million litre per year 
industry here in this province for ethanol production, then we 
can assume that ethanol will create at least 450 direct and 
indirect, permanent jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. And that’s . . . That would be a very welcome addition 
because many of those jobs would be in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
In addition, Mr. Speaker, there are important spinoffs to the 
development of an ethanol industry in our province, including a 
larger cattle industry with meat packaging plants, and the 
increased usage of rail lines in our province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we as a government estimate that if ethanol 
was used in 50 per cent of Canadian gasoline, it’s projected that 
3 to 6,000 jobs would be created as a result. And, Mr. Speaker, 
that would be a significant potential opportunity for both the 
people of Saskatchewan, and other portions of Canada that are 
significant agriculture producers, Mr. Speaker, in the grain 
industry. So the opportunities here are immense. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure at this point to formally 
move the motion, and I would like to, at this time, Mr. Speaker, 
move that . . . seconded by the hon. member for Regina 
Qu’Appelle: 
 

That this Assembly support the ethanol policy released by 
the government, a policy that will create the environment 
for building a vibrant ethanol industry in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I so move. Thank you very much. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. It 
is a real privilege for me to be able to stand here today and to 
speak in support of this motion, and also to have had the 
opportunity to work on developing a greenprint on ethanol for 
the province. 
 
I’d like to go back and just look again at the history of this 
project. Long before I was elected to government, long before I 
was born, ethanol was a fuel that was used and contemplated 
for use in North America and throughout the world. 
 
Most people will know that ethanol has actually been around 
from the very early time of humanity where people fermented 
their grains and drank them and then later on distilled that wine 
to make alcohol, which is basically what ethanol is. 
 
So it’s been around for a long time and I know that during the 
20s and 30s we had some real expert producers of ethanol in 
North America, and I’m told that there are still a few of those 
producers around the province. But that’s not the aspect of 
ethanol that we’re looking at, Mr. Speaker. 
 
What we were looking at in this province is the potential of 
developing an industry that will help on a number of fronts — it 
will bring jobs to rural Saskatchewan; it will help protect our 
environment; and it will provide . . . has the potential to provide 
a major new crop emphasis in this province. 
 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 545 

 

So to move it forward a little bit, the government over many 
years looked at ethanol as a possibility, and during the 80s and 
into the 90s there was development of ethanol but it wasn’t 
timely and technologies were such that it was very difficult to 
make it go without subsidizing that industry. 
 
But through the midst of that we had one operation that 
persevered, partly due to the people who were involved and 
partly due to the support that they were provided by 
government and by one of their partners, Husky — Mohawk at 
the time — and that’s the Pound-Maker facility. And I would 
like to pay tribute to not just their CEO (chief executive 
officer), Brad Wildemen, who has done a tremendous job 
working in this industry, but to the board and the people who 
invested in that and who persevered through the more difficult 
years. 
 
But I would like to say that as I travelled around the province 
this past year, many, many people spoke to me about Brad 
Wildemen and the kind of work that he had done, how he had 
encouraged them to look into this industry. So we did have one 
facility that was producing between 10 and 13 million litres and 
that’s an integrated facility. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to just explain a little bit about an 
integrated facility and how they operate. An integrated facility 
like Pound-Maker’s has a beef feedlot that is directly connected 
to an ethanol facility. They take the grain in and the grain, after 
much testing and checking, the grain which they use basically is 
feed wheat. They take this in; they crush it. They mix it with 
water, with yeast, and they brew it. They distill it and produce 
ethanol. 
 
But in producing that ethanol, there are by-products that come 
out. One of them is the stillage, which is basically the water that 
is pressed out of the mash. That water is piped out to the cattle. 
It’s a high value nutrient that goes out to the cattle for their 
watering. 
 
And the second by-product which they use is they take the mash 
then which has been pressed. It is still wet. They take that. They 
blend it with other grains, other feeds, and they feed it to the 
cattle. Now it’s particularly good for those cattle who are just 
beginning into the feed process. It’s high protein and really 
helps with gains there. And they blend differently as the 
production goes along. 
 
But this integrated facility provides many jobs, not just for the 
people involved in the ethanol production side but also in the 
feedlot side of the production. It also is a benefit for the people 
in the area immediately surrounding Pound-Maker, which is by 
Lanigan, Saskatchewan. 
 
Many of those people own some shares in the operation and 
many of them are farming in the area. Some of them produce 
the feeder cattle that go into the lot. Some of them produce 
some of the other grains that are blended in and they gain on 
each of those fronts. 
 
The other place where they gain, Mr. Speaker, is on the far end 
of the whole process, where they also are able to take the 
manures that are produced in the feedlot and spread that on their 
land. So we have a nice synergy going in the integrated type 

facility. 
 
Now there have been concerns about some of the environmental 
aspects of that kind of an operation, and I would say that the 
Pound-Maker operation has been very cognizant of those and 
has now started to compost its manures and they’re being very 
careful about where these things are done. And so when they’re 
spread now, there is less risk of contamination and nutrient is 
provided for the soil; the crops give better returns. 
 
And it’s just basically a benefit for all who are participating in 
that integrated facility in the region. So that plant, Mr. Speaker, 
was there long before I ever got involved in the issue of ethanol, 
and certainly long before . . . Excuse me, Mr. Speaker, I’m not 
understanding the comment. Okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the . . . Long before I got involved, that plant was 
going. It was very successful, developing well. And our 
government started to look at the possibility of developing this. 
There were people in Agriculture working on this, there were 
people in Economic Development working on this, and there 
were people in Environment, in SERM, working on this issue. 
 
In 1999 I was fortunate enough to be elected to this legislature. 
And one of the realities, which I’ve mentioned before, is that 
the constituency that I represent has about 20 per cent rural. 
And so I felt it incumbent on me to learn about some of the 
issues in rural Saskatchewan and to try and find ways that I 
could help build the economy in rural Saskatchewan. 
 
So I started to look and inquire, and one of the issues that came 
forward was the issue of ethanol development. And a young 
man in my constituency who works for Associated Engineering, 
Darren Anholt, began to encourage me to look further, opened 
up a number of Web sites for me, and introduced me to Dr. 
Keith Hutchence from the Saskatchewan Research Council. 
 
And with these two people encouraging my development of 
understanding, I really worked at trying to gain as full a 
perspective and understanding on ethanol and what the potential 
was for ethanol development in this province. 
 
As a part of that, when my interest grew, my understanding 
grew. I began to try and encourage members of the caucus to 
also look further at this, and so we were able to put together a 
seminar for our caucus to look into this and to talk to and listen 
to Dr. Keith Hutchence talk about what the potential for ethanol 
development is. 
 
That seminar was very informative. And just to jump ahead a 
little bit, when we got down to the leadership contest in the 
New Democratic Party, a number of the candidates were 
drawing from that information to talk about the potential of an 
ethanol plan for the future. 
 
So we used that as a base and began to develop a deeper 
understanding. My work on that area kind of was put on hold a 
little bit during the leadership, but I still felt that it was a piece 
that we needed to develop as fully as we could. 
 
One day I was contacted by Mr. Murray Mandryk, a reporter for 
The Leader-Post, who was asking what we were doing in the 
leadership campaign. He noted that Chris Axworthy had a 



546 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

position on ethanol and that Scott Banda had a position on 
ethanol, and wondered where we were on that. 
 
And so I started to talk to him about the work that had been 
done on that to this date. And I went into, I gather, too much 
detail because I thought, Murray’s either doing a home building 
project or he’s . . . something else is happening. But I realized 
he was snoring. And I gathered I’d gone into too much detail on 
it and he really wasn’t that interested in the kind of thoughts 
that we had about where it might be projected down to the 
future. 
 
But I do want to say this was long before there was any kind of 
surfacing of any, any plan or any notion coming from our 
members opposite. This was long before they revealed their 
plan on ethanol, which, Mr. Speaker, could have easily been 
taken out of any of the newspaper articles that were there during 
the leadership and then encapsulated as their plan on ethanol. 
 
So given that little bit of history then, I’ll go back to the story of 
our development, of how as we worked on that I began to find 
out the kind of work that had already been done in Economic 
Development, Sask Ag and Food, and in SERM. And I was 
quite excited about some of that groundwork that had already 
been laid and was very, very pleased then when I was appointed 
in May to, to head up the development of a greenprint for 
ethanol for Saskatchewan. 
 
And there are a couple of pieces that I found extremely helpful 
and I think I passed some of this information on to members of 
the opposition during the development phases. I talked with the 
member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, who was also 
interested in this, pointed him toward Dr. Keith Hutchence and 
his document which he had produced, called, “Saskatchewan 
and the Ethanol Energy Economy.” 
 
And I have to say that I couldn’t put it other than Dr. Hutchence 
is visionary. The view and the understanding that he had of how 
the ethanol industry could be developed in this province is 
worth a read by anyone. And he’s gone beyond just the . . . just 
this work that he’s done. Second book will probably be 
published by the Research Council in the not too distant future. 
 
So after my appointment, I started to be able to take in more 
seminars, more educational events around the province, and to 
meet with people throughout the province, who were interested 
in the development of ethanol. 
 
And I had one rather disturbing, disappointing experience 
during that time, Mr. Speaker. I had found out that there was 
going to be a international conference on ethanol in the United 
States. And I shared that with members opposite saying that, 
you know, this is good for Saskatchewan, this conference is 
coming up, it would be really good if one of you might partner 
with me so we could go down and do that. 
 
I won’t name the constituencies of those members, but just 
suffice it to say that I approached a couple of them. I 
approached their House Leader and suggested that this would 
be a good idea. He said not over his dead body. I agreed to that, 
but he didn’t go for it either, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so this . . . the impression I got was that it wasn’t going to 

happen. There would be no partnership agreement. And so what 
happened, Mr. Speaker, was that on the sly they sent one of 
their members down who came back afterwards and made a 
great member statement about how I hadn’t been at this world 
ethanol conference and was . . . I was disappointed just at the 
level of rancour that there was around that. And it’s just part of, 
I guess, the dynamics of the politics that happens around these 
things as you vie for recognition. 
 
But that was just one of those little, little things that happened. 
And I have to say that there were members opposite who spoke 
about that and were chagrined at the way that that had unfolded. 
And I did appreciate that and the comments that they made 
during that process. 
 
I think that through that process, I tried always to not only keep 
them informed but to be very open with people throughout the 
province as we talked about this development, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I went out and spoke . . . I think one of the first large 
public events that I spoke at was in Melville. And Melville had 
really developed a lot of interest in this. The member from 
Melville had been really involved in encouraging this 
development. The community people had been working on this. 
They had looked at a whole number of ways that they might 
help build their community. And one of the things that they 
were hoping was that they would have a real good, deep, hot 
water well; they could use some of that heat in the process. 
Unfortunately, the . . . that part of it didn’t work out. But they 
still felt that they could possibly do something in the ethanol 
development. 
 
And so I went out to this meeting, and I think there must have 
been between 150 and 200 people out at that first meeting at 
least. And they very clearly were interested in the development 
of an integrated type facility, they were looking at a large 
facility. And we were able to talk somewhat about the kind of 
sizes, what you can get as an optimum size according to 
analysis that we had done. 
 
Part of our, part of our work on this process was to hire a 
consultant. And we hired S&T Squared Consultants’ Don 
O’Connor to do a very solid economic and scientific and 
engineering analysis of ethanol development and what the 
potential is there. 
 
I’m told by the former member or — pardon me — the former 
minister of energy and mines that that has been released, that 
report has been released and is available for public scrutiny as 
well. But it has a lot of detail about what the potential is of this 
industry in Saskatchewan, and tremendous analysis on the 
economic potential. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So through this analysis, as I looked at the information that 
came in and worked with Economic Development, worked with 
Ag and Food, I began to form the basic vision of what we might 
do in this province. 
 
And my recommendation was after looking at this, that in a 
preliminary stage what we do is try and set as a goal about a 
400 million litre industry by January 1, 2005. And that this 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 547 

 

basically be done by the government trying to set the 
environment through taxation and regulation changes that 
would really enable and encourage a private industry to 
develop. 
 
I’m told, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that the opposition was running 
around scaring all these people who were interested by telling 
them that we were going to form this ethanol Crown 
corporation. And so a number of communities that I went to, a 
number of individuals that I spoke to, I had to put that rumour 
to bed and make very clear to them that we were not looking at 
setting up any kind of an ethanol Crown corporation. 
 
But we’re clearly looking at trying to set the right environment 
through taxation and regulation that would enable private 
industry to develop this industry. So we looked at setting a goal 
of some 400 million litres in a grain-fermentation-based 
industry, and we look at that as a primary goal. Secondary goal, 
but a goal that we had to keep our eyes open for, was the 
possibility of a 1 billion litre grain-based industry. 
 
Now I want to talk about why we would just set that 
preliminary goal at 400 million litres. There are a couple of 
factors that were quite key in this. First of all, is that there are 
an amazing number of technologies that are coming on stream 
very quickly, technologies that have been lab tested. They’re 
very exciting. 
 
When the analysis is done and we get a sense of what the cost 
per litre is in producing ethanol from these technologies it’s 
quite significantly lower than what we can produce it on a 
grain-fermentation-based facility. So we have to keep that in 
mind when we’re trying to set the goal of what we would invest 
our funds in at this point. 
 
Now I’ll just highlight briefly what some of those technologies 
are that I discovered as I was reading, studying the issue, and as 
I was meeting with various people around the country. 
 
Those technologies, most of them are basically some form of 
hydrolyzation, that is turning into liquid form the products 
which will produce ethanol. When we do that, when they are 
turned through hydrolysis, either acid hydrolysis or supercritical 
water hydrolysis, and there are other methods as well, you’re 
able to isolate the starches; you’re able to isolate some of the 
other components. Once you’ve got the starches isolated, then 
you can produce ethanol from those starches. 
 
Through those methods, I think there’s an enzyme hydrolysis, 
which a company many people will be familiar with, a company 
called Iogen has been developing and Jeff Passmore has been 
out here and talked to us about the potential of that industry 
using straw and other biomass to produce ethanol. The enzymes 
would do that same work of breaking down the plant material 
— just like you see in the forest where it breaks down the plant 
material, turns it into kind of mush. Well in the enzyme 
hydrolysis you’re able to then take the starch out and produce 
ethanol. 
 
So this is one of the technologies that is lab tested, the federal 
government has put a fair bit of research and development 
money into the Iogen Corporation to help develop ethanol. And 
in that process, they have been discovering there are a few 

difficulties in bringing it to market. 
 
And so some of those things they are working on, they’re 
overcoming, and they’ve set several goals — they thought they 
would have it by this year; they thought they would be able to 
have it in production by later next year. So far we’re not sure 
when that will be in production but we have confidence that that 
corporation will also bringing its method of producing ethanol 
to the forefront and will be a player in the future. 
 
So all that said, recognizing that there are other technologies 
coming up . . . Oh, and I mention one more, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, because it was one that it’s theoretical but we have our 
scientists check through the theory about how this one would 
work, and it’s processive gasification, which has been known 
for many years. It’s basic Fischer-Tropsch process which 
produces the gas from the biomass. And then that’s run through 
a transformer, transformed into ethanol and could be used to . . . 
for all the things that ethanol could be used for. 
 
But that process was also quite fascinating it could use virtually 
any kind of biomass and produce a gas and then have it 
transformed into ethanol. 
 
So with all those potential technologies there, you don’t want to 
run to far ahead on just simply a grain-based technology. So 
you set a limit. You say just in terms of a preliminary goal, let’s 
look at 400 million litres. Well how would that 400 million 
litres be used in this province. How would we develop that? 
 
If we were blending 10 per cent of all the gasoline sold in this 
province, we would be using somewhere between 130 and 170 
million litres of ethanol. But there have been tests done all 
throughout North America blending ethanol also with diesel, 
and those tests have run up to 15 per cent ethanol with diesel. 
And most commonly, the percentage used is around 7.7 per 
cent. And that has been tremendous in terms of the results, the 
particulates that are cut out, the greenhouse emissions that are 
cut out from diesel fuel. We can see some tremendous 
advantages to going this way. If we were to blend all of the 
diesel sold in this province at about 15 per cent, we’d be 
looking at another 225 million litres. 
 
If we were looking at some flex-fuel vehicles which burn up to 
85 per cent ethanol, we would then be able to consume in this 
province — if it were necessary — we would be able to 
consume all 400 litres . . . 400 million litres that would be 
produced in the province, but . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . 
Yes, it is actually very incredible that you could . . . that we 
could have this much potential for use in this province. 
 
But we recognize that that’s not really what this is all about, 
although that’s one of the potential uses that could consume a 
full 400 million litres produced in the province. Where the real 
objective is, is that broad market that is out there in the rest of 
Canada and in the United States. Billions and billions and 
billions of gallons needed to blend with the fuel throughout the 
United States. 
 
When a couple of years ago California decided that they had to 
take out the oxygenate that they were using in their fuel — 
MTBE (methyl tertiary-butyl ether) — because it was 
contaminating groundwater, and the fuel of choice then for an 



548 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

oxygenate was ethanol, they set their goal to be fully blending 
with ethanol and no longer using MTBE, and that put a demand 
on the market again of massive amounts of ethanol. 
 
The producers throughout the Midwest who basically . . . in the 
US (United States) who basically produced their ethanol from 
corn, really when they look at the markets that are developing 
in the United States, just could hardly build plants fast enough 
to meet the need. 
 
Producing ethanol from corn is not as efficient as producing 
from wheat and therefore, we have some advantages in our 
production here as well. So it’s the market out there that we’re 
looking at in Canada and the United States, but we want to be 
able to export that . . . the ethanol that we produce here. 
 
So let’s just say we want to produce 400 million litres as our 
preliminary goal. We would consume probably and according 
to what we have now made possible by the mandate, we would 
consume somewhere between 130 and 170 million litres 
domestically. We would then have the rest of that potential to 
export throughout the world. 
 
And we could build that market up, we could make our market 
connections so that when we have these alternate technologies 
that produce from straw and other biomass and we’re talking 
. . . and I’ll just cite Keith Hutchence here. When we come to 
the real potential production in this province, we’re talking at 
somewhere around 8.7 billion litres — billion litres. And this 
really, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would demand a change in the way 
that we crop in this province. It would be a tremendous industry 
that would provide jobs for thousands, would bring great 
returns into this province. 
 
And I mean, some of the plants that we would be growing — 
and I think I may have mentioned these during the response to 
the budget speech — but we would be able to grow hybrid 
poplar, specialty hemp crops where you would strip out the 
fibre, strip out a number of other valuable components, and then 
use the starch to produce ethanol. Amazing the kind of cropping 
that we can do — I mean, just to add those kind of things into a 
crop cycle — and it would be a massive benefit to the province, 
to our economy. 
 
So when I looked at this I was just fascinated by the incredible 
potential that there was, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And I tried to roll 
all of these things together to make a good, broad view of what 
this industry could do for the province. 
 
It is truly exciting to see what the potential is here. Now when I 
also . . . when we look at the potential for ethanol, right now 
we’re basically just talking about use in combustion engines, 
combustion engines throughout North America. And this is a 
very, very limited part of the potential use market for ethanol. 
 
And I’ve alluded to a couple of the other potentials, but one of 
them which has been tested in a number of places has been fuel 
cell technology where, when you’ve got the right membrane, 
you can use ethanol as the fuel to run a fuel cell engine and 
again you’re reducing the pollution significantly. We’re talking 
about reaching a Kyoto standard or even bettering that standard. 
Well if we took the combustion engine out, that would help a 
lot. 

But even more fascinating is the potential to generate power 
using ethanol turbines. And when we look at that piece we see 
the potential throughout the whole of the North to be able to 
produce power, to be able to produce the heat that we need, 
using ethanol. And I think this is tremendously exciting when 
we look at these developments for the future. 
 
There have a been a number of concerns that were raised 
recently in the media. There was a person from Minnesota on 
talking about how the people were concerned about pollution. 
In St. Paul, I believe it was, they had a plant right in the middle 
of the city; it was an old brewery, apparently. And the plant was 
also drying the grains that were used to distill the ethanol. There 
was a fair bit of dust came up; there was a fair bit of smell 
coming out. Mr. Deputy Speaker, we were not talking about 
building this kind of antiquated plant using old technologies in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
What we’re talking about, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the newest 
technology that’s available, technology that they’re developing, 
Commercial Alcohols is using down in Ontario — the kind of 
technologies that are not producing a lot of smell, that are very, 
very good at producing ethanol, efficient at producing ethanol. 
And so those fears that were raised by that commentary on CBC 
Radio clearly were not true. 
 
One of the other pieces that came up just recently, an article in 
the paper not too long ago talked about the “Ethanol plan 
questioned.” It says, and I just want to quote a bit from this — 
quoting: 
 

. . . Cornell University agriculture professor David 
Pimentel, who says it is morally wrong for the United 
States to be growing corn for fuel and giving tax incentives 
to do it. 

 
He claims it takes 70 per cent more energy to produce 
ethanol than the energy that is actually in ethanol. 

 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, that is patently wrong; it has been proved 
wrong time and again. 
 

Bliss Baker of (the) Toronto . . . president of the Canadian 
Renewable Fuels Association ( I’ll just go on to read this) 
which is a lobby group for bio-fuels, says 
Pimentel is just plain wrong and there is a “mountain of 
research” refuting him. 

 
Mark Stumborg (one of the people who was very helpful in 
my research) an Agriculture Canada researcher at Swift 
Current who studied the energy equation for making 
ethanol for more than a decade, says ethanol from grain is 
positive in two ways. 

 
“We’ve done the detailed analyses on both the energy 
balance and the greenhouse gas-carbon balance,” he said. 
“In both cases, they are significantly positive.” 

 
Stumborg says the Canadian study has done all of the 
calculations on the energy required to put the seed into the 
ground, to make the chemicals and fertilizers to grow the 
crop, to harvest it and to transport it to a distillery. 

 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 549 

 

The energy calculation continues at the distillery which 
uses large amounts of natural gas and electricity. It looks at 
the energy to move ethanol by truck or rail to where it’s 
blended and then sold. Adding all those totals together still 
produces a net energy gain when ethanol is burned in a car, 
Stumborg says. 

 
Now that’s again using the kind of technologies that we’re 
using right now. That’s again at the beginning of the cycle, 
using fossil fuels to produce that ethanol. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But think about it this way, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s not 
too long down into the future that we are using ethanol to 
produce ethanol and the energy gain is significantly higher than 
what it is when we’re using fossil fuels to produce that ethanol. 
So again, a sign of real hope for the future. 
 
So how do we get to 400 million litres in this province? Well 
we’ve got groups all over the province who have been doing 
studies on the viability of ethanol in their . . . of an ethanol 
operation in their area. And there are a number of factors that 
are very, very important to keep in mind in terms of 
development of an ethanol facility. 
 
You need to have very good water supply. You need to have 
good crop production in the immediate area, so your soils in the 
area are also very important. 
 
You need to also have excellent transportation. You need to be 
able to haul primary weights, because think about what you’re 
moving. You’re moving the product in to . . . the grains in to 
ferment them; you’re moving in cattle and moving out cattle; 
you’re moving out the ethanol. So you’ve got truck traffic on 
those roads regularly or if you’re near rail, rail traffic. And even 
if you’re using pipeline to ship the ethanol, you still have to 
truck that to the station and . . . before you run it through the 
pipeline. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is tremendous potential here for 
development. But the people who are looking at this 
development have to do a clear analysis in their area to see if it 
is viable in any particular area. You can’t build the plant off in 
the back quarter just because it’s the cheapest quarter. You need 
to look at this in terms of how much infrastructure is already 
there in place. That’s what makes these plants even more viable. 
 
We’ve looked at the potential sizes, trying to determine what an 
optimum size of an integrated facility would be. And an 
integrated facility, when we’re looking for optimums — that is, 
how do we get the best return — would be to build a plant that 
would produce some 20 to 25 million litres per year and 
probably be feeding somewhere over 25,000 head of cattle. 
 
The other possibility in this province would be a facility 
somewhere in the nature of 80 to 100 million litres and that 
would be a more stand-alone facility not tied into a feedlot. And 
that kind of facility would dry the distiller’s grain and then ship 
that out for feed to a variety of places. 
 
Part of that whole discussion was also about, how do you get 
the best return on a stand-alone type plant, and part of that 

would be to build that type of plant very . . . right next to an 
energy co-host of some kind — that is some other industry that 
has excess power, excess heat, that could be used to help dry 
the distiller’s grain. 
 
So we might end up having four, five, or six of the integrated 
facilities and two or three of the stand-alone type of facilities. 
Hopefully those would be co-hosted to help maximize their 
return. 
 
And it’s through that type of development done by private 
investment . . . And that’s one of the other key things, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, is that in those areas where they want to 
develop they have to make sure that people there understand the 
potential and are willing to invest in that type of an operation. 
And some of the communities that I visited very clearly do have 
that kind of interest, do have that kind of commitment, are 
ready and willing and able to invest in the development of a 
plan. 
 
There are feedlots that have been developed in the past few 
years that had in mind the potential of becoming integrated 
facilities, and they’re still looking at that potential and pulling 
the investors together. 
 
A 400-million-litre industry in this province would produce 
about 450 jobs and that impact is very important in our rural 
economy. These are basically the direct jobs. There are other 
spinoff jobs that are very important as we seek to build this 
economy and make a thriving rural economy in Saskatchewan. 
 
If we build a billion-litre facility — a billion-litre industry, 
pardon me — we will see more in the neighbourhood . . . we’ll 
look at thousands of jobs produced in the province in order to 
support that. And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, if we get into the other 
technologies which I believe we will, not too far down the road, 
we’ll see really the numbers of jobs just growing exponentially. 
So there’s tremendous potential as we look down the future, we 
look at the technologies that are being developed. 
 
Now the other piece that is very important in this whole picture 
is to recognize that ethanol can also be just a by-product. And I 
know I’ve also spoken about the tremendous work that’s 
happening in the ag biotech industry and the opportunity that I 
had to meet with some of the people who are working in that 
industry in Saskatoon and other places. 
 
And what they’re talking about there and what easily could be 
integrated into the process for producing ethanol is to 
fractionate the grains. In doing that you’re taking out a variety 
of the other components other than the starch; you’re looking at 
the value that those components have, and . . . Let me just give 
you a couple of examples. From the bran, if you de-bran the 
wheat, you can roll that bran and apparently there are some 
essential oils in that that can be used for nutraceuticals — very 
valuable — and then you still have the rest of the grain that 
could be fed or other components — gluten and other 
components — taken out. 
 
Just some tremendously exciting pieces there that the ag biotech 
community is looking at developing, and it would depend on 
the kind of feedstock that you’re using to produce your ethanol 
what the by-products would be, what the other products would 



550 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

be that ag biotech would be using. 
 
Now there are some barriers that we have had to developing an 
ethanol industry in this province and I think, as we look at 
developing any industry, you can’t just look out there and have 
some kind of pink glasses on, pink-coloured glasses to . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — Rose-coloured. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Rose-coloured. That’s the term I’m 
looking for. Rose-coloured glasses to say, oh this would be a 
great industry. You also have to look at the barriers. 
 
And some of the barriers . . . the first barrier that the industry 
raised for us was the cap that we had on the 15 cent a litre tax 
and that was a limit on the amount of ethanol produced and 
consumed in Saskatchewan that would be eligible for that 15 
cent a litre rebate. And so taking that cap off, we were told by 
industry people, both Husky and Commercial Alcohols, would 
go a long ways to setting the right atmosphere that would 
encourage them to come in and help build this industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
We also had to look at the cost and, as I say, with the new 
technologies coming on board, cost which had been a barrier in 
the ’80s and ’90s, cost was not so much a barrier because these 
new technologies give you a cost per litre that is more 
competitive with the production of gasoline. And I think with 
the price of oil running at above $20 a barrel, we’re quite 
competitive. 
 
One of the other problems, a barrier in Saskatchewan that we’re 
facing, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is the whole piece about getting 
the fuel blended itself, dealing with the refiners and the 
wholesalers. 
 
And if I might ask leave of the House, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
the midst of my own speech, I’d like to interrupt myself to 
introduce someone, if I could. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
I’d like to thank the member for yielding the floor to allow me 
to introduce my guest. 
 
I would like to introduce Lionel LaBelle who is with 
Agrivision. I met Lionel during the process of the study on 
ethanol and found him a very knowledgeable business person 
and has been very helpful at bringing this whole vision of 
developing an ethanol industry in the province along very well. 
 
So I’d like to welcome you to the House, Lionel, and hope that 
you enjoy the proceedings here, the debate on ethanol 
development in the province. I ask others to join me in 
welcoming him. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 2 — Development of Ethanol Industry 
(continued) 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was just 
going to talk about some of the issues around refining and 
wholesaling and here we have a very limited market. I talked 
about the 130 to 170 million litres of blending that we could do 
in this province and we have about five or, I believe, five major 
refineries that are supplying gasoline to the Saskatchewan 
market. One of them, Husky/Mohawk sells blended fuels in the 
province and has been for a number of years; the others are not 
blending. 
 
And so we began to look at how do we deal with this particular 
barrier. And one of the ways that was suggested early on, in fact 
one of the ways that the Sask Party raised when they were 
talking about their ideas on ethanol, was that you would 
mandate. 
 
Well there’s bit of a problem with mandating. If you just go 
right in and say you have to blend 10 per cent, you need to 
make sure that you’ve got your production up high enough so 
that you can actually provide that product to the refiners; 
otherwise you’d end up importing, you’d end up with free trade 
problems when you tried to develop the industry. And so that 
was not a direction for us to move at that time. 
 
But in dealing with the reality of this barrier, one of the 
possibilities was for us to say that . . . give ourselves the power 
to mandate if it was necessary. Well shortly after the interviews 
had come out in the newspaper between the Sask Party position 
. . . and I had done a scrum with the media following that and 
talked about what our position was on it, and that we were not 
talking about a mandate immediately. 
 
I received a call from one of the industry people and he said I 
noticed that you’re not planning on mandating right away. 
What’s with that, why don’t you . . . why aren’t you going to be 
mandating? And I said, well part of it is that we recognize that 
there are certain economies in the refining industry that mean 
that mandating is not necessary — that in fact if you have a will 
in the industry, you can actually make money in this whole 
process, you can refine the aromatics out. 
 
And Don O’Connor had helped us get an understanding of this. 
The eastern refineries are doing this. You refine some of the 
aromatics out of the gasoline which reduces the octane, those 
aromatics, benzenes, and others can be sold to other industries, 
to petrochemical industries, to cosmetics industries, and then 
you add the ethanol back in to increase the octane. 
 
And so in fact the refineries, if they had a will, could increase 
their refining and the economics were good enough for them 
that you’ve got a carrot out there. They could decide to go 
ahead and blend on their own. But if they didn’t, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, our legislation enables us to then say you must blend a 
minimum of 10 per cent or whatever that is. 
 
And it’s really kind of exciting that this is actually the first — 
not just in Canada, as our . . . as the mover had said — but the 
first in North America that actually has the potential to legislate 
. . . excuse me, legislate a blend of ethanol. The others will 
legislate an oxygenate level, but this is the first to our 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 551 

 

knowledge to legislate a certain percentage of ethanol. 
 
And so a very exciting piece of legislation; I think maybe 
groundbreaking for other jurisdictions as well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much. I think also 
wonderful pieces on the environmental side. We’ve talked 
about some of those and I’ll just highlight a couple — a couple 
of those again: that using a 10 per cent blend of gasoline 
reduces greenhouse emissions. The common view is that it 
reduces greenhouse emissions by about 30 per cent. 
 
If you’re using flex-fuel vehicles, and there are a number of 
manufacturers that have actually been making flex-fuel vehicles 
for quite a number of years — Chrysler mini vans, the 3-litre, I 
believe it is; some of the new Chev V8 motors, GM V8 motors 
that are coming out are flex-fuel vehicles; and Ford Taurus has 
been manufacturing their 3-litre engine, which is also a flex-fuel 
vehicle. All of these without any adjustments can burn up to 85 
per cent ethanol. 
 
And if you’re burning 85 per cent ethanol, you’re reducing 
greenhouse emissions by about 55 per cent. So again some 
tremendous environmental gains if we’re doing this kind of 
work. 
 
And I’d just like to give a couple of the other pieces here in 
terms of using oxy-diesels, blends of about 7.7. I spoke briefly 
about this but this can reduce nitrous oxide by 3 to 6 per cent, 
particulate matter by 30 to 35 per cent, carbon monoxide by 20 
to 25 per cent, aldehydes by about 15 per cent. And this is all 
done, Mr. Deputy Speaker, all done with no reduction in fuel 
economy. 
 
This is pretty incredible in diesel to be able to find these kind of 
results. And there are tests going on right now in Manitoba, in 
the city of Winnipeg with their buses, and I believe there are 
other tests going on throughout North America that will help us 
get a sense of how viable and how valuable this fuel is, 
ethanol-blended fuel is, in helping to clean up our environment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Well as you can tell, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I am really excited about the potential of this. I’m 
really thrilled by the opportunity that I had to study the whole 
issue for significant period of time. And so it is my hope that it 
will help to build the economy in this province. 
 
I look around. I see groups like Agrivision; I see some of the 
other industry groups that are really committed to developing 
this industry and have done tremendous research. And I am 
confident, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that we will reach those goals 
— that by our regulatory environment, our tax environment, we 
will the reach the goals that we have set, a preliminary goal of 
400 million litres by January 1, 2005. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And I expect, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that that will only be just the 
very, very beginning, just the tip of a wonderful industry that 

will be a boon to Saskatchewan, will be a boon to Canada, and 
to North America. 
 
With that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I just want to say that I’m 
happy to be able to second this motion. I’m happy that we have 
got the legislation in place. I am thankful for all of the work that 
has gone on by a wide variety of people, the community groups 
— the groups in Shaunavon, the groups in Melville, in Birch 
Hills, all around this province — groups that have worked on 
developing this industry, who have invested money; groups like 
the one in Rosthern who have been working away to try and 
make sure that they’ve got a good development in their area. 
 
I thank them for their work, I thank them for the time that they 
gave to listen to me, to speak to me, to work with me, to try and 
put together a plan for this province. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a plan that will work. This is a plan 
that will help clean our environment. This is a plan that will 
help build industry in Saskatchewan. This is a plan that will be 
successful for generations to come. Thank you, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, thank you. It’s a pleasure to join in the debate today on 
a very important topic about ethanol development in our 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I certainly have listened with great interest to the 
mover and seconder on the government side, and I am pleased 
to say that in the bulk of their presentation, I would have to say 
that we on this side are in complete agreement about the 
potential of the ethanol industry in this province. 
 
I was taken, with a little bit of humour, the revisionist type of 
historical rendition that the seconder had in terms of how this 
all happened. And I know it’ll come as a great surprise to 
people who have studied and understood the industry, to know 
that in fact the Saskatchewan Party had posted on its Web site, 
as early as last September, the plan that the government 
announced just at the end of the year. 
 
And so we’re extremely pleased to recognize and acknowledge 
that the government is at least technologically adept enough to 
be able to copy information off of our Web site. And for that we 
congratulate them, and agree completely with them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member and the expert for ethanol from 
Regina shouts from his seat and tries to interrupt an 
acknowledgement of the fact that the government was able to at 
least read our Web site. And that’s important that they be 
recognized for those small accomplishments. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Order. Order. Order. 
Order. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I mean it 
is always quite amazing to me that the louder that the 
opposition on the government side howls at us, the more you 
realize is that what you are saying over here must have hit a 



552 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

nerve. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the whole point of this argument is to take 
some modest exception to the way the seconder to this motion, 
sort of, reconstructed his impression about the fact that he’d 
been working on this project for a great deal of time. That is 
true. 
 
And he also became a lot wiser about the project after we put on 
our Web site and the member from Watrous had released a very 
thorough discussion about what should be done. And we’re 
very pleased, we’re very pleased that that would happen. 
 
And by and large, Mr. Deputy Speaker, by and large from what 
we’ve seen and listening very carefully to the seconder of the 
motion today, I think that by and large the government is 
getting it right. They’ve actually talked to enough people, and 
watched what we were saying and doing, and learnt enough to 
maybe to be by and large on the right track. And, Mr. Speaker, 
we’re very hopeful that that will continue. 
 
However we do have a number of concerns that I think, based 
on the past record of this government, are legitimate concerns 
that we and people in the industry that we talk about have 
legitimate basis for our fears. 
 
The first concern that we have is that the government doesn’t 
repeat its practice of thinking that the only engine of economic 
development in this province is going to be controlled, and 
manipulated, managed, or taken over by some Crown 
corporation and drive out the private investment. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have seen that far too many times in the past to 
not be just a little bit concerned and nervous that this 
government will take another step out its own book of 
revisionist economic development and say that the Crown 
corporations are the only organizations that have the money and 
the opportunity to remove the private investors and thereby 
dominate an industry. 
 
And we’re concerned. And we want to go on the record to make 
sure that we are in opposition to the government developing the 
ethanol industry along another potato industry and we end up 
with a SPUDCO (Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development 
Company) fiasco like the government is well noted for. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, the first thing that we want to say is that we 
want to insist that if the ethanol industry is going to develop, 
it’s going to be given the opportunity to develop as a private 
investment industry in this province for Saskatchewan citizens. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it is important, it is important 
that we do develop this industry and we create the environment 
for it to develop. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I spent the weekend in Tisdale at a trade fair. And 
while I was there, I had the opportunity to meet with Mr. Jim 
Boxall, who is the chairman of the Tisdale Alfalfa Dehy project 
who are the spearhead coordinators of putting together a 
proposal for the northeast part of this province for an ethanol 
plant. 

And I spent a couple of hours with Jim, talking about the 
project, talking about how it might be constructed, and what 
they have in mind and what their vision of the development of 
the ethanol industry is in the northeast part of the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I remember some time ago when I was active 
involved in the poultry industry — I’m sort of reluctant to 
mention that it’s probably 25 years ago — in the growing of 
poultry chickens and the marketing of those chickens across the 
country. 
 
And we used to talk about a concept of comparative advantage 
and that some parts of this country had an easier time taking 
advantage of some natural advantages that they had, compared 
to other parts of the country. 
 
And you know, Mr. Speaker, that in the Northeast and the 
eastern part of the province, that’s where there are the highest 
grain transportation rates in the country. And so there’s a 
natural advantage for the Northeast to take advantage of that 
reality instead of just looking at it as a bad thing, to say, what 
can we do to value-add our grains in that part of the world? And 
certainly an ethanol project of this nature is perfect for that 
concept of taking advantage of the natural geographic 
comparative advantages that there are in some parts of this 
province. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I was very encouraged to hear 
that we had a major group of people in the northeast part of the 
province that are spearheading the development of one project 
in the Northeast. 
 
And I was also pleased that there was a number of things that 
they’re looking at that are very worthy of support. And the first 
thing is, is they said they’re going to take a geographic area that 
may extend from the treeline to the East to west of Melfort, 
from the treeline in the North to considerably south of the 
Melfort-Tisdale line. 
 
And somewhere in that geographic area, they’re going to ask 
their consulting engineers and people that they’re going to hire, 
on the basis of a solid business plan rather than community 
competition, to come up with a plan and a location for this 
ethanol project. And I thought that that was a very responsible 
position to take. 
 
You know, over in the Northeast over the last number of years, 
there’s been a great deal of effort made between the 
communities in the Northeast — and particularly the three 
major communities of Melfort, Tisdale, and Nipawin — to 
increasingly work together in co-operation rather than 
individual competition to see to it that things happen in that 
corner of the world. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there have been many examples of 
indeed that happening and working really well. In health care, 
the renal dialysis project in Tisdale is a great example of the 
three communities coming together and working in common 
purpose to have something that they all needed and to put it in a 
location that made the most sense on a business case rather than 
community competition. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, that spirit is actually growing. And I’m 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 553 

 

pleased to see that a group like Tisdale Dehy is spearheading a 
project that’s going to bring benefit throughout the whole 
Northeast. 
 
I’m further pleased to say that in discussion with the mayors of 
the communities in that area, they too believe that this is the 
best way to go. And you see the communities working together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the size of the project that’s being proposed in this 
corner of the world is very significant. And I would like to 
relate that a bit back to what the member from Regina 
Qu’Appelle was talking about when we talked about a 
provincial scheme of things. 
 
The project for the Northeast is envisaged to be something in 
the magnitude of 100 million litres a year — an 80 to $100 
million project. It’s estimated that it’s going to require 300,000 
metric tons of grain and an estimated 260,000 acres of 
production, and would draw grain from an 80-kilometre radius 
of the facility. It’s estimated that it’d create 80 jobs in the 
region and have a payroll of $3 million. That is a very 
significant project. 
 
And as the member before me said, there are a number of 
configurations that you can use when you establish these plants. 
Certainly this project would be one of the ones that would be 
indicated to be more of a stand-alone site, and the distiller’s 
grain that is a by-product of the ethanol process needs to find a 
market in order to really take advantage of all of the input costs 
for this plant. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they’ve got plans to basically take 
the water out of the product with centrifuges, and then it would 
be in a form that’s able for feedlots to pick up and to use in their 
feeding program. And what that then creates is an environment 
where we could have five or six feedlots that have relationships, 
economic relationships, with this plant to produce a very 
economical and cost-efficient product for the livestock industry. 
 
And so potentially a project like this not only develops the 
ethanol industry and all the benefits for the grain and value 
added for the grain industry, it lets us really form the basis for 
developing and maturing a livestock industry that develops 
again more value added and feeding out of our cattle. 
 
Instead of just shipping the cattle and our barley and our kids to 
Alberta for finishing, we can start doing this in the Northeast of 
the province and hopefully we will attract and retain 
opportunities for young people in that corner of the world. And 
so it’s important. 
 
The interesting thing as well that I heard from Mr. Boxall on the 
weekend is that there are proposals coming together right across 
this province in a very rapid way. And so there’s going to be a 
number of people that are going to be looking at this and 
they’re going to have to do some very serious economic studies 
to make sure it makes sense. And that whole concept of 
comparative advantage has got to make sense. 
 
We understand and he told me that there’s a group in the 
Shaunavon area that are proposing a 150 million litre plant. 
Again, very significant. 
 

It was indicated to me by him as well on the weekend that in the 
Melville area there is another group of people that are working 
with an Ontario company to put another 150 million litre plant 
in production. 
 
So with those three projects that have been explained to me that 
are on the discussion and investigation sides, you already have 
400 million litres, which is approximately three times what we 
would use with a blended fuel supply in this province. 
 
So clearly while it is very important to have that commitment 
for the blended fuel support in this province as a base volume, 
very quickly if these projects come on line we’re going to 
clearly see that the vast majority of the ethanol produced is 
going to be into the export market. 
 
And so we have to make sure that we understand that our 
Saskatchewan companies are not going to be able to rely on the 
Saskatchewan domestic market in order to make their project 
viable; they’re going to be into a national and international 
market almost instantly. 
 
And so, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not enough just to talk about 
supporting the removal of the 15 cent a litre tax in 
Saskatchewan; we’re going to have to do everything we can to 
make sure that our Saskatchewan companies are competitive in 
the global world, to make sure that they actually are competitive 
to take advantage of being able to export into the national, 
international market. 
 
And so other issues like the capital tax and investment tax and 
all of those things, the regulatory regimes that apply to 
Saskatchewan companies generally and have caused 
Saskatchewan companies to struggle under this NDP 
government also have to be looked at and dealt with if we’re 
going to build an ethanol industry that is going to take care of 
the advantages that it’s going to have. 
 
(15:45) 
 
If we don’t do that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’re going to have 
the Saskatchewan ethanol industry stifled by the same 
oppressive attitude that this government has demonstrated right 
across the piece in the past. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And that, Mr. Deputy Speaker, would be 
too bad. It would take a very good idea and a very good concept 
and a very good opportunity and waste it, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
because this government doesn’t understand you just can’t look 
at these things in isolation. You have to look at the big picture, 
and you have to look at the entire environment that this 
government creates in order to make Saskatchewan companies 
be placed in a position to compete. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are a number of things that could be 
gone over, a lot of technical information that could be shared in 
terms of how the ethanol industry is going to be able to 
potentially develop. But I would like to make just a very few 
comments about the general way that we think that this has got 
to work. 
 



554 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

First of all, I’ve said and outlined, we’ve got to make sure that 
we create an environment where free enterprise investors are 
going to be able to be a part of this investment regime, with the 
absolute commitment from this government that those 
investments are not going to be put at risk by competition from 
Crown corporations that this government is so fond of using to 
develop their economic future. 
 
We need that commitment. We don’t want to see another 
situation where SGI or another Crown or any of these entities 
are created in order to go into competition with free market 
Saskatchewan men and women who are going to put their own 
money forward in order to build an ethanol industry. 
 
We need the government of this province to say unequivocally 
that they will not be competing in the market with the free 
enterprise investors in this province in the ethanol industry. We 
need that to happen. 
 
We need certainly to have that base commitment of the ethanol 
blend opportunities happening in the province. And insofar as 
this legislation comes forward and talks about it, we’re going to 
be supportive of that. It’s important. 
 
We also have to see that it’s important that we end up with a 
new look at the regulatory environment and the tax structure for 
corporations in this province so investors will want to put their 
money into this province again because, quite frankly, they no 
longer trust the intention of this government and their good 
words about saying they’re not going to go into this, and 
they’ve learned their lessons from past experiences, and what 
they’re going to do is do a . . . turn over a new leaf, and they’re 
going to deal better with ethanol than they’ve dealt with 
potatoes or Channel Lake or any of the other fiascos that these 
guys have been involved with over the last decade or so. So 
people are a little bit suspicious. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, as well we would hope to see that this is 
not only going to be exclusively the opportunity for large 
pension funds or things of that nature to invest but we want to 
see the opportunity for Saskatchewan men and women — 
farmers, rural people, urban people — to also invest in what we 
think potentially is a very bright future for this province and a 
great opportunity. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we’ve got to see that there’s a new 
breath of fresh air put into this province, and that this 
government probably is past changing its way in terms of 
looking at the other parts of government to make sure that an 
attitude of positive, go forward, let’s make things happen in this 
province permeates this province instead of we’re losing 
people; what are we going to do; let’s manage the decline; let’s 
make excuses for everything that’s happened over the last 
decade that has resulted in this province being dead last on 
almost every important indicator that there is in this nation. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, we end up with a situation in 
this province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, where the rest of this 
country, the rest of North America has recovered from the 
September 11 situation. Every other state, nation, and province 
in this country has recovered except Saskatchewan, and they 

say it’s a coincidence. 
 
Well, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it isn’t a coincidence and we’re very 
concerned that the opportunities that we see available in ethanol 
are going to be squandered because the wrong people are 
making the decisions about the future of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, few people will 
disagree that ethanol shows a great deal of promise into the 
future but most people also say it isn’t an automatic and it isn’t 
a given. It’s going to have to be done on a progressive, stepped 
way so everything fits together. And if this government misses 
some important components we could put the industry in 
jeopardy. 
 
And we definitely, from this side of the House, want to make 
sure that the marketplace and free investment dollars, the 
experts in the industry are going to be able to work in an 
environment where they’re willing to put their money forward 
and take the chances that are going to have to be taken in order 
to move this industry forward. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, by and large we’re in agreement with the 
words that were uttered today on the other side of the fence in 
terms of the technical aspects of this industry and the general 
direction about how the industry is going to have to evolve. 
That’s true. 
 
But we’re concerned from where these words are coming from. 
The people of this province are concerned where the words are 
coming from because, quite frankly, the track record is pretty 
poor in terms of any other experience from the members 
opposite. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I am pleased to be in general support with the 
motion, but I think it leaves out some important aspects that I 
think should be added to, not taken away from the motion as it’s 
stated. 
 
And therefore, I would like to move, seconded by the member 
from Cypress Hills: 
 

That the following words be added after “Saskatchewan”: 
 

if the government takes the necessary steps to attract 
private investors to build this industry in our province as 
outlined in the Saskatchewan Party ethanol plan released in 
September of 2001. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It gives me 
real pleasure to be able to stand today to speak to the motion 
that’s before the House and also to the amendment that has been 
added to the original motion, because the ethanol issue has been 
one of a great deal of significance to my constituents and people 
who have worked very hard on this particular industry in the 
area immediately to the east of my own constituency, in the 
community of Shaunavon. 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 555 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I heard of ethanol as a potential for the 
fuel industry some years ago. And I think the whole concept has 
been developed rather slowly and methodically through a 
variety of improvements to technology and application. But it’s 
only in the very recent past few years that the real potential of 
ethanol has been recognized for this province and for the 
industries that depend on fuel in this immediate area. 
 
I guess the one individual that has played the biggest role in 
raising the awareness of ethanol and the potential that it has to 
offer is Mr. Brad Wildemen, who’s in charge of the 
Pound-Maker operation at Lanigan. He has been a prophet, 
virtually, on that particular front, given his lone voice speaking 
on behalf of the ethanol industry for a long time. 
 
And he’s worked hard, he’s worked extraordinarily hard, 
talking to anybody who would listen, bending any ear that 
might give him some time. And he has advanced the cause of 
ethanol significantly through the whole province and, most 
importantly, I suppose, in my own estimation of the value of the 
industry, he’s played a very significant role. 
 
I remember when Mr. Wildemen came to this building, actually 
I believe he spoke to members of the government caucus, and to 
our caucus as well, and lauded long and loud the advantages of 
ethanol and what it could mean if that industry was developed 
properly to the overall economy of this province. I’m sure that, 
as he talked, there was some element of skepticism among the 
people who were listening to his presentation that day. But 
when somebody is as convinced of the rightness or the benefit 
of the point of view they’re holding and espousing, almost any 
obstacle can be overcome. And I think that that’s what we have 
seen in this province over the last couple of years. 
 
Finally, the reality of ethanol is about to be experienced, and I 
think the one thing I would like to say, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
without prejudice of any kind, is that this is an industry that can 
seriously impact our economy for good. It has such tremendous 
potential. 
 
And because it was introduced . . . legislation was introduced 
by the provincial government to that end, does not make it any 
less important. We would like to, as members of the official 
opposition, recognize that this industry can only succeed if it is 
promoted fully and endorsed wholeheartedly by both sides of 
the House and that we want to acknowledge credit and give 
credit where it’s due today. 
 
Having said that, I would like to talk briefly about what the 
Saskatchewan Party has seen as the significance of this industry 
and how we approached the whole, whole issue of developing 
an ethanol policy — something that could benefit the province, 
that could be implemented, that could be developed over the 
long term . . . 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Why is the member on 
his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — To raise a point of order, Mr. Deputy 
Chair. 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Would the member 
state his point of order, please? 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. I apologize for it taking a moment until I had a chance 
to see a written copy of the amendment moved. And I would 
ask that you would rule the amendment out of order, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, on these grounds: when I look at the 
amendment in the context of the original motion moved by the 
hon. member for Saskatoon Greystone, I remind you and the 
House that the motion is to ask that this Assembly support the 
policy released by the government. 
 
In the amendment then, as proposed by the hon. member for 
Melfort-Tisdale, the amendment is, in effect, to redefine what 
that policy is. And I would suggest that this is not an 
amendment which brings some condition . . . altering condition 
to the original proposal but in fact moves to deny the original 
proposal, and that the appropriate course of action would not be 
to amend it but . . . that’s achieved by defeating the original 
motion. 
 
And therefore on those grounds, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I would 
ask that you would rule the amendment out of order, and that 
debate would proceed on the original motion as moved by the 
hon. member for Saskatoon Greystone. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. To 
respond to the point of order, with leave. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the amendment certainly backs up what 
the government has said, plus goes a little bit further. It adds to 
it; it’s not a . . . It’s a friendly amendment that just adds to the, 
to the motion put forward by the government, simply stating 
that ethanol production in the province is a great idea and it 
could be even supplemented with ideas such as that that have 
been put forward in September as mentioned in the amendment, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
(16:00) 
 
The Acting Speaker (Mr. Harper): — Members, upon the 
advice I’ve received, I believe that the amendment seeks to 
qualify the ethanol and express support of the Assembly for the 
— and I guess you’d say enrich — the main motion and does 
not contradict the main motion. 
 
As such I find the point of order not well taken and I will 
resume debate. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I concur with 
the idea that the government’s motion is a good motion. It talks 
about an industry that is going to be significant to this province. 
I think there is some debate as to where the idea originated and 
who developed it first and who developed it most significantly, 
but nevertheless I think this particular industry needs to be 
encouraged by the substance of the debate here this afternoon. 
 
I had talked earlier, Mr. Deputy Speaker, about the role played 
by maybe one or two individuals in this province who promoted 
ethanol day and night and beat the tub on that particular issue 
when nobody seemed to want to listen. 
 
But finally, finally it’s like a light went on. There was some 



556 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

opportunity for those of us who had never considered the 
significant impact or potential of that industry for this province, 
to give due recognition to that prospect. 
 
And out of that particular moment of enlightenment came a 
couple of initiatives. And I know the provincial government 
appointed one member of their caucus to look at ethanol, but so 
did the official opposition. 
 
We asked the member from Watrous to take on, as a challenge 
and an opportunity to contribute to this debate, a thorough 
search of the existing technology and the literature that was 
available on the subject and to maybe do a tour of some of the 
plants and facilities that were producing ethanol, especially in 
the state of Minnesota. Which incidentally, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, appears to be the leading jurisdiction when it comes to 
the implementation of ethanol legislation and the production of 
the product itself. 
 
I know that as a result of the good work of the member of our 
caucus, the member from Watrous, we as a caucus came up 
with a very thorough and complete ethanol proposal, policy, 
and strategy. And we spoke about that publicly. We went on 
record very early, Mr. Deputy Speaker, on the initiatives that 
the official opposition would have proposed for the general 
public in this province, especially as early as September 19, 
when the Leader of the Official Opposition spoke to the Regina 
Chamber of Commerce. 
 
I attended that particular event and I remember clearly the way 
the Leader of the Opposition laid out our strategy and our 
proposal to the members of the chamber of commerce who were 
gathered at that particular meeting, and how well received that 
idea was. There was, no doubt, some room for question and 
there were people who had some areas of concern and they felt 
that the whole strategy needed to be developed much more 
thoroughly. But you know, you have to start somewhere, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and that was the inauguration of the 
Saskatchewan Party’s ethanol policy that particular morning. 
 
And I have with me, actually, a copy of the speaking notes of 
the Leader of the Official Opposition from that morning. I’m 
just going to quote a few pieces from it for the record today. 
And I would recall if you would, Mr. Deputy Speaker, this 
speech was given on September 19 in Regina here. And I’m 
quoting here from the Leader of the Official Opposition where 
he says: 
 

. . . as I (have) said, today I want to focus on one industry 
as an example of what is possible in the province of 
Saskatchewan . . . 
 
an industry that holds tremendous potential for our 
province if we eliminate the massive bureaucratic, political 
and workplace barriers that have been erected in 
Saskatchewan over the past decade. 
 
It’s the ethanol industry. 
 
Saskatchewan has traditionally been known as the 
breadbasket of Canada because we are a major producer of 
wheat. 
 

Unfortunately, the price of wheat has been driven down by 
an international subsidy war and a world-wide grain glut. 
 
And since there is little reason to believe the price of grain 
will significantly increase over the next decade, the future 
of the traditional Saskatchewan grain farm is not bright. 
 
But that doesn’t mean the future of agriculture in 
Saskatchewan or our economy must suffer. 
 
Nor does it mean Saskatchewan farmers do not have the 
ability to make more money from each acre of land. 
 
What we require are new and potentially more lucrative 
markets for our primary agricultural production. 

 
And . . . 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

. . . we need to build processing and manufacturing 
operations here in Saskatchewan that add value to our raw 
products. 

 
Some producers continue to look to government to 
subsidize farming operations in years where low 
commodity prices, drought, flood, insects, or disease, make 
it impossible to turn a profit. 
 
But many other farmers are looking, as business 
commentator Paul Martin and others have advocated, for 
ways to add more revenue per cultivated acre. 

 
And I’m quoting specifically again from this speech, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, when the Leader of the Opposition said: 
 

The ethanol industry holds the potential to build a lucrative 
chain of value-added products in Saskatchewan from 
Saskatchewan’s primary grain production. 

 
Now how would all this translate into good news for the 
province of Saskatchewan? Well we’ll number them off for 
you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
First of all, ethanol is an environmentally friendly substitute or 
additive for gasoline and potential addition to diesel fuel. 
Burning more ethanol as fuel means cleaner air and a cleaner 
environment for Saskatchewan families. And it will go a long 
way in achieving the carbon reductions targeted in the Kyoto 
agreement. 
 
Second, Mr. Deputy Speaker, ethanol can be manufactured 
from wheat, feed grain, and straw. And Saskatchewan certainly 
could use new markets for those particular products. 
 
Third, the construction and operation of ethanol production 
facilities would create hundreds of new jobs for Saskatchewan 
people. 
 
Fourth, ethanol production creates several valuable by-products. 
 
Fifth, a significant increase in the number of feedlot operations 
could supply the cattle necessary to attract large-scale slaughter 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 557 

 

facilities, as well as meat processing and packaging facilities. 
 
And finally, over the past few months Ottawa has all but 
confirmed the federal government will be announcing new 
initiatives. Unfortunately, I might add, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
that has not happened yet. 
 

In short . . . 
 
And I quote again: 
 

. . . ethanol production provides a new market for raw 
Saskatchewan product while establishing the basis for new 
value-added investment. 
 

So the question naturally becomes: why isn’t all this happening 
in Saskatchewan today? 
 
Hopefully, Mr. Deputy Speaker, with the initiatives taken by 
the provincial government, we are about to see that industry to 
start developing in this province. 
 
And I am very hopeful that the initiatives will not drag out. That 
we will see the industry develop in a very deliberate, careful, 
but effective way, to benefit farmers, construction companies, 
communities that are hoping to be participants in the ethanol 
boom and certainly any other supply side part of the industry 
that might benefit from the development of ethanol. 
 
The words I read into the record presented by the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the Official Opposition, were a 
direct result of the good work of our member from Watrous. 
And I want to recognize that officially today. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I want to speak also, Mr. Deputy Speaker, of 
some of the developments related to ethanol in the community 
of Shaunavon and in the extreme southwest part of the province 
as well. 
 
I think it’s been recognized for some time that initiative had to 
be taken at the local level by certain key individuals in that area 
of the province to see some of the negative impacts that the 
downturn in agriculture had created in that particular region of 
the province. 
 
There’s also a belief in that area, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that it’s 
absolutely essential for people to help themselves, that initiative 
has to come from individuals and individuals working together 
and communities working together, and that the only true 
success that can be generated is the co-operative effort of local 
people. 
 
The Cypress Hills Regional Economic Development Authority 
and the Economic Development Committee for the town of 
Shaunavon were among the first in this province to look at the 
creation of an ethanol facility generated entirely by local 
initiative and they have spent incredible time and energy in 
seeing that idea advanced. I’ve been very well informed of their 
activities. But more importantly, I’ve been very pleased with 
and, might I say, proud with the initiative shown there and with 
the thoroughness with which that group of people have pursued 

this possibility. 
 
(16:15) 
 
The ethanol production facility that that group in the Shaunavon 
area are proposing is not a small plant. It’s not an inexpensive 
proposition. It’s not going to be an easy industry to develop, or 
to construct and to operate. They’re looking at a fairly 
significant operation there. They’re talking about a plant that 
will produce 150 million litres of ethanol a year, and investment 
costs approaching $100 million. Projects of that size are rarely 
heard of in this province, at least certainly in the last decade or 
so. 
 
This is a megaproject by today’s standards, in Saskatchewan 
certainly. And this is a project that has been developed at the 
local level. Not with the abilities, not with the promotion, not 
with the influence of the provincial government, but at the local 
level by individuals who have seen the need, have recognized 
an opportunity, and have decided to go for it. 
 
I also understand that there is some conversation with the 
government from time to time by that group of people in order 
to clarify what the government’s role will be and what their 
intentions will be. And governments do have a necessary role to 
play at the regulatory level. But what concerned the people in 
the Shaunavon area was that the government might decide to 
take a much more aggressive position from an investment point 
of view or an economic participation point of view. 
 
And I think that their biggest concern, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
that that might be the government’s preferred way of 
approaching that particular industry. And they are saying 
clearly that’s not what they want. 
 
And I think that we would be, we would be happy, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, to have the assurance of the government that they have 
no intention of doing anything but setting the proper 
environment in place for these types of operations to flourish. 
 
The group that I had spoken of from the Southwest has come 
together across all political persuasions. And I think what 
appeals to me so much about their initiative is that they have 
put aside the small things that might divide them for the benefit 
of the greater good in that particular community. 
 
And if the plant that they are proposing comes into . . . comes to 
fruition and is actually up and running someday, we are looking 
at thousands of grain cars per year delivering grain to this 
particular operation. So if you extrapolate that, it has a 
tremendous impact on all the farmers, all the grain growers in 
that area. It has tremendous potential to impact the short-line 
railway that exists in that area. It has a tremendous potential for 
local businesses. It will help develop a great spinoff economic 
effect through the whole southwest. 
 
And that, that frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, can’t come soon 
enough. We need that kind of initiative. We need to see it 
develop not just in the community of Shaunavon, but we need 
to see it developed in other communities throughout this 
province — other communities that have the same vision, the 
same potential of benefiting from working together and seeing 
this particular industry developed to its fullest potential. 



558 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I, I did have some concern 
about where the government was planning to go with this, this 
industry. And before they articulated some of their, their ideas 
and put them forward for public consumption, I talked to the 
newly minted minister of ethanol, at that time, and had a little 
conversation with him at a private function. And just said, look 
it, these are some of the concerns that people in my area have 
with regard to the development of the ethanol industry, what do 
you think? 
 
And I was quite encouraged, frankly, to hear his response 
because he very much agreed with the idea that this is an 
industry that needs to be driven by the public sector . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . Did I say private sector? Did I say it, 
did I say it loud enough and clear enough for everybody to 
hear? The private sector. 
 
But in talking to other ministers from the government side on 
that very issue, I wasn’t nearly as assured, frankly, that that was 
the way things were going to unfold. And I’m still not sure, Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, that that’s going to happen. 
 
Because with the introduction of the Bill, recently, on the 
ethanol industry, there’s nothing in it. There’s virtually nothing 
in there of any consequence. It outlines a few penalties if you 
violate this or that or the other thing. But it doesn’t really say 
how this industry is going to be built, how it’s going to be 
achieved, how it’s going to be developed, and what the 
government’s role really might be in the, in the completion of 
that industry. 
 
It leaves everything quite anonymously to regulations. 
Regulations that we haven’t seen yet and regulations which 
could amount to anything. We have no idea what will be 
contained in the regulations; we don’t know how that will affect 
the development of the industry. And I think that if we have any 
real questions about the government’s intent, I hope they will be 
clarified when we see the eventual release and development of 
the regulations. 
 
There are, as we mentioned earlier, some serious requirements 
to make this particular industry all that it can be. There has to 
be a support for the proper environment — regulatory 
environment — by the provincial government for this industry 
to flourish. There has to be put in place the right taxation 
policies. And I think that the government has not seen fit to go 
far enough in that regard as yet, especially as it concerns the 
corporate capital tax. 
 
There were some changes in this most recent budget on that 
particular matter. But in talking to people who are about to 
launch onto the development of huge and expensive 
capital-intensive ethanol plants, they’re telling us that one of the 
most serious debilitating elements to the development of their 
projects is the corporate capital tax, because that tax comes into 
effect and has to be paid right at the construction stage of these 
big facilities. And it’s an insidious tax because you have to pay 
it before you make a nickel’s worth of profit. 
 
And I think that if anything discourages investment in this 
province and in maybe investment in the ethanol industry with 
all its potentiality, that is one of the taxes that has to be 
addressed in a much greater way by this government. 

The corporate capital tax in this province, even though there 
was a very slight change made in the previous or the most 
recent budget, is still the highest in Western Canada. And it 
detracts from our competitiveness when people are looking at 
. . . when investors are looking at places to put their money. 
And if they know that they come to Saskatchewan and pay tax 
before they . . . at a higher rate than they would pay in other 
jurisdictions, that is a disincentive to their investment here. And 
I think we need to address that particular concern for outside 
investors soon, in fact, sooner than later. 
 
One of the concerns I think that has to be considered in this 
whole industry is the size of plants that are proposed so that 
they will maximize the efficiencies required. You know, 
ethanol . . . there’s a debate about the efficiency of ethanol from 
an investment point of view and an efficiency point of view and 
a cost-recovery point of view. There are differing points on 
those various aspects. 
 
But I don’t think anybody seriously disagrees now with the 
wisdom — conventional wisdom — of the industry. And that is 
that you have to reach a certain level of production to recognize 
the most benefit from the investment and also a return on the 
energies required to make ethanol from the various feedstocks. 
 
I know that there have been a lot of communities looking at 
ethanol opportunities for their own use and their own 
development. But it concerns me that too many communities 
are looking at small operations that won’t be viable over the 
long run. The cost of a small operation . . . when you look at the 
construction and the design and the engineering and all of those 
elements, the cost of a small ethanol facility is going to mitigate 
against its profitability. 
 
If you, if you take a . . . if you take a larger plant, if you take a 
larger plant, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the cost of design and 
engineering is no greater than for a small plant. The cost of 
construction is only proportionately higher than a small plant. 
But the return on investment to a large plant is much quicker 
and much more significant. And I think that communities that 
are looking at these projects need to consider seriously whether 
or not their plans are viable. 
 
I think that we would be doing a disservice to communities if 
we suggested that this is the panacea for every small 
community and they could go out and invest 25 or $30 million 
and have an economic return and a big economic impact on 
their community in any kind of short order. That’s simply not 
going to happen. We do need to be encouraging the proper level 
of investment, the proper production capability, and we need to 
be encouraging pragmatic and careful use of whatever 
investment resources are available to the communities. 
 
There are, as I said many, many communities in this province 
who have looked to this industry as a potential economic 
saviour for their area. I believe, in talking with people 
well-placed in the, in the federal and provincial government 
agencies, that there could be as many as 30 or 40 communities 
who are considering ethanol as a possibility. 
 
And when it comes right down to it I don’t think that that’s 
realistic in any respect. And I think that if these communities do 
their homework and check with companies that specialize in 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 559 

 

building these plants, specialize in managing these plants, 
specialize in marketing the product from these plants, they will 
soon come to realize that there is an economy of scale that has 
to be considered in their ideas and their plans. 
 
So I would just urge caution, Mr. Deputy Speaker, for 
communities that are looking at this as a possibility. I know that 
there are, I know that there are small communities in my own 
constituency who have talked about getting involved in the 
ethanol industry and they are, they’re looking for something 
that will benefit them. But whether or not they really want to 
invest their own money in a plant that would be at risk 
financially, I doubt that seriously. And I think that they need to 
look carefully at all of the cost considerations and all of the 
implications of their decisions in that regard. 
 
I guess the other thing that’s kind of interesting about ethanol is 
that almost everybody associates the production of ethanol with 
a feedlot. And while that has worked very effectively in the 
Lanigan enterprise at Pound-Maker there, that’s not going to be 
the reality for every project that comes up. 
 
And in fact, I think that there are some ethanol projects that will 
benefit from other types of products. There might be an 
opportunity to dry down the distiller’s grain, pelletize it, maybe 
export that, move it around to other jurisdictions. You don’t 
have to have your feedlots all immediately tied to the ethanol 
facility. They could be scattered around the province and there 
are those potentialities. 
 
I guess there’s CO2 recovery that could be accomplished. There 
might be opportunities to use energy from other sources to help 
recover the costs of and the needs of energy for the ethanol 
production. I think that there is flare gas that is burned up and 
wasted in some areas and that flare gas could be used 
effectively in a cogeneration or a symbiotic type of relationship 
with some of these ethanol plans. 
 
So there’s a lot of element, a lot of various elements, and a lot 
of different ideas that can be developed from the basic ethanol 
concept. And I think the opportunities are so diverse and so 
potentially tremendous for this province that I really want to see 
this industry get up and running. And I think that we’re going to 
witness, in the southwest part of this province, some of the very 
first opportunities for ethanol production. 
 
I was listening to one of the members from the government side 
speak earlier about the mandating of ethanol, by implication 
suggesting that the Saskatchewan Party’s plan was a little 
impractical because we were going to mandate this, the use of 
this stuff. 
 
You know, Mr. Deputy Speaker, some people must think we’re 
stupid, you know. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — You know, I get the impression, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that they think all wisdom resides on their side of the 
House. Now if that was true, they would be government in 
perpetuity, but that’s going to come to an abrupt end soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

(16:30) 
 
Mr. Elhard: — But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, everybody knows 
that you’re going to have to mandate the use of this fuel in order 
to develop and encourage the development of this industry. 
 
But nobody is going to wake up one morning and find out that 
every litre of gas is going to contain 10 or 15 per cent of 
ethanol. You know, that industry has to be developed and 
promoted and encouraged. And that industry is going to have to 
find export markets. That industry is going to have to be up and 
running before any full mandating could apply here. And just as 
they have suggested in their own documents that they would 
mandate on a incremental basis, anybody with a brain would 
want to approach that issue the same way. 
 
And so I . . . you know, I’m resentful, frankly, of the 
implications of that kind of . . . that charge. It just is . . . it’s 
beyond belief that somebody could think that little of their 
opponents that they would suggest that, frankly, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
Mandating will be an important part of the development of the 
industry — not just to encourage the industry but because it’s 
good for the province. It’s good for the environment. It’s good 
for your vehicles for that matter. I’m using ethanol-blended fuel 
in my own car right now and I’m finding that my car runs 
better. I get better mileage; I got more power when I need it. 
And I think that people will buy blended ethanol fuel because 
there’s an advantage to them for doing that. 
 
Maybe mandating won’t be such a big issue. The sheer 
brilliance that people would exude by having recognized the 
benefits of ethanol would override any need to mandate. We’re 
being a little facetious, Mr. Deputy Speaker. But you know, I 
think the mandating issue is a moot point. I think it’s not nearly 
as significant to this whole debate as might be made out to be 
by some opponents, frankly, of the ethanol industry. 
 
Now is the ethanol industry going to be harmful to the 
petroleum industry? I don’t believe that for a moment. I think 
that there is a very real benefit to the petroleum industry by 
encouraging this ethanol blending of fuels. I think that we have 
renewable resources and non-renewable resources. If you can 
combine the two to achieve a good purpose for the economy, 
for the environment — certainly for the ag economy — I think 
it’s something that we need to pursue as public policy. And 
that’s why I’m glad to be supporting the development of the 
ethanol industry today. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are probably a number of other 
issues that we could develop today. But I think that one of the 
things that we need to have on the record is an assurance given 
to the people of this province by the government of the day that 
they will do what they can to encourage the development of this 
very important industry and will not stand in the way of the 
development of the industry. 
 
What do I mean by that? Well we talked about the corporate 
capital tax and the need to level the playing field in that area to 
help the development of the industry and to encourage 
investment to this province. Investment that would be willing to 
come here if the conditions were right and if the return on 



560 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

investment was proper. 
 
We need to look at the implications of our labour legislation. 
Frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there are provisions in our labour 
legislation that make it difficult, that make it difficult for us to 
attract the investment to this province that we so desperately 
need. 
 
We are not looking at wholesale changes. We’re not looking at 
undermining workers’ rights. We need a balanced approach and 
a fairness test for labour legislation that would meet the 
standards of other provinces. 
 
You know, you just simply cannot put barriers around your 
province to this kind of investment and expect it to play no role, 
to have no effect on whether or not people invest in this 
province. You can’t, you can’t say this is not that important, 
this is insignificant; this is more important than an investor’s 
rights or opportunities without having a negative consequence. 
And the last thing this province needs, Mr. Deputy Speaker, is 
another negative consequence. 
 
So while we want this, while we want this industry to succeed, I 
think the people of this province want assurances that the 
government will put into place every opportunity for the 
industry to succeed and remove every barrier to success that 
exists right now. 
 
And I really . . . I would encourage the government to take 
these concerns seriously, to act on them and to do the right 
thing and make the growth of our economy and the potential of 
our economy realized by the removal of any barriers to 
investment in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
So let’s promote, let’s promote policies. You know, let’s look 
seriously at what is best for the province. Let’s forget our 
ideologies. Let’s forget about the public . . . the pressure group, 
the special interest groups that are putting pressure on us. Let’s 
forget about those kinds of things and work for the common 
good on this particular industry. Let’s try something creative. 
Let’s do something that will work for the common good — the 
benefit of the province — without the other impediments that 
are so often brought up to bear on these, on these particular 
types of ventures. 
 
I think that we need to emphasize more than anything the 
development of this industry through the encouragement of 
private sector investment. We have talked about two specific 
cases, in the speech by myself and by the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale, of communities that are prepared to develop an 
ethanol operation without government involvement. And I think 
that there are probably several other communities that are 
prepared to take the same approach. 
 
But what they need, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I believe is a real and 
ironclad assurance from the government that they will allow the 
private sector to lead and benefit by their involvement in this 
industry. 
 
The government has to resist. It just must resist the natural urge 
it seems to always succumb to, to the desire to take an equity 
position in anything that looks like it might succeed. There has 
to be a resistance on the part of this government from doing 

what it’s always done. 
 
It’s time for it to look seriously at trying an approach they’ve 
never tried before and in that area, Mr. Deputy Speaker . . . or 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sorry, we have, we have a need of assurance. 
We need that assurance that the government will set the 
parameters in place, build the foundation, and let the industry 
grow on its own. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we think that, we think that this industry is so 
potentially important to the province that we desperately want 
to see it succeed. We desperately want to see the people of this 
province benefit from its success. We want to see the 
opportunities that this industry will bring with it realized by 
communities throughout the province. We need, we need, Mr. 
Speaker, the confidence as a people that a success in this 
industry would bring. 
 
Every small town in Saskatchewan that would benefit from one 
of these programs, one of these plants, would see such a 
tremendous boost to their own confidence that the impact would 
be immeasurable, frankly. And I think that when we succeed as 
a province in these types of endeavours, it’s only a matter of 
time until people are willing to try something else and take on 
another initiative and do something very positive for their 
province. 
 
There’s nothing worse than being beat down by failure, Mr. 
Speaker. And we have seen too many good ideas dissipate into 
failure. We cannot as a province have that happen any longer. 
The psyche is negatively affected and the reaction is, is 
demoralizing. And we just simply cannot afford to have that 
happen any longer, or again. 
 
We need to look at ethanol as just one of many opportunities in 
this province. We have talked about a variety of potential 
spinoff industries. We have talked about potential in other 
related activities. But we also have some other very significant 
opportunities that might come our way, Mr. Speaker, if this 
industry gets off the ground. And it may not be because it’s 
directly related to ethanol, but because of the sidebar effect of 
good planning, good ideas, good people, good opportunities. 
It’s amazing what success in one industry will do to elevate the 
potential for success in other industries. 
 
You know, we said earlier that ethanol plants don’t necessarily 
require a feedlot industry to succeed. But I want to go back to 
that, Mr. Speaker, and talk about what the potential for the 
feedlot industry is in this province. 
 
I’ve talked to a number of people who raise cattle. I have cattle 
myself. We run a few cows and have calves that we sell every 
fall. And, you know, those calves always go to a foreign buyer. 
Somehow they end up in an Alberta feedlot and almost always 
end up going across the line for slaughter. 
 
You know, the potential for developing a feedlot industry in this 
province is so tremendous — with or without ethanol — that we 
have missed a golden opportunity, Mr. Speaker, to see that fully 
realized and to see the impact that that particular industry might 
have. 
 
Do you know that there is, by all counts, about a million cows 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 561 

 

in the breeding herd in this province and experts tell me that we 
could probably triple that number quite easily? We have the 
land base to do it. We have the people who are willing to do it. 
And if we did triple the cow herd, we could have a tremendous 
feedlot potential realized in this province. 
 
We wouldn’t be shipping our cattle to Alberta. We wouldn’t be 
shipping our feed grains to Alberta. We wouldn’t be shipping 
our children to Alberta to look after them. We could be doing 
that right here. And that feedlot industry could make an 
immense difference to the communities that are in some cases 
nearby the ethanol, but they not necessarily would have to be 
located in near proximity. They could be down the road 10 
miles. They could be down the road 60 miles or 260 miles. 
 
The ethanol by-product distiller’s grain, if it’s dried down and 
pelletized or if it’s used as a wet feed, has a tremendous 
potential for the feedlot industry, the cattle industry in this 
province. And we need to look at the potential for that as 
equally important, frankly, to the economic opportunity and the 
development of our economy on a plane very close to what the 
ethanol industry itself might produce. 
 
The big impediment, frankly, the big impediment to the growth 
of the cattle industry and the feedlot industry has been lack of 
initiative and lack of opportunity and too much regulation. 
There have been people in every quarter of this province who 
have, at one time or other, expressed an interest in developing a 
feedlot of some size whether it’s just a few hundred head up to 
as large as 20,000 head. 
 
But there is almost no opportunity for the people with the desire 
to establish a feedlot to get the approvals they need, to get the 
regulatory requirements fulfilled with any kind of efficiency. 
And too often, they are discouraged at every turn by 
government regulation, by investment complications, maybe by 
environmental concerns, who knows what they are. I mean the 
list is endless. 
 
What we need in this province is a recognition that that 
particular industry could play a tremendously significant role 
and that there are people willing to participate in that industry 
and see it grow to maybe double or triple what it is right now. 
 
(16:45) 
 
The area in which I represent 10,000 people has maybe three 
small feedlots operating right now but there would probably be 
three more in existence within days if somebody would provide 
them with a single window of opportunity to get all the 
regulatory requirements approved. 
 
The cattle are there, the people are there, the land is there, the 
water is there, the power is there. You know, the feed is going 
to be there if these ethanol plants produce the distiller’s grain in 
the volumes that everybody says. 
 
This is the time. The need is here, the opportunity is here; now 
is the time for that industry to take root and flourish in this 
province. And any possible effort that the government could 
make to lessen the complications faced by proponents of feedlot 
would be a welcome, a welcome addition to the economic 
opportunities of this province. 

And I think that at this point the government needs to review 
the role that it plays in keeping that particular industry at bay. It 
has not realized its potential by a long shot and there’s much 
that can be accomplished if the government would simply 
streamline the regulatory and environmental issues that mitigate 
against the development of feedlot industries. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — You know if you tripled the size of your 
feedlot industry in this province and you looked at the 
economic impact that would have, I think that the numbers 
would boggle the mind of the average person. They just don’t 
understand the value of an industry like that. 
 
You know when you have a cow now, an average herd cow . . . 
oh, let’s say 4 or 5 years old, weighing 1,500 pounds . . . you 
know that cow is worth on the market $1,500 to $2,000 these 
days. 
 
You sell a calf in the fall at 7 or 800 pounds, those calves are 
bringing you 7 or $800 . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . We have 
some people on this side of the House who are involved in very 
special cattle because they think their calves are worth about a 
thousand dollars. But we’ll overlook their optimism for the 
market and the futures in that particular industry. 
 
But you take those kind of numbers, Mr. Speaker, and you 
multiply those by a million head more or a million and a half 
head more, and you look at the value that you would be putting 
into your economy by expanding the basic cow herd and the 
feedlot industry and you can see the multiplier effect of four or 
five times rippling through all of the small communities in rural 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The implications for our economy are tremendous. And I think 
we need to, we need to give that particular industry every 
opportunity to flourish that we possibly can. And I’m hoping, 
I’m hoping that the ethanol industry will help contribute to the 
development of that feedlot industry. 
 
You know, we haven’t . . . when you talk about the growth of 
the cattle industry and how it could be encouraged with the 
ethanol industry, you know, all we’ve talked about basically are 
feeding operations. We haven’t even talked about, you know, 
the slaughtering operations that ought to be in this province. We 
haven’t even started to talk about the development of a packing 
industry. 
 
You know, Saskatchewan used to have a fairly vibrant feed . . . 
I’m sorry, a slaughtering industry. We used to have a pretty 
vibrant packing industry in this province. And in the short time 
that I’ve been involved politically and for the few years prior to 
that, you know, we’ve seen the decimation of those two 
industries in this province. We have seen job losses in those 
industries; we have seen a real failure of opportunity in those 
industries. And I think that the blame for that, frankly, Mr. 
Speaker, has to lie at the feet of this particular government. 
 
I remember a time when this government decided that the best 
way to invest their money was to buy into a packing industry. 
And I don’t know exactly what happened to that investment but 
we’ve heard very little about it after it’s gone broke. 



562 Saskatchewan Hansard April 9, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, there are immense opportunities in this province. 
You know, I clearly recall the title of the Throne Speech being 
province of opportunity. What a great title. I think I referred to 
that once before — province of opportunity. 
 
You know, the potential is so dramatic, so wondrous. But the 
realization is so pathetic. We have undersold ourselves to the 
point where we don’t know any longer, we aren’t even aware of 
how great we could be. 
 
You know, we’ve accepted second best for so long that we 
don’t know how great this province could be. And we need to 
revisit not just the opportunities, but the way with which we are 
so self-satisfied — so satisfied over the smallest gains, so 
satisfied over the smallest achievement. We should be going, 
Mr. Speaker, for the great things. We should be realizing at 
every turn all of the opportunities that this province has to offer. 
 
And when I looked at the Throne Speech and saw the title, I 
thought this is right on track. When I read the Throne Speech 
for myself, I was sadly disillusioned. There was . . . 
 
An Hon. Member: — You can’t judge a Throne Speech by the 
cover. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — You certainly cannot judge a Throne Speech by 
its . . . not its cover, but by its title. And we found that very loud 
and clear in the reading of the Throne Speech this year. 
 
You know, we have covered quite a bit of ground in terms of 
the ethanol industry. We have talked about its great potential. 
We’ve talked about several different communities that have 
ethanol projects on the go. We have talked about the number of 
small communities who are looking at it as a panacea for their 
own economic future. We’ve talked about the pitfalls of getting 
involved in a project that is maybe too small or undercapitalized 
or hasn’t been considered carefully in terms of the economies of 
scale that are necessary to make a successful venture. We have 
talked about ethanol and its implications for the economy and 
for the cattle industry and for other spinoff industries. 
 
I also mentioned about the potential of the benefit to rail 
companies. In the Southwest we have a privately owned 
short-line rail operation that will move 3,000 cars — 
approximately 3,000 cars a year — just to supply the feedstock 
for the plant that is proposed for the ethanol plant in the 
community of Shaunavon. 
 
But here’s something that we have not talked about, having 
covered all those areas. And that is the potential for significant 
economic opportunity through the development of an export 
market. 
 
You know, we have . . . we are sitting on the edge of an 
opportunity here that we won’t even understand its full potential 
for a number of years. But if the state of California and if the 
state of Arizona and if the state of New Mexico, some of the 
states that find increased traffic and huge urbanization and air 
pollution bothering them more and more and more, if they go 
ahead and mandate not a 10 per cent ethanol blend, not a 15 per 
cent, but an 85 per cent ethanol blend, which is entirely 
possible, if those states that are growing at such a rapid rate, 
whose population — the state of California exceeds our national 

population — but if those states mandate ethanol to that level, 
we have such a great opportunity for export, the potential for 
which we have not even sat down to calculate yet. 
 
And I think that by being in the forefront of the ethanol 
industry, by having got this far with ethanol in this province 
now, we are just about to realize the first fruits of that great 
potential through export. You know, we have lots of land here; 
we have lots of raw materials here. We can do the ethanol here. 
But no market is growing as rapidly as the state of California 
and the state of Arizona. And we are going to be in a position to 
supply them, to be the primary source of ethanol for their needs. 
 
You know, can you imagine how great that is to finally be on 
the winning end of a trade deal with the state of California? 
You know, we don’t have to just sit here and take their oranges 
whenever they come. You know, we don’t have to just sit here 
and take their lousy hockey teams when they come up here and 
play. You know, we are going to be on the winning end of an 
agreement with a state the size of California that has a real need 
of a product that we can develop here. 
 
We are in the driver’s seat on this particular arrangement. And I 
think that we need to make sure that not only do we drive a hard 
bargain, but we drive a thorough bargain and make sure that 
we’re part of this whole process for many, many years yet. 
 
And I sure am glad that we are in the vanguard that we’re in the 
forefront of the development of this industry that can take 
advantage of an opportunity like that. I would certainly have 
been disappointed if we had sat back on this particular industry 
and watched the lead being taken by Ontario or Manitoba, and 
we sitting here simply saying, me too. You know, like a poor 
cousin — me too. It’s so refreshing to have the province of 
Saskatchewan in a position where we are in the lead for a 
change and that we are going to capitalize on for a change. 
 
Now I’m making some serious assumptions here, some . . . and 
maybe I’m on dicey ground here, maybe this is tenuous, but 
nevertheless, Mr. Speaker, we have the potential to reap 
tremendous benefits for the province of Saskatchewan through 
the development of the ethanol industry and by being the 
leading exporting province in the country. 
 
And if we fail to take advantage of those opportunities when 
they present themselves, who knows how long it’ll be till 
another opportunity of anywhere near that proportion presents 
itself again. 
 
We simply cannot fail on this particular industry. And that is 
why once again — I find it important to reiterate — that is why 
once again, Mr. Speaker, we need to make sure that the 
conditions are right for the development of the industry — that 
the things are in place that will attract investment; that the 
playing field is as level as it can be in terms of attracting 
investment and labour here; that we are going to see every good 
opportunity realized in this province because we did it right. 
 
And if there’s anything that I can contribute to this debate, if 
there’s anything that I can do in the future to make sure that we 
achieve the rewards that we deserve in this particular industry, I 
will do it, not just as a private citizen, although that’s part of my 
imperative as well, but as the representative of the people of the 



April 9, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 563 

 

Southwest, of the constituency of Cypress Hills, the community 
of Shaunavon, which technically is not in my constituency. It’s 
just on the outside edge of my particular constituency and is 
part of the Wood River constituency, so ably represented by the 
member sitting immediately behind me. 
 
But our objective will be, Mr. Speaker, to make sure that the 
opportunities that they are chasing today, the opportunities that 
they are seeking on behalf of their communities, the 
opportunities that they are seeking for their friends and their 
neighbours will be realized, and that nothing this government 
does will prevent that opportunity from being realized to its 
fullest. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Elhard: — I want to just refer to the Saskatchewan Party’s 
announcement for the ethanol plan that we talked about earlier 
on this afternoon. And maybe if I can find it here, I will 
compare it directly to the press release issued by the then 
ministry of Economic and Co-operative Development. A 
word-by-word analysis and comparison might be appropriate 
this afternoon, but I think that in view of the debate about 
whether or not the amendment was valid earlier on this 
afternoon, Mr. Speaker, we really should maybe proceed with 
this comparison, so that the people of this House, and the 
people who are viewing these proceedings on television . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Members of the Assembly, it is 
now past the hour of 5 o’clock. This House stands recessed 
until 7 p.m. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


