















































Hansard: May 28, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1651 
 May 28, 2002 
 

 

EVENING SITTING 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 11 — Development of the Forestry Industry 
 

The Speaker: — Order. Debate resumes on the private 
members’ motion moved by the member for Cumberland and 
seconded by the member for Regina Dewdney. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to join 
with my colleagues to support the motion that’s congratulatory 
to the forest industry for making great progress in creating 
thousands of jobs and attracting new investments of nearly $1 
billion in the last three years. 
 
This strategy that has been developed with the forestry industry, 
Mr. Speaker, is all about partnership. And as the member 
opposite would have said, it’s not taking credit for but 
congratulating the forestry industry for all of their hard work. 
 
Now I listened — and I hoped they didn’t — to the member 
from Carrot River give his speech about the gloom and doom 
that he sees in Saskatchewan because certainly it would not 
follow through with the intent of the ACRE (Action Committee 
on the Rural Economy) report and the people that came before 
us and said it’s time that we all up our attitude, that they’re 
looking to leaders to be positive and to attract investment in this 
province. And that certainly would not be the way to do it, Mr. 
Speaker. In any silver cloud, you can always trust that the 
Saskatchewan Party can find a dark and gloomy lining. You 
find, Mr. Speaker, that leadership requires . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you. Mr. Speaker, I hear an 
opposition that may be coming to the ACRE point of view and 
our point of view, that you should up your attitude. They even 
noticed that there was sunshine outdoors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — I want to say though that people are looking 
to leadership to take pride in what is happening and to tell 
others where the opportunities are and the opportunities that lie 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
So I ask them to say, do you pass the test? If there was someone 
who was visiting Saskatchewan and turned on their television, 
and had just happened to be listening to the legislative channel, 
Mr. Speaker, would they hear the positive opportunities 
available in Saskatchewan, or would they hear the gloom and 
doom and want to stay far away from this province, thanks to 
the leadership provided by the members opposite. 
 
Will people rush to invest in this province? Yes, Mr. Speaker, if 
they listen to the strategies that are available and the 
Partnership for Prosperity, there are those who are investing 
and want to remain investors in the province and particularly in 
the forestry industry. 
 
So look on the bright side. It was a little more positive from the 

member from Saskatchewan Rivers, so I listened probably more 
carefully than maybe many others did in the House this 
afternoon to how the forestry industry affects his community 
because it’s very interesting to learn from members where they 
have an industry that is active and alive in their area. And he 
did talk about many, many things that are happening there. 
 
But I was trying to figure out, between that member and the 
member from Carrot River, what would their strategy be? Or 
what would they do differently than the government has done to 
spark growth and creativity and opportunity for forestry in this 
province? And it was a bit convoluted, sometimes 
mind-numbing, but I did pick out pieces of it. And they said 
that government should not invest, that the private investors 
would do it all. 
 
Well we know, Mr. Speaker, that many of the communities out 
there, particularly in northern Saskatchewan, without the 
government having a role to play and some investment through 
CIC (Crown Investments Corporation of Saskatchewan) and 
other organizations that have some public monies involved in 
them, there would not be some of those opportunities. 
 
So I want to read Hansard and see what they’re saying about 
. . . let’s not invest any public money, any further public money 
in forestry, that somehow this is all going to just happen. And 
that’s of an interest to me because I know all of the educational 
opportunities that are now available for people who want to be 
employed in the forestry industry, particularly in 
post-secondary education and on-the-job training and many, 
many opportunities that are out there through the partnerships 
we form with the corporate sector and with our public education 
system to make sure there are people who are ready to work in 
the forestry industry as it grows in the province. 
 
So I don’t know how that’s accomplished when you freeze 
education funding. So I don’t know what kind of cornerstone 
forestry industry you have when you have no public investment, 
you have no public education for jobs and training in that 
environment. 
 
And then I heard that somehow the taxes that they gain from 
that sector are going to pay for some of the things that happen 
in their communities that stand for a good quality of life. Well 
the next breath, the member opposite said, but we’re not going 
to tax this industry. They’re good corporate citizens and they’ll 
do this out of the kindness of their hearts so we’re going to 
decrease taxes. We’re not going to collect taxes, and somehow 
in this industry that out of the goodness of the corporate heart 
there’ll be a commitment to the quality of life everywhere 
throughout the communities. 
 
Now economic development, Mr. Speaker — I’m not sure that 
that’s a way that the forestry industry would see stability and 
growth there, and I don’t see somehow where they would gather 
that the members opposite are somehow the guardians of the 
forestry industry for this province. 
 
So to the bright side, Mr. Speaker. Let’s look at the bright side 
of this. If you look at a map, and when you see in the ’80s that 
there were maybe one or two players involved in forestry in 
northern Saskatchewan and had somehow negotiated large 



1652 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

tracts of land, that didn’t allow for the investment that the 
members opposite talked about until about the year 2002. 
 
So in 1997 — I’m looking at a map of northern Saskatchewan 
and what do I see? There’s a few companies who are involved. 
There’s about four major players: Mistik’s up there, 
Weyerhaeuser, Pasquia/Porcupine, and L & M Wood Products. 
There was an opportunity; we had an opportunity to work, as I 
said, in partnership with those groups but with local 
communities to see how we could get more involvement. 
 
And what do we see today? Now in 2002, when you look at that 
same map, you’ve got Mistik, Weyerhaeuser, 
Pasquia/Porcupine, L & M Wood Products, but you’ve got 
Kitsaki-Zelensky. You’ve got North West Communities 
involved. You’ve got the Mee-Toos. You’ve got the Turnor 
block with two tracts of land. You’re now talking with people 
for development in those areas. So what a change, what a 
change in five years where we see that same map and it now 
includes investments and jobs and forestry stewardship from 
many of the partnerships that we’ve developed with these 
organizations. 
 
The activity there is to be commended and congratulated and 
it’s something that from time to time this Assembly on all sides 
of the House should step back and say, let’s celebrate the 
activity and the growth and development in northern 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — So I want to highlight now how does 
partnership work. In the members opposite talking that there 
were threads and bits of pieces, but they didn’t seem to be able 
to pull together how does this strategy develop, how do we get 
people involved, how do we look at all sides of the issue and 
get advisory committees that talk about environmental 
stewardship and sustainability as well? 
 
And one of the ways we do that in forestry projects is to have 
land use planning, Mr. Speaker, and we have people who have 
come together in this kind of a partnership. And in several areas 
across the North, our Environment department and northern 
people are working together to set objectives for land and 
resource use. 
 
Land use plans are underway for Pinehouse-Dipper, North 
Central, Amusatik, and Athabasca areas. Some are just 
beginning, Mr. Speaker, but we’re seeing some results. And 
there are others who have worked for a long time together and 
they’re nearly completing their land use strategies and plans. 
Each one of those plans includes a very important role for area 
residents. And in the decision making, there is the local and the 
regional advisory committees. 
 
While I listened for over an hour to a member opposite who’s 
involved in that community, and he doesn’t have any 
knowledge of the land use committees at work in those areas. 
Now how could you say you’re supporting that industry — you 
have knowledge of it — and somehow not acknowledge that 
right there with people, they’re working together with 
government, with industry, with the local residents to develop 
their land use strategies and plans. 

So we will do what was mentioned by the member from 
Saskatchewan Rivers — make sure sustainable development 
and economic development opportunities occur so we have 
generations in the future who are enjoying the forest as well, 
because there is planting and replanting that must occur. There 
is good stewardship in the way that the forests are harvested, 
Mr. Speaker, and that is well underway and in many areas 
completed — not acknowledged or celebrated by the members 
opposite, but it’s there. 
 
The wood allocations. Again, enhanced wood allocations for 
northerners means more involvement and more growth. Nearly 
three years ago it was determined that Weyerhaeuser’s forest 
management agreement included more wood than the company 
would use. So under the terms of the FMA (forest management 
agreement), the company gave up surplus wood from its 
northernmost areas to allow for others to become actively 
involved and develop this industry. This wood was reallocated 
to partnerships, partnerships involving northern communities 
and First Nations. 
 
And again the members opposite didn’t seem to know that right 
in their backyard those kinds of partnerships are underway and 
happening, Mr. Speaker. 
 
More recently a similar review of the Mistik FMA was 
conducted and the results? A larger wood allocation for the 
community-based partnership, North West Communities Wood 
Products, the opportunity for NWC (North West Communities) 
to own a share in the major oriented strand board development 
and the Turnor blocks in the northern areas available for local 
economic development opportunities. And when you look at the 
map you can see those opportunities springing up and 
happening. 
 
From the beginning the forestry sector . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Carrot River Valley 
on his feet? 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Request leave to introduce guests, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I thank 
the member opposite for allowing me the time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to introduce to and through you to all 
members of the Assembly, 51 students. We have 27 students 
from Bjorkdale, Saskatchewan, and there they are, an 
enthusiastic group. And we also have with us this evening, Mr. 
Speaker, 24 students from Sechelt, British Columbia. 
 
And the students from Sechelt are here on an exchange program 
with Bjorkdale School. Bjorkdale has been twinned with 
Chatelech Secondary School’s Jazz Concert Band through the 
Society for Educational Visits and Exchanges in Canada 
program. This program runs through a federal grant and fosters 
school students learning about different regions of Canada. 
 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1653 

 

Bjorkdale School was in BC (British Columbia) in April and 
Chatelech students will be here in Saskatchewan for about a 
week. 
 
We have with us as well, teachers from Bjorkdale, Theresa 
McHugh, Penny Cason; and from Chatelech Secondary School, 
we have Karin Tigert, Bob Benmore, Janet Bennie; and we 
have a chaperone, Bonnie Hoffus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it is indeed a pleasure to have both groups, 
but it’s particularly a pleasure to have a group from BC here on 
an exchange program and I know that Bjorkdale has been very 
honoured to host these students. So I would ask everyone to 
join with me in welcoming both the students from Bjorkdale 
and the students from British Columbia. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Prince Albert 
Northcote on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — With leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I’d like to join with the member opposite in terms of 
welcoming the students from Bjorkdale, as well the exchange 
students from British Columbia. 
 
We’re debating tonight a resolution that speaks to $1 billion of 
new investment in forestry in this province, which is an industry 
the students from British Columbia will I’m sure be very well 
acquainted with. It’s an industry that’s under a little bit of 
pressure right now, but we’re going to get that fixed here in 
Canada and the jobs in the forestry industry are going to 
continue to serve British Columbia and Saskatchewan students 
well. 
 
So welcome here and on behalf of the government it’s good to 
see you guys. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 11 — Development of the Forestry Industry 
(continued) 

 
Ms. Hamilton: — Well, Mr. Speaker, leaving off where our 
House Leader stopped in his introduction, it was mentioned that 
there are issues with softwood lumber, and it’s a forestry 
industry in the sector that works with government here, and I’m 
sure in the province of British Columbia and the province of 
Ontario to have a strong voice in Canada to fight the softwood 
lumber dispute. Saskatchewan’s working with those provinces 
and the federal government to deal with challenges from the 
taxes imposed from the US (United States) on the imports of 
Canadian lumber. 
 
So the US is contending that the stumpage charged by 
government in Canada for Crown timber is so low that it 
amounts to government assistance in this industry, and they also 

say that selling lumber in the US is at a loss and it’s harming 
the American lumber sellers, a practice called dumping. Of 
course we all disagree with this. And there’s a strong voice 
that’s being taken from Saskatchewan, from British Columbia, 
to fight this, to fight the claims that the Americans have here. 
 
The members opposite talk about well the marketplace will 
dictate and the Americans look at that and they say yes they are 
a free enterprise state and want to operate in that manner. But 
really, Mr. Speaker, if this is how they look at the industry here 
and the grains and so on, we’ve got a lot to fight when we talk 
about let the marketplace dictate because it’s not doing it for 
this issue in Saskatchewan. 
 
The comparison with the United States, the rates ignore the 
costs of doing business here. Long-term planning via 
forestation, environmental assessment, and monitoring are just a 
few of the issues that we tackle here that we work on and that 
cost to develop our lumber industries and softwoods. Part of the 
American response to the issue has been a 19.3 per cent duty 
and more recently a 12.6 per cent anti-dumping duty on the 
imports of Canadian softwood lumber. These costs have meant 
very difficult times, and I heard that both in the voice of the 
speaker from Saskatchewan Rivers and Carrot River that this 
means some difficult times for the Canadian lumber industry. 
 
(19:15) 
 
But with a strategy and with the kinds of plans that we’ve set 
forward, today the motion before us celebrates that we have the 
investment — $1 billion investment in the last three years in the 
forestry industry in Saskatchewan. 
 
We’re going to need a lot of support and we’re going to take 
this dispute to the World Trade Organization. It could take up to 
about 18 months but I think we’ll get some good resolve to this 
issue and work through and up the other side. 
 
So developing a partnership and celebrating success. The 
industry, someone talked about, didn’t know where they stand 
or that there’s convoluted regulations. I think the members 
should look at those regulations that are in place because 
they’ve been developed in partnership and they draw that fine 
balance between wanting to develop economic growth, jobs to 
have people employed in that industry and the economy, and 
the balance that we talk about in preserving our natural 
resources for the next generation as well. 
 
Our commitment as a government to the industry is to review 
the regulations in place and yes, where there is duplication or if 
there are regulations that are outdated and don’t make sense to 
modern industry, those will be either deleted or amended to 
make certain that they support this remarkable growth in the 
forestry sector in Saskatchewan. 
 
All along in partnership we’ve been working with the forestry 
sector to expand using these principles. Sustainable forest 
management, a diversified industry with the emphasis on 
producing higher value products. We take pride in the way that 
in Saskatchewan we come together and we develop the higher 
valued product and this is no different. 
 
Effective use of the province’s wood supply, and as I talked 



1654 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

about the way that the companies have come together and the 
organizations to look at how wood supply could be allocated 
and the allocation and how they’re utilized. And direct 
participation of Aboriginal northern communities in the new 
forest businesses. And we hear from them every day that 
they’re appreciative that they’re actively involved in the 
development of the industry. 
 
So let’s look at the project update for a moment, Mr. Speaker, 
from this area of the province. You’ve got Kitsaki-Zelensky — 
the partnership is currently running an existing sawmill in La 
Ronge. Because of its substantial customer base in the United 
States, the company has been negatively affected by the 
softwood lumber dispute. But despite the current difficult 
circumstances, the company continues to work toward a term 
supply licence — a first step towards a forest management 
agreement, an FMA. 
 
Mee-Toos Forest Products. In spite of the withdrawal of the 
Peter Ballantyne Cree Nation’s original industrial partner, a 
substantial opportunity in the region remains. The new 
company has approved environmental impact assessment. 
They’ve got that in place, they’ve worked towards that and 
they’ve got that there. And a great deal of work has been 
completed towards finalizing the long-term lumber supply. The 
company plans to harvest 65,000 cubic metres of wood this 
winter. 
 
Northwest region. OSB (oriented strand board) mill. Tolko 
Industries, in partnership with Meadow Lake Tribal Council, 
North West Communities Wood Products, and Crown 
Investments Corporation is moving ahead with plans to build a 
$200 million oriented strand board mill in northwest 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Partnership, Mr. Speaker. The site selection phase is now 
completed for this mill. And the work needs to get an 
environmental approval — which is reasonable and they agree 
— for the specific site and the facility and that’s now underway. 
And they are working together with our Saskatchewan 
Environment and others to make sure that they meet all the 
environmental processes for the site that will be selected. And 
we expect that this spring construction will now be underway. 
 
Green Lake. The facility owned by Green Lake Metis Wood 
Products is in the process of rebuilding following a fire last 
year. Initially the first goal is to get a new sawmill and log 
sorter up and running by March 2002, this year. After that plans 
are in place to build drying, planing, and distribution facilities. 
 
Buffalo Narrows and Pinehouse Lake post plant. Because of the 
abundance of small diameter wood in that area, post plants are 
being considered for both Pinehouse Lake and Buffalo 
Narrows. Discussions are underway between North West 
Communities Wood Products and potential partners as well as 
local contractors. And they will receive annual allocations for 
wood harvesting to create local jobs. 
 
To hear the member from Saskatchewan Rivers this afternoon, 
you would think that no one has been talking to anyone locally 
or that there are not opportunities for the smaller local 
contractors, and yet I’ve already talked about two or three 
examples of where that’s already underway and occurring. 

Again, up the attitude. Let’s talk about the positive things that 
are happening in this province. Let’s have people turn on their 
television, listen to the leaders and say, come to Saskatchewan, 
it’s a good place to invest. And the people that are here take a 
pride in the business that they operate and want to stay here and 
grow. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Beauval. North West Communities Wood 
Products is looking for a suitable industrial partner for its 
planned Beauval saw mill project — a search made much more 
challenging by the softwood lumber dispute of course. But 
long-term plans include a diversified value-added industry such 
as prefab housing in association with other area developments. 
 
Now there’s an opportunity. We should be selling that to other 
people and getting industrial partners up there to get involved 
because it’s happening up there. And it’s happening because of 
the hard work of the forestry sector. 
 
La Loche, two northern timber supply areas referred to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Why is the member for 
Saskatoon Southeast on her feet? 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Permission to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m so 
pleased you’ve given me leave to introduce guests because I 
have tonight in the Speaker’s gallery two very special guests. 
Brent Thompson is from Thunder Bay, Ontario. He is the 
vice-president of Wardrop Engineering. And seated with him as 
well is Doug Kramble who is in Saskatoon, is a constituent of 
mine. He is also with Wardrop Engineering. 
 
Now Mr. Kramble came originally to Saskatoon from Winnipeg 
via Calgary and is very, very high on this province. And Mr. 
Thompson who is here this evening exploring business 
development with the mining sector is also equally enthusiastic 
about the great opportunities here in Saskatchewan. 
 
They tell me that the engineering graduates from both the 
University of Regina and the University of Saskatchewan are 
second to none all across this great continent. And they also 
have an extremely positive attitude about Saskatchewan and 
really wish that all people of Saskatchewan could see ourselves 
as other people see us — so optimistic. 
 
So I would ask all members to welcome Mr. Kramble and Mr. 
Thompson from Wardrop Engineering. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 11 — Development of the Forestry Industry 
(continued) 

 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1655 

 

Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I had an 
opportunity to work with Mr. Kramble when I was minister of 
Sask Property Management and I know of the enthusiasm that 
they approach our . . . Saskatchewan and our communities. 
 
La Loche — let’s go back to the area, northern timber supply 
areas referred to as the Turnor blocks. And they will form the 
basis for forestry economic development for this area. As well, 
10,000 cubic metres per year from the Mistik licence area have 
been allocated to La Loche. 
 
The government and the community are committed to work 
together towards a long-term wood allocation for the 
community and building regional partnerships. Current efforts 
are focused on doing an inventory of the forests so good forest 
management decisions can be made. A comprehensive 
inventory is needed before any further allocations can take 
place. This will occur. It will occur in partnerships. And when 
we talk about working with people in northern Saskatchewan in 
the areas to make sure sustainable development occurs, of 
course we want the comprehensive inventory so we can make 
those decisions based on comprehensive information. 
 
North West inventory project. Before the forest can be 
harvested, information is needed about how much wood is 
available for harvest, where, and in what form. The forest 
industry forms the basis for deciding where and how much 
harvesting can take place in a sustainable way. 
 
Through the summer and fall of last year fieldwork was done by 
northern residents to get more complete information, and also 
giving participants hands-on experience in the science of forest 
management. 
 
Well when you see all of those companies and the corporations 
that are involved in the forestry sector that are creating the jobs, 
attracting new investment of nearly $1 billion over the last three 
years, you know that where there’s that kind of activity, groups 
are going to come here and want to be active and involved in 
the partnership. And one such group is the Forest Industry 
Suppliers and Logging Association that had their inaugural 
lunch kickoff earlier this month, May 6. 
 
They chose P.A. (Prince Albert) as a place to expand their 
operations and establish an office in Prince Albert. With their 
extensive background in supplying and servicing the forest 
industry, I’m certain that FISLA (Forest Industry Suppliers and 
Logging Association) will be a valuable resource for 
Saskatchewan companies looking to take advantage of 
opportunities in our rapidly expanding forestry sector. 
 
In fact, in the past three years government and industry teamed 
up to announce the major expansion of Saskatchewan’s forest 
sector, with tremendous growth and opportunities, goals that 
were set and have been surpassed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s with a great sense of pride, with a positive 
attitude, a reaching out to investors who want to be in 
partnership with us in developing the forestry industry, but also 
in being good environmental stewards of the natural resources 
that we have in abundance in Saskatchewan, that I support the 
motion that has been placed before us today. Thank you. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
always a pleasure to stand in the House and talk about an 
industry that we have in the province of Saskatchewan that 
could be and should be a vital industry to the province, a 
growing industry to the province. But unfortunately under the 
present government that we have, this NDP (New Democratic 
Party) government, it’s not. 
 
I was listening to the comments put forth by the member from 
Regina Wascana, and in her remarks she was saying about how 
wonderful things were being done in the North with the 
Aboriginal people, and how the positive things are working for 
them, and how the forestry industry is looking very positive up 
there. 
 
And I would like for her or all the members from the other side 
to actually go to the North and talk to the people up there, sit 
down and talk to them. Because I guarantee if they went up to 
the North and talked to the people and told them that the 
forestry industry in the province of Saskatchewan is booming 
and growing good, they’d get something like I just got here 
now. 
 
The member from Regina Wascana was also saying that they’ve 
looked at positives up in the North where the Aboriginal people 
work with the government to create new jobs and create new 
industry. And they’ve also come out with the fact that the 
government in the 1999 budget said that they were going to 
create 10,000 jobs in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
And I remember distinctly the member from Regina — or not 
from Regina, from Prince Albert — saying the same thing when 
he did his member statement, that they’ve created 10,000 jobs 
in the province of Saskatchewan and spent over $1 billion. Well 
they may have spent close to $1 billion but where are the 
10,000 jobs? When they go from the year 1999 to now, that’s a 
far cry from 10,000 jobs. 
 
Just some statistics, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve dug up. In late fall of 
2001 there was 70 jobs lost at Carrier, there was 50 jobs lost at 
Zelensky Brothers, there was some 300 jobs lost at 
Weyerhaeuser, there was 110 jobs lost at Carrot River, and 
Weyerhaeuser also were cutting back their third shift at the Big 
River mill. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, common sense would kick in and when 
these kind of operations are losing people, in other words 
they’ve had to cut back on their jobs, it would tell you that they 
are not creating jobs, that they’re losing jobs. And yet the 
member from Prince Albert says we’re creating 10,000 jobs. In 
fact he also went on to say he’s darn near got it complete. They 
darn near completed 10,000 jobs. 
 
Well I say to the member from Prince Albert, and I say to all 
members, go up to the North, go to where the forestry people 
are, where the forestry business people are, and tell them that 
we’ve created 10,000 jobs. And they’ll tell you point blank 
you’ve got your head in the sand because that’s exactly the 
truth. 
 
Now I know for a fact, Mr. Speaker, and I’m not going to stand 



1656 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

up for the government, but the embargo between Canada and 
the United States over the softwood lumber industry has 
definitely hurt the province of Saskatchewan. They have. But to 
stand up in the House and say that they created 10,000 jobs in 
the last two and a half years is bogus. It is. The people in the 
North will tell you the same thing that it’s bogus. They’re not 
there. 
 
(19:30) 
 
In the last two and a half years you may . . . and you can take 
credit for some jobs at the Big River Weyerhaeuser mill. They 
built on to the Big River Weyerhaeuser mill. But you got to 
remember also, Mr. Speaker, that it wasn’t just the government 
that got those jobs because they just put a portion of money in 
there. What about Weyerhaeuser? What about the owner of the 
Weyerhaeuser mill? They were the people that created the jobs, 
not the government. 
 
The government can stand up and say what they’ve done and 
done a good thing of it but they haven’t done it. They can take 
credit for creating a little bit of the jobs that Weyerhaeuser did, 
but that is it. And those few jobs that they created is a far cry 
from 10,000 jobs. 
 
There’s a member up in the P.A. district and he wrote a letter. 
And I took a copy of this letter; he sent one to me. And it says: 
 

NDP promised 10,000 jobs in forestry sector. 
 
And this is what he says: 
 

Several reasons for forestry jobs not appearing in 
Saskatchewan. 

 
Now it is a lengthy letter but he’s got some good stuff and I just 
want to read some of it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now the member from Regina somewhere anyway, he was 
saying that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Elphinstone, right. 
He was saying is this a Sask Party member? By the comments 
from this letter I’m sure he’s a Sask Party member because he 
knows what we’re going to do when we get into power some 
day and that time is coming pretty soon. 
 
Well it starts off, Mr. Speaker: 
 

I’ve been logging since I was 14 years old — I’m now 43. 
 
Well actually, you know, I could fit this category. Well not 
quite. 
 

A new skidder 535 Cat is about $325,000, then you need a 
delimber worth . . . (300 to 400,000) because (of) the 
lawmakers — in creating 10,000 new jobs in forestry — 
changed the workers’ compensation laws to prevent people 
from realistically getting jobs and contracts in . . . (this) 
province. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, that is so true. To the smaller operators in 
the province, they cannot get jobs for the simple reason they 
can’t get wood contracts. Why can’t they get wood contracts? 
Because the government is saying they can’t have them. 

That’s why there’s no job creation. That’s why it’s bogus for 
the minister from Economic Development, the member from 
P.A. to stand up and say, hey we created 10,000 jobs. Where? 
Where? 
 
The member from P.A. also goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 

 
If you have power saws, falling and delimbing it would be 
about . . . 20,000 for a couple of people to be insured, 
however, if you are mechanically logging you only pay 
about . . . 7,000 a year and get back . . . 3,000 to $4,000 a 
year if you work injury free. 
 

That’s where the legislation in this province has gone haywire. 
 
(The) legislation is taking away any profit you might make 
(that) will lower (your) expenses. 

 
In Alberta, and I know that members don’t like us talking about 
Alberta — they hate that when we start talking about Alberta. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Request leave to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 

Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and members. I would like to introduce to you, Mr. Speaker, 
and to members of this House, friends who are here today — 
Larry Hubbard, with his mother and father. 
 
Larry is in Regina today on a Justice of the Peace training 
course. And he is the RM (rural municipality) administrator for 
the RM of Rudy and for the town of Outlook. We met on a 
number of occasions to talk about the highways networks in 
that area, and I appreciated Larry’s insights during that time. 
His parents, Garry and Alice Hubbard, are from Avonlea. They 
are retired farmers. 
 
And I would just like all members to join with me in welcoming 
them to the House this evening, and to let them know that it’s 
. . . a relative of Alice’s is in one of the paintings downstairs, an 
RCMP (Royal Canadian Mounted Police) officer. 
 
And so we welcome you to this House. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Before we carry on, I just want to point to 
members, bring to members’ attention the example that has 
been set by the member from Regina Qu’Appelle as the way to 
do introductions, without involving any members of the . . . any 
guests of the Assembly in the debate of the Assembly. And I 
thank him very much as an example. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 11 — Development of the Forestry Industry 
(continued) 

 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1657 

 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too would like to 
welcome Larry Hubbard to the Assembly today, and I hope he 
enjoys the proceedings. Hopefully my rant will not sound like a 
question period. But welcome, Larry, to the Assembly. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I was saying about the member . . . or the 
gentleman from Prince Albert and his letter that was written to 
the paper regarding forestry problems in Saskatchewan. And I 
was just talking about Alberta, and I know that members 
opposite, they do not like us talking about Alberta. But the 
member that writes this letter says: 
 

In Alberta you now must have a power saw license, (you 
have to) take a two-day course and spend $280 or you can’t 
even operate a power saw. Because of workers’ 
compensation laws (the legislating preventive measure to 
stop successful small business in the province in forestry in 
favour of wealthy people), you must also have a buncher 
worth about . . . 375,000. So don’t even think you can start 
logging without about $1.5 million. Alternatively you could 
purchase worn out equipment with real high over-head 
costs and be plagued with mechanical failure and high 
repair bills. Some pumps are worth $40,000 (in) . . . 
hydraulic systems (alone). 

 
The point I think this member wants to bring forth, Mr. 
Speaker, is that our legislative laws that we have in place is 
contributing to everything goes bigger. If it’s not big, it’s not 
going to work. 
 
Well in Alberta they use chainsaws and it still works. The 
problem with using . . . or the real asset about using chainsaws 
is you have more people working in the forestry industry and 
that would bring your numbers up. And to the member from 
Prince Albert, that would gain you your 10,000 jobs. But 
relating everything to bigger and bigger and bigger is not 
always better, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The member also goes on to say: 
 

But don’t expect you’ll find good experienced men to work 
here in Saskatchewan — the wages are too low. You can 
work your butt off and take home . . . 2,400 to $3,500 a 
month. In Alberta you can earn $7,000 to $8,000 a month. 
Contractors here don’t pay overtime after eight hours . . . 
most employers want you for (is) 15 to $20 an hour. You 
take home about $2,000 a month more in Alberta than here 
so who wants to work here. 

 
And I listen to the members opposite talk when I was reading 
this about doom and gloom, always doom and gloom. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, to the members opposite, actually go out to the 
forestry industry in the North and talk to the people. You know 
the members are always saying we should up our attitude. Well 
maybe it’s time the government upped theirs. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I heard the member from Regina 
Elphinstone say that we should up our attitude and that we 
should go out into the forestry and see what positive people are 
talking about. Well if everything in the forestry industry in the 
North is working so well, why don’t they set up another 
Crown? 
 

They’re so famous about setting up Crowns. If they set up 
another Crown in the forestry industry, at least it would be in 
Saskatchewan. It wouldn’t be in Australia or Chile or 
somewhere else where they’re now creating jobs somewhere 
else; it would be right here in Saskatchewan. So set up a Crown. 
 
Maybe I shouldn’t be giving them another idea but, on another 
note, Mr. Speaker: 
 

. . . the forestry companies are cutting trees (that are) too 
small and not benefiting from the growing time. A tree six 
to eight inches in diameter is probably 80 years old and if 
thinned out, either mechanically or naturally, the forests 
would yield higher volumes. After 80 years, trees can put 
on one to 1.5 inches in diameter annually, or two to three 
inches a year once established in old growth trees. Most 
large trees, 20 inches (or) . . . bigger, are probably 150 
years old. Nobody can grow trees in 20 to 60 years in 
Saskatchewan, and I sure wouldn’t want to work there with 
a piece (of inoperational equipment) . . . 

 
Weyerhaeuser was throwing away trees that (were) . . . less 
than 16-feet long. But ever since the new technology in 
forestry has taken over, the amount of waste is in the tons. 
We used to log only in the winter and take trees down to 
the size of my little finger on the tops. Now trees are cut off 
at 3.5 to 4.5 inches on the tops. The tops of sawlogs, at 5.5 
inches used to be 16 inches long, go to pulpwood (to) . . . 
be 10 per cent of the overall cut. Now with lower pulpwood 
prices, about five to 10 per cent of the volume is thrown 
away over mechanical logging practices due to lower prices 
and lower technology practices. 

 
A lot of lower prices I believe are caused by cheap Brazil 
wood where low wages and low environmental standards 
exist in South America due to the global economy and 
corporate profit over the past 10 to 15 years. The 
government should stop legislating small business with 
workers’ compensation laws and allow more waste with 
new technology. 

 
That ends the letter that this member wrote, Mr. Speaker, and 
it’s a good letter. One of the things that’s causing our problems 
in the forestry industry is legislative labour laws. It’s hurting 
not only all of Saskatchewan but especially in the logging 
industry. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in my other remarks I was saying about 
Carrier, and Carrier had to cut 70 jobs. And I’d just like to read 
a couple of things out of the paper from the P.A. Herald 
regarding Carrier. And it says, and I quote: 
 

“A large helping of tariffs with a big piece of no wood 
supply led to the decision of layoffs employees at Carrier 
Lumber operations in Prince Albert,” the company’s 
president said. 

 
Now, Mr. Speaker, it wasn’t only the tariff that caused the 
problem, it was the fact that they had no wood. They didn’t 
have any wood. The reason why they didn’t have any wood is 
they couldn’t get any wood from the FMAs. They didn’t have a 
wood. There is only two FMAs in the province of 
Saskatchewan, and those are two big ones. In fact they have 



1658 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

about 95 per cent of the wood allocated to them, and that is 
Weyerhaeuser and Mistik. 
 
Now it’s okay to have those two big FMAs in the province of 
Saskatchewan, but the thing of it is there has to be somebody — 
which should be the government — realize that in order to 
create forestry jobs in the province of Saskatchewan, in order to 
create wealth and prosperity in the province of Saskatchewan 
there has to be smaller operations of loggers having the right to 
get a supply of wood in their areas to harvest. 
 
And evidently it’s not working, Mr. Speaker, because the 
smaller wood producers are falling by the wayside. And what 
are they doing? They’re moving out of the province. 
 
You know it’s ironic, Mr. Speaker, when you look at Alberta. 
Our cattle go to Alberta, our grain goes to Alberta, our young 
kids go to Alberta. And you know something, Mr. Speaker, two 
weeks ago the wind was blowing from the east and it was 
blowing very strong, and our dirt was going to the province of 
Alberta. And now our wood people are going to the province of 
Alberta. 
 
So I know the members opposite don’t like us talking about 
Alberta, but they’re getting all our wealth. All our wealth that 
should be staying in the province of Saskatchewan is all going 
west to Alberta. They’re the ones that’s benefiting. 
 
You know, Mr. Speaker, a short time ago — just about two 
weeks ago — we were talking about the ag problem that we had 
in the province and that the Bill that the United States had 
imposed on the province of Saskatchewan. And you know 
something, it tied in at the perfect time with the embargo 
between Canada and the United States and the problem that we 
had with the softwood lumber industry. 
 
Well the Leader of the Opposition, the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, proposed a motion in this legislature to the 
Premier that we would have Manitoba, Alberta, and BC come 
to the province of Saskatchewan, and come right here to Regina 
and talk about the ag problems that we have on the Prairies, but 
also to make sure the Premier of BC came so we could talk 
about the softwood lumber problems, because we have those 
problems in the province of Saskatchewan also. 
 
Just because the accord was signed some years ago between 
BC, Alberta, Ontario, and Quebec doesn’t mean to say that 
Saskatchewan doesn’t have a stake. We do have a stake. So 
when the member from Rosetown-Biggar proposed that the 
Premier invite the Premier from BC to come, it was a great 
motion. 
 
And I don’t understand why the Premier never invited him. I 
would like the members opposite — one of them, or even the 
Premier — to stand up and say why they didn’t invite the 
Premier from BC so that we could discuss softwood lumber 
industries. But they never. 
 
(19:45) 
 
So as it went through, all we talked about was ag. But there’s 
also another problem and that is the softwood lumber. And if 
we could’ve got the four Western provinces together, Mr. 

Speaker — BC, Alberta, Saskatchewan, and Manitoba — got 
them together, you know we would’ve had a stronger voice, a 
stronger front to go down east and say, look, we’re united to 
bring the softwood industry to its halt. We could’ve put more 
pressure on the ministers from Ottawa and it would’ve helped. 
It’s not going to solve the problem, but it definitely would’ve 
helped. 
 
But the Premier wouldn’t even invite the BC Premier here. And 
I don’t understand why. Here we have a problem in 
Saskatchewan that’s causing heartaches to people in the 
province, to all forestry people, and the Premier doesn’t do 
anything with the forestry industry. But yet his member from 
Prince Albert, the member for Economic Development, stands 
up and says everything is wonderful in the forestry industry. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it is not and it hasn’t been for some time. In 
fact it hasn’t been for some time since this NDP took over 
government back in the early ’90s. 
 
And to a point on that I just want to bring up to the members 
opposite, the chief from La Ronge, which his name is Harry 
Cook, and everybody knows Harry Cook. Harry Cook is a 
wonderful chief from La Ronge. He’s also a very, very smart 
man. He understands the problems in the North, especially in 
the forestry industry. And talking to him, he said there is so 
much government red tape in getting things done with the 
government that he decided to go on his own. And that’s why 
Mr. Harry Cook, the chief of La Ronge, has done so well for the 
people of the North in La Ronge. Everybody that you listen to 
or talk to and listen to Harry Cook can understand where he’s 
coming from and what he’s done with the North. And I know 
even the member from Melville knows this gentleman. He’s a 
fine gentleman who’s done a lot of work. And it’s amazing 
what you can do when you don’t have the government in your 
face. You know that. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — You know, that member up in the North, 
Harry Cook, has done a wonderful job with the forestry 
industry. He’s given people in the North jobs. He’s given them 
a sense of reality, a sense of worth in this province. And it’s all 
because he’s done it without the government help. He just said 
to heck with the government, we’re going to do it on his own. 
 
In fact, you know, Mr. Speaker, it kind of reminds me of the 
word privatization or something like that. Oh no, that’s another 
bad word that we on this side here don’t want to use. We don’t 
want to use Alberta; we don’t want to use privatization. 
 
But then what would the members opposite know about 
privatization? Has any of the members been in private business 
for themself? I remember asking this question here a short time 
ago, Mr. Speaker, and there was one hand went up — one hand 
out of all the members on that side said that they were in private 
business for themself — one hand. And that goes to show just 
how they’re governing. And that’s why the province of 
Saskatchewan is going backwards. And that’s why the . . . we 
up here always bring out the doom and gloom as they so-called 
say. But if there’s nothing more than doom and gloom, then 
why don’t they bring us up something to cheer about? They 
don’t have anything to cheer about, Mr. . . . 
 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1659 

 

The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would like to remind 
the member that the topic under discussion here is the forest 
industry and the jobs that are being created, and I’d ask the 
member to relate to that topic. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I will try and bring 
it back to forests. It is kind of tied in you know, because the 
doom and gloom with everything else in the province is kind of 
like the doom and gloom in the forestry. And the doom and 
gloom is brought about not by the members on this side, but by 
the members from that side, Mr. Speaker. So when they stand in 
the House talking about the doom and gloom, they are talking 
like they’re talking in the mirror. They’re talking about 
themselves. 
 
If they want to get away from the doom and gloom, then do 
something positive for this province. Do something positive for 
the people in this province. Do something positive for the 
northern people that need the jobs so badly. That’s what we 
need in this province, not the doom and gloom that the 
members opposite are bringing about. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the motion that was put forth was a motion that 
says all the good things that’s happening in the province of 
Saskatchewan in the forestry. 
 
And in closing, Mr. Speaker, I would just like to say to the 
members, get on the bus, put the wheels back on the bus, and 
take another trip and go north and talk to the people in the 
North and see what they say about the doom and gloom and all 
the positive things you guys are doing for the forestry industry. 
Because it’s not working, Mr. Speaker. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
It’s my pleasure to enter into this debate tonight. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — I’ve spent the afternoon and some time 
this evening listening to what the members opposite have to 
say. And I will tell you that I am surprised by the ignorance of 
some of the members in terms of what is happening in this 
province of ours, in terms of the type of investment we’re 
looking at, in terms of the growth that we are seeing, in terms of 
jobs, and the sound forest management that this government is 
undertaking. 
 
And I look forward tonight to spending a little bit of time 
talking about some of the things that this government is doing 
to grow jobs, to create investment opportunities, and to help 
find opportunities in the communities that those members 
opposite claim to represent. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I think it’s very interesting that, as we listen 
tonight, and as we heard this afternoon, a long list of woe-is-me 
complaints from the members opposite. 
 
I listened for an hour to the member for Sask Rivers who every 
second sentence repeated what he had just said, throughout it all 
talking about very much the investment that was being made in 
the communities and then saying, oh but the government’s not 

doing enough. Saying, oh look at the good work the Zelensky 
Brothers do. But you know what, the government’s not doing 
enough. Oh look at the good stuff that’s going on in Meadow 
Lake. But you know what? The government’s not doing 
enough. 
 
And what I find interesting is that they use as an example the 
investment and the support given by the provincial government 
in terms of creating a climate for growth, creating a climate for 
investment, creating a climate for jobs, and they come forth and 
they criticize it. 
 
And I think we have to ask ourselves, Mr. Speaker, why is that? 
Why do those members opposite do that? Well they like to give 
the credit to the entrepreneurs and they like to be quick in terms 
of their criticism of the government. Why? Because it suits their 
political advantage. It has nothing whatsoever to do with the 
economy. It has nothing whatsoever to do with the communities 
that they claim to represent, by the way, with the citizens that 
are employed in their own communities. 
 
But they don’t want to talk about that, Mr. Speaker. Instead 
what they want to do is they want to stand up and they want to 
be naysayers. 
 
I thought it was very interesting this afternoon listening to the 
member for Saskatchewan Rivers talk about the situation in 
Meadow Lake. And what does he say? He stands up and he says 
the government is involved in the Meadow Lake pulp mill. And 
the government is stifling investment. 
 
Well I can take from that that if the Sask Party were ever 
elected — God forbid, ever elected — that they would pull out 
every cent of government investment in that pulp project and 
that they would cripple the community of Meadow Lake. They 
would cripple that pulp mill investment. Because who’s calling 
for their withdrawal? Not the investors, not the community, not 
the local tribal council — the Saskatchewan Party. 
 
Why? Because it’s good for the community? No. Because it’s 
good for the investors? No. Because it’s good politics for the 
Sask Party? I’d argue no, but they certainly seem to think so. 
That’s the approach that they put forward. They cannot take off 
their ideological blinders for one single minute to look at the 
work that’s being done in their communities. 
 
I think it’s time for the members opposite to stop speaking for 
the Saskatchewan Party and start speaking for the people that 
sent them to this legislature. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, as we understand, 
forestry is a complicated industry, it’s a complicated issue, 
because it requires us to balance both an investment climate and 
an environmental regime. We need to make sure that we’ve got 
an environment for growth today but that we are also protecting 
it in terms of a growth into the future. 
 
That’s part of what being government is about. It’s not about 
the quick fixes. It’s not about using a chainsaw versus a skidder, 
I say to the member opposite. It’s about building a climate for 
growth and a climate for investment. 



1660 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

Now I don’t understand why the members opposite don’t 
understand that. I don’t know why the member from Sask 
Rivers, who supposedly lives in the forest range himself, 
doesn’t understand this. 
 
He claims to have visited La Loche. This is his great 
understanding of the North, is he has visited La Loche. He met 
some . . . one person from La Loche once, he says, and that 
person said, do you know what, he says, I think that we could 
do more. And his response is, oh yes, you could do more with 
the Sask Party. Oh, and by the way, we’d pull out all the 
government investment. 
 
He didn’t ever say what that person said to that. And I’d be very 
interested in knowing what the leaders of Meadow Lake have to 
say about the Sask Party’s position that they will pull out the 
investment that CIC has and the support for the Meadow Lake 
pulp mill. 
 
What does the community of Meadow Lake say about that? 
What does the tribal council say about that or do they just not 
care? Maybe they don’t care about the tribal council, maybe 
they don’t care about the community of Meadow Lake. But I 
think it’s time that this party opposite come clean with the 
voters and the people that they claim to represent and tell us 
very clearly how they would put forward a forestry plan. 
 
I appreciate listening to the member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood 
and his argument that there will be a chainsaw in every garage 
and that these people will be out there chopping down their 
trees and that this is the way we’re going to stimulate growth. 
Well you know what, Mr. Speaker, that’s fine. That’s fine if 
that’s their approach. I mean, we can go back to the horse and 
buggy too. 
 
But I think if any of us who understand modern forest 
management take a look at it, we understand that modern forest 
practices is about more than just that. We understand that there 
is a responsible use of technology. We understand that that’s 
made for good employment and good forest stewardship. That’s 
what we have supported. 
 
Has it meant the single largest growth in jobs? No. Could we 
have grown it more aggressively? Probably. Did we want to 
balance it off in terms of the environmental responsibility? 
Absolutely. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Mr. Speaker, it is time for those 
members opposite from the flatlands and the grasslands to start 
to wake up and smell the forest. It is time for them to go 
forward and understand what people in the forest fringe are 
saying. Go up to the North, go and talk to the people. 
 
I listened to the member speak. I listened to the member for 
Saskatchewan Rivers claiming to sit down with George 
Weyerhaeuser, Jr., I think he was saying this afternoon. I’m 
sure George calls him up on the phone and says, you know 
what, Mr. Member for Sask Rivers, I’m thinking about doing a 
little bit of an expansion up on the paper mill there. What do 
you think about that? He says, well, you know, Mr. 
Weyerhaeuser, paper is good — paper is good. You know, 

paper is good. Well, thank you very much. What kind of a 
policy is that? 
 
When we come forward with a plan that’s going to expand the 
economy, that’s going to expand the mills, going to expand the 
production, is going to protect this province’s jobs, where are 
those members? They’re sniping on the cheap politics. That’s 
where they’re off to, sniping on the cheap politics. They’re not 
interested in moving forward with a growth agenda. They’re not 
interested in moving forward environmental stewardship. 
They’re saying, what’s wrong with us simply opening up every 
patch of forest to everyone with a chainsaw that wants in? 
 
Well you know what? We’re trying to balance some of the 
agenda here, Mr. Speaker, and we’re doing it fairly effectively. 
I think it’s quite interesting to note that there is more than $1 
billion worth of investment that is undertaken in this province 
in forestry — $1 billion. 
 
This is a party opposite that likes to criticize this NDP 
government for investing in industry. It likes to criticize us for 
setting an investment climate that has seen a growth in the 
forest sector. We have seen a doubling of the oil production in 
this province; we have seen an increase in the type of 
agriculture development; we have seen an increase in the type 
of mineral production we have in this province. That’s what this 
province’s government has done. 
 
That’s what an NDP government has done. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Those members opposite can talk all 
they want about the 65 years of socialism. And let me tell you 
this. There were 20 years of that 65 years of socialism that I 
don’t want to relive; nobody on this side wants to relive. And 
nobody will ever vote for them to allow in. And that was the 
years under Thatcher and that was the years under Grant 
Devine. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Because we are only now getting that 
repaired. 
 
Let’s understand this. When the member for Wood River stands 
up on his rant about this 60 years of socialism, I say, well those 
60 years, Ross Thatcher and his Liberal administration, nothing 
says socialism like Grant Devine . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’d ask the member to relate his 
remarks to the topic and the motion at hand, that is regarding 
forestry. 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — About some of the time during Grant 
Devine’s wondrous administration, one of the things that we 
have cleaned up since then has been his forest management 
policies. We have helped to rebalance those, not by driving out 
private sector investment, as the members opposite said we 
would do . . . well I have a little surprise for them; they seem to 
laugh. Weyerhaeuser is not only actively involved in the 
province, they’ve expanded their enterprise — expanded it 
under the NDP government. But the members opposite don’t 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1661 

 

want to give any credit for that. 
 
That’s one of the things we’ve done in terms of rebalancing it. I 
think one of the things we have the most opportunity to be 
proud of in this province is the work that we have done in terms 
of advanced silviculture. The amount of replanting that has 
been done, the amount of reforestation that has been done under 
this regime, under our province, is a very positive piece of the 
forestry industry. 
 
Because you know what, Mr. Speaker? You can’t cut down 
trees that don’t exist. You can’t make jobs out of a forest that 
isn’t there. And I think that those members opposite are 
prepared to take their short-sighted approach, as the member for 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood does, with his, every man with a 
chainsaw in the garage, and going out to the forest and cutting it 
down and making a living. That’s fine; that’s fine. But that is 
not going to make a sustainable forest industry. 
 
And when I listen to the member for Sask Rivers that has in the 
middle of his riding an economic centre built around forestry, 
and I listen to what he has to say about his views, I . . . all I can 
say is that I think that he has not taken a good look at what is 
happening in the city of Prince Albert right there. Because what 
this government, this NDP government has done, is it has 
expanded the forest opportunities; we have expanded the 
investment opportunities. And we are going a step further. We 
are making an investment in the technology that will make 
forestry sustainable long and far into the future. 
 
(20:00) 
 
And I say to the members opposite that when they oppose this 
resolution, and they stand and they oppose this government’s 
approach on forestry, I ask them: tell me more than just why it 
should be about the single chainsaw. Isn’t this about more than 
that? Isn’t this about how we develop a forestry institute? Isn’t 
this about how we build a forestry industry? Isn’t this about 
how we put together a better forest management system? That’s 
what this is about, and that’s what we have attempted to do in 
the time — short time — that we have been in the stewardship 
of those forests. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite like to forget that. 
They like to forget about the investment that’s going on in their 
own communities. They like to criticize what is happening and 
the opportunities that are being put forward by their very own 
constituents, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I think it’s very interesting, as we take a look around this 
province, in terms of new opportunities, not only in terms of 
softwood but in terms of hardwood development. I think it’s 
interesting that they forget to talk about the development in 
oriented strand board plants that are happening in this province 
as a result of this administration. 
 
Simply take a look at the number of Saskatchewan people today 
employed in that industry versus where they were under their 
cousins, the Tories, a few short years ago, and ask yourself: 
aren’t we better off today? Are we not better off today than we 
were when those members opposite were voting Tory and 
supporting Grant Devine’s administration? Well Mr. Speaker, I 
think that the answer is very clearly yes. 

I appreciate the members’ support on . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . Mr. Speaker, finally you know I have to say I 
have heard something that I agree a slight amount with from the 
members opposite and that is their support — this is their 
support for the government’s ethanol policy. 
 
And I want to say in terms of forestry, Mr. Speaker, because I 
know you’re very interested in how this will relate in: as you 
know, Mr. Speaker, there are two ways that we can create 
ethanol in this province, one of which is from grain, the second 
which is from cellulose or biomass. 
 
A cellulose production is simply using waste wood products. 
Think of the opportunity we have in the forest land. Think of 
the opportunity we have in the forest fringe in terms of being 
able to use those wood chips, in terms of us being able to use 
that waste wood product to turn that into ethanol. Think of what 
that will mean for communities like Birch Hills. Well I didn’t 
hear the member that represented, or claims to represent Birch 
Hills, today standing up and saying that this is one of the things 
that he’s going to support our government on. 
 
No, instead he talked about meeting somebody somewhere on 
some street to talk about something or other related to forestry 
maybe once. That’s what he had to say. This is not exactly the 
type of leadership that we would be expecting from a so-called 
government in waiting. 
 
That’s what they offer, Mr. Speaker. They offer a strategy that 
pokes holes, pokes at our government strategy. Is it perfect? No. 
Is there more we can do? Yes. Is there more we’re going to do? 
Absolutely. 
 
I say to the members opposite that what we did with the oil 
industry in the last 10 years in terms of doubling the production, 
we are prepared to do in terms of forestry. And just watch us in 
the next 10 years as we’re on these benches moving forward. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — The members opposite know full well 
that there is no opportunity for them to move over into this 
bench. So the best that they can do is sit and squawk and poke 
holes. 
 
I say to them, support the people and the industries in the 
ridings that they claim to represent. Support the industries in the 
ridings that they claim to represent. Don’t sit there and snipe at 
an NDP government because we’re prepared to work in 
partnership with business, because we’re prepared to work in 
partnership with the communities, because we’re prepared to 
work in partnership with Indian and Métis people. Don’t snipe 
at this government because of that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
That’s what good government and good, sound public policy is 
all about and the sooner those members understand that the 
sooner the day we’ll show Saskatchewan people that they may 
be worthy of the number of seats that they have been given. But 
until then, Mr. Speaker, the good news for Saskatchewan 
people is we’re here to govern. We’re here today, we will be 
here after the next election, and we are going to keep moving 
forward. 
 



1662 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

The motion before us today speaks of $1 billion — $1 billion 
worth of investment that has been stimulated by this 
government. Not government investment, private sector 
investment. These members opposite always say, oh that 
government over there, all they can do is get involved in 
everybody’s businesses. Well you know what? I never hear this 
complaint from any of the businesses that come into this 
province. 
 
Only a couple of weeks ago we had in this Assembly 
representatives from the Weyerhaeuser corporation. This is a 
very large forestry enterprise. What does this company bring 
forward, Mr. Speaker? Well of course they’re very involved in 
saw mills, they’re very involved in pulp mills, they’re involved 
in paper mills. They’re a big, big industry, they’re a big 
employer. 
 
And do you know what? They’re working in partnership with 
us and they are supportive of the approach we’re taking. 
They’re supportive of the fact that we’re helping them in terms 
of growing the economy. They’re supportive of the fact that we 
are working with them on major issues, not only in terms of 
investment but in terms of protecting the capital they already 
have. 
 
I want to tell you that we too have been pushing Weyerhaeuser. 
As much as they push us to be more involved, we push them 
also. And we ask for them to be more involved in the 
community, and they are. And we ask for them to take a 
broader perspective and to look at some of the environmental 
issues, and they do. 
 
It’s not always quick. There are always issues that we are 
constantly working on, whether it be Dore/Smoothstone and the 
issue there or be it the Kyoto accord. These are issues that we 
continue to work with industry on. That’s what being in 
government is about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Sorry, I should say, that’s what being a good government is 
about, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Because I think the members opposite 
forget this. It isn’t always about the cheap shot. And it’s nice 
that they’ve got that and that they’re in to pick at it in question 
period. But I find it very interesting that in the some 50 days 
that we’ve been in this House I don’t think there has been a 
single question raised on forestry yet in question period. 
 
And I don’t want to be critical of the members opposite. I mean 
they’ve got their job to do as an opposition and they will, in two 
or three terms, get quite good at it. But in the interim, what I say 
to them is, when the opportunity comes forward to support the 
businesses in their community and support the people that are 
working in their communities that rely on a sound forestry 
policy, be genuine about it. Come forward and be supportive 
about it and don’t constantly feel the need to oppose good 
public policy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have undertaken a large number of different 
issues and different opportunities over the last year — last 
several years to be honest. We are seeing now more than 2,200 

new jobs created in this province as directly related to the forest 
industry, 4,400 new indirect jobs. 
 
The members opposite constantly stand up and harangue this 
government on a job creation record. I want to say very bluntly 
I’m quite proud of our job creation record. During this 
government’s administration we have taken Saskatchewan to a 
record number of people working — more than any other 
administration in this province’s history. To date, more people 
are working in Saskatchewan under this administration, during 
this administration’s tenure, more people have worked in this 
province than at any time in the province’s history. 
 
And do you know what, Mr. Speaker? They are working in a 
larger number of industries. Just think about it. Yes, agriculture 
is under significant strain. Yes, there is a large number of 
people exiting the farming industry. But you know what is 
interesting, Mr. Speaker, is that other industries are stepping up 
to the plate and they are filling those job opportunities. 
 
Isn’t it interesting that nearly 7,000 new jobs in forestry have 
been created under this administration. Isn’t it interesting that in 
a year when we have seen significant decline in agriculture we 
have still seen other growth in other sectors. Isn’t it interesting 
that we are not simply cutting down the trees and shipping them 
off. We’ve seen the growth here in terms of diversifying our 
economy and diversifying the industries. And I think we need 
only look at their communities to take a good example of that. 
 
Look at the work, for example, that has been done in terms of 
Hudson Bay with the new OSB mill. A $220 million investment 
— a quarter billion dollar investment — but the members 
opposite never want to talk about that. Members opposite say, 
oh that quarter of a billion dollars, oh we can’t have that. We 
don’t want to talk about that. Private sector’s coming out with a 
quarter billion dollars; well that’s not worth supporting. 
 
And I say simply, why not? I mean we don’t stand up and 
attempt to take credit for it. This is part of an investment 
climate that we’ve set out that’s helped people move in. We’ve 
seen a $315 million upgrade to Weyerhaeuser’s Prince Albert 
pulp and paper mill — $315 million — a third of a billion dollar 
investment. 
 
Oh and the member opposite laughs, says oh well what’s that? 
Obviously he can create that in his riding like that. Well I 
simply say to them that where we can celebrate the successes of 
Saskatchewan businesses and that kind of enterprise and that 
kind of an investment climate, we should welcome that, we 
should encourage it, and when it happens we should celebrate 
it. 
 
Now I don’t know why the members opposite don’t want to do 
that, Mr. Speaker. I don’t know why the members opposite 
don’t want to do this. They just seem to have a list somewhere 
in that inappropriately named Grow Saskatchewan plan of 
theirs. I mean I haven’t been around the farm in a long time, but 
I know that in order to grow things you need a lot of fertilizer 
and then maybe in that way that plan will work, because there’s 
no shortage of fertilizer in that plan to be able to encourage 
growth. 
 
But what I would say, Mr. Speaker, is this: when they come 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1663 

 

forward in this Assembly and they say to us that there is good 
investment and there is bad investment, there’s some private 
sector investment that they welcome and then there’s some 
private sector investment that they would drive off — that says 
to me that this is an opposition party that’s not yet ready to 
govern. This would say to me that on issues, whether it be on 
forestry or whether it be on further diversification of our 
economy, the members opposite have not clearly thought this 
through. 
 
Now what I’d be interested to know, is do the members 
opposite accept the fact that we have a large American investor, 
in this case Weyerhaeuser, bringing in $315 million to upgrade 
the pulp mill facility in Prince Albert; $315 million is a lot of 
money — even in Canadian dollars it’s still a lot of money, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . very close to a third of a 
billion. Very close to a third of a billion dollars. 
 
Now I hear that the Finance critic from the Saskatchewan Party 
saying yes, yes, he would agree that this is not a bad thing. 
 
But my question, Mr. Speaker, is obviously in the forestry 
sector they welcome this American money coming in to support 
jobs in Prince Albert and ostensibly Saskatchewan Rivers and 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood and where else is there — Hudson Bay. 
That clearly this is a good investment. 
 
Now this is fine. We understand this on forestry. Now I know 
that tomorrow or the day after or the day after that, the members 
opposite will say oh, but you know, Mr. Speaker, those big, bad 
NDP guys, you know what they’re doing? They’re going to 
bring in American investment into ethanol. 
 
Oh well, wait a second here now. Now do I maybe understand 
that American investment is okay in the forestry sector but not 
okay in the grain sector? So if we said that we were creating 
ethanol out of cellulose or biomass, then the American 
investment would be okay? 
 
Well this is I think where the members opposite are going, 
because they seem to have somewhere buried in their platform a 
list of companies that investment is okay from and a list of 
companies that investment is not okay from. Some American 
money is good, some American money is bad. 
 
And I say to the members opposite, what kind of a platform is 
that? What kind of a policy is that? How do you build an 
economy on that? 
 
And what I say to the members opposite is that I think it is time 
that we simply work in the best interests of all Saskatchewan 
people, and let’s accept investment in this province, wherever 
that investment comes from. Let’s welcome in investment that 
is going to create Saskatchewan jobs, Saskatchewan growth, 
and help diversify Saskatchewan’s economy. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — What’s wrong with that? As long as a 
deal is structured fairly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Once again, order. I ask the member to relate 
his comments to the motion at hand. 

Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was of the 
view that I was talking about cellulose-based ethanol 
production. But that’s fine, I can talk about other forestry 
development. 
 
There is no shortage of different issues that we can talk about. 
And it’s not all based around just the tertiary expansion of the 
industry. It’s not all based around paper. It’s not all based 
around always being secondary. I mean, we can talk about the 
expansion that’s gone on in a more primary-based industry. We 
can talk about the expansion of the saw mills. 
 
Well it may come as a surprise to the member for 
Shellbrook-Spiritwood, but there is room in this economy for 
both small-scale developers and large-scale ones. And both 
have prospered under this government. 
 
In fact I would argue, Mr. Speaker, that under this government 
we have seen an expansion of both sets Why? Because we have 
helped rebalance it. We have not simply opted for a corporatist 
model that the Conservative government before us did. Nor did 
we, I would say, adopt this back-to-the-future model proposed 
by the member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood. I’m starting to 
understand why maybe some members are more equal than 
others over there in terms of the policy development, because I 
think some of these ideas need a little working out. And I’m 
glad that they gave the member for Shellbrook-Spiritwood a bit 
of a chance to run and show us what his ideas are here and the 
same for the member for Sask Rivers. 
 
(20:15) 
 
I only hope that the leadership of their party will come together 
and put together a coherent forestry plan that they can put to the 
electorate so that the electorate can compare it to ours, so that 
they can compare it to ours in terms of the expansion that we’ve 
seen, so that we can talk about the $2 million saw mill upgrade 
and wood treatment plant at Glaslyn. 
 
Now my question is, why hasn’t the member for that area ever 
stood up and supported this? Why have I not heard a single 
solitary speech from that member about the work that’s been 
done there? 
 
But what about the $2 million saw mill in Dillon? I mean we 
know that that’s been a good support on our part. 
 
We’ve seen a $2 million saw mill expansion at La Loche. I 
heard the member for Sask Rivers stand up today and say he’d 
talked to somebody from La Loche once, maybe. And he 
thought they had said something about La Loche anyway and as 
a result he was pretty sure there was something good happening 
in La Loche. But he was sure the government had nothing to do 
with it. 
 
Well I want to assure the member that it’s because of the 
investment climate and the partnerships we’ve been building 
that we’ve been able to see this kind of expansion. We have a 
large number of other expansions which are on the drawing 
board. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a case of this government resting on its 
laurels. This is not a case of us simply sitting back and saying 



1664 Saskatchewan Hansard May 28, 2002 

 

what we have today is good enough. 
 
I think all members know that today forestry is under a very 
serious threat. It’s under a serious threat because of the situation 
in terms of the softwood lumber dispute. And what I would 
think is now imperative is that all members in this Assembly 
come together to support the government that’s been elected to 
provide the leadership to help us work on this issue with 
Ottawa. Let’s put forward a united front on this. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that despite the large number of 
trees in my riding, there’s not a lot of forestry going on in 
Regina South. In fact I’d say woe he be the man who takes out a 
chainsaw in my riding. There’d be big trouble. 
 
But I’m prepared to support growth and the development of a 
forestry industry in this province. I’m prepared to support that 
despite the fact there’s no particular gain to my riding directly 
out of this. So if I’m prepared to support that on behalf of the 
constituents of Regina South, isn’t it a bit of a no-brainer to ask 
the members that represent the forestry industry areas to support 
that? Isn’t it a bit of a no-brainer to ask them to join with the 
government on this? 
 
I understand that their policy is going to be to take a chainsaw 
to government after the next election. I’ve heard that many 
times. I know all about their chainsaw audits, and their great 
love for BC’s approach. That’s not how you build an industry, 
that’s not how you build a support base. 
 
What we’ve got to do right now is we’ve got to go for it as a 
united province and work with Ottawa and we’ve got to fight 
those lumber subsidies. 
 
Don’t sit here and argue about these small little petty 
differences that the members opposite say, oh well, you should 
be bringing in more private sector investment. And then when 
we do, they argue, oh no, you shouldn’t be bringing in that 
private sector investment. Mr. Speaker, the single best thing 
that the members opposite could do is get out of the way. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Let this Minister of Industry and 
Resources, let this Minister of Environment move forward on a 
forestry plan that is going to further build and diversify and 
grow our economy. Because, Mr. Speaker, that’s what we’ve 
been doing. That’s what we’ve been doing. 
 
And I think that the thousands of new jobs that we are seeing in 
our economy as a result of it, the thousands of new jobs that we 
are going to see as a result of it are part of why we should be 
supporting this. 
 
My bench mate reminds me that one of the most important 
things — and the members opposite always say this — that 
investors speak with their feet. Well they’ve been tromping 
their way into this province with more than $1 billion worth of 
investment. And that’s a whole lot of zeros. Now I know the 
members opposite know a lot about having zeros over there, but 
this is about having a whole lot of zeros after a one — $1 
billion worth of new investment in this province. 
 

That’s what the NDP government’s been up to. While the 
members opposite are, whoa, saying, don’t be getting involved 
in the economy, don’t be involving yourself with these 
companies, don’t be getting in the way of investment, you know 
what? We’ve been helping these companies grow. 
 
And they’ve been growing not just in terms of profit. They’ve 
been growing in terms of jobs. And jobs are good for 
repopulating the province, and jobs are good in terms of helping 
those rural communities stay alive, and jobs are good in terms 
of making sure people have a sound basis to raise their families 
and keep their communities alive. 
 
Mr. Speaker, who other than the Saskatchewan Party could 
argue with that? And what I think we need to be doing now 
tonight is moving forward to vote on this amendment, or this 
motion. I think we need to be supporting the fact that we have 
$1 billion worth of new investment. I think we need to be 
supporting the fact that this growth is not just on a single basis 
of one company or one community. 
 
I think we need to support the fact that this is a full, 
wide-ranging policy, a wide-ranging approach to expanding 
forestry. Not just for today but for making sure that we have 
made the sound investments through environment in terms of 
reforestation. It means making sure that we’ve got a good fire 
management policy in place. That’s what this means. 
 
And certainly, Mr. Speaker, one of the things that we need to 
remember is that there is a lot more to be done if forestry is 
going to change. 
 
Forestry is going to change. The member opposite speaks about 
the romantic old days with a chainsaw. I like the story of Paul 
Bunyan as much as the next guy. I mean, an axe was always 
used to clear the forest in the old days, and there is a certain 
romance to it. And we’ve got plenty of time and plenty of 
opportunity for all sorts of development. 
 
But you know what, Mr. Speaker? I believe very much that the 
development of the forestry in this province is going to come 
from the investment and technology just as it has in oil, just as 
it has in terms of agriculture, and that’s what we need to be 
supporting. This government, because it believes in helping 
grow this economy and because it helps . . . believes in helping 
to grow this particular industry, we’re making that investment. 
It’s a smart investment. It’s an investment in research, it’s an 
investment in our future, it’s an investment in the science, and I 
think people understand this. 
 
Many years ago we came to this understanding in agriculture in 
this province that if we were going to grow agriculture and 
move it forward, we needed to make the investment in the 
technology. That’s why we have such a renowned university in 
Saskatoon with its College of Agriculture. That’s one of the 
areas where we made a good government investment, and I 
don’t mean this particular NDP administration because that’s 
been going on for generations, but it was the type of investment 
that helped agriculture to grow. 
 
Now what we need to be doing on this side of the House today 
is thinking about, as our economy diversifies, where are those 
new places that we invest? Certainly in terms of our 



May 28, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1665 

 

administration, we’ve decided there are two very key areas that 
we need to put that investment into. One is in terms of 
petroleum and the resources around that, and we’ve made big 
investments down here in terms of the University of Regina and 
petroleum technology expansion and the advantages we have 
for enhanced oil recovery. 
 
The second area, though, is going to be in the area of forestry 
because as we look at the forest resource in this province and 
the advantages that we have, they’re immense, but we need to 
take advantage of the smart science. 
 
Now that, Mr. Speaker, some members over there who I know 
are tripping over themselves to try and pretend to represent 
Saskatoon . . . I guess they’ve given up on representing their 
own area; they’re now attempting to represent the ridings we 
hold. Let me tell you this, Mr. Speaker. We are working in 
partnership with the smartest minds of that university in 
Saskatoon, we are working together with the industry, the best 
industry reps that we can find in the forestry sector, and we are 
going to put that together in what we call a forestry institute. 
 
And that forestry institute, located in none other than Prince 
Albert, Saskatchewan, is going to be a beacon of hope and light 
and jobs in that industry for a generation to come. And what I 
think the members opposite should do is come forward and 
support it. And I say to the chainsaw artist opposite, put down 
that chainsaw; come in, come join us. Support our vision. 
Support our approach. Don’t worry about trying to clear-cut the 
forest to gain some votes. I say simply, Mr. Speaker, that 
member and all members on that side should come forth. 
 
Now I don’t want to . . . I don’t want to paint all members 
opposite with that same brush. I suspect that some members 
have a better understanding and certainly as I listened to the 
comments from the member for Carrot River Valley, I think he 
has a good understanding of the support that needs to be there 
for his communities to grow. And I certainly support that and I 
want to recognize that right now. But I think that this is the kind 
of more mature approach to politics that is going to help move 
this agenda forward. 
 
I encourage other members to do the same. I say to the member 
from Sask Rivers, set aside that strange ideological view that 
you have. Set aside that irrational approach to politics, and get 
out there and get to work for the people who elected him. That’s 
what I think. Get out there and get elected. Get to work. This 
isn’t a huge amount of effort to ask for. 
 
And sometimes you know what, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t hurt for 
the members opposite to admit that this government has done 
some very good things. Sometimes it doesn’t hurt for them to 
admit that the investments that we’re making in their home 
communities are actually helpful. 
 
I think it’s time to set aside the politics. I think it’s time for 
them to come forward and support it. And we can give the same 
speech in terms of ethanol. I can give the same speech in terms 
of agriculture. We can talk about diversifying the rural economy 
— and maybe I will for a minute talk about diversifying the 
rural economy. 
 
When we had ACRE here . . . and I want to tell the member 

opposite just a little bit about how we came to want to set up an 
Action Committee on the Rural Economy. I think it’s 
interesting to note that one of the reasons in 1999 when we 
talked about setting up the Action Committee on the Rural 
Economy, it was because we recognized that the rural economy 
is about a lot more than just agriculture. And I think the 
members opposite should know that. I think the members 
opposite should understand that — that there’s a lot more to the 
rural economy than just agriculture. 
 
And what we are trying to do here is move forward an agenda 
that’s going to talk about building that rural economy in terms 
of forestry, in terms of ethanol, in terms of agriculture, in terms 
of rural industrial development, in terms of high tech. Those are 
the kind of investments we’re making. And they’re not 
isolating, Mr. Speaker. Because sometimes an investment in 
research is just as good as allowing the members opposite to cut 
more trees. And sometimes an investment in terms of advanced 
silviculture makes more sense than us simply figuring out how 
to cut down more trees. 
 
And sometimes, Mr. Speaker, we need to look at how we 
encourage that investment — private sector in co-operation 
with the public sector. Because I’m not afraid to put some tax 
dollars up to support Saskatchewan people’s endeavours. The 
members opposite appear to be. The members opposite appear 
to be afraid to do that. 
 
But as I listened to the member for Saskatchewan Rivers today 
talk and he talked about how an investment in forestry could 
lead to an investment in infrastructure and social programs, I 
say to him, well if that’s good for a community, then why 
would we not look — when we’re asked — at putting in some 
support? 
 
Mr. Speaker, I notice that the benches opposite are rather 
empty. I am sorry that I drove them off. I hope that the 
members will have taken some notes or at least taken 
opportunity tomorrow to talk . . . to read what has been said. 
And rest assured, rest assured that this government is working 
for their constituents and their communities even if they’re not. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I will be supporting the motion. I will be 
supporting . . . I will not be supporting that amendment. But I 
think given, given the hour and given the fact that I would like 
to hear a great deal more about what members opposite have to 
say when they have an opportunity to come back in, I would 
simply move that we adjourn the House . . . debate. Oh, I’ll just 
move that we adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 20:30. 
 


