















































Hansard: May 01, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 1091 
 May 1, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about the crop insurance 
premium hikes and coverage reductions. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take the money out of the 
crop insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Landis, Hudson 
Bay, and Mistatim. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a 
petition regarding halting crop insurance premium hikes and 
coverage reductions. And this petition is to the Hon. Legislative 
Assembly of Saskatchewan in legislature assembled. Mr. 
Speaker, the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and to hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, these petitioners are from the communities of 
Biggar and Rosetown, and I’m pleased to present it on their 
behalf. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased to rise 
again today to present a petition from people who are still 
concerned about the long-term care rate increases: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people that have signed this petition are all from 
Kelvington. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition to present. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 

immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the city of Yorkton, 
village of Willowbrook, and Good Spirit Acres. 
 
Mr. Toth: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. As well to present a 
petition and reading the prayer: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition I present, signed by people from the 
city of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition signed by citizens concerned with proposed fee 
increases for long-term care services. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by individuals all from 
the community of Yorkton. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have with me today 
a petition asking for a halt in crop insurance premium hikes and 
coverage reductions. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by producers in the Cabri and Pennant 
area of southwest Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Eagles: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I too rise 
today to present a petition on behalf of concerned Saskatchewan 
residents deeply concerned about the long-term care fees. And 
the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 



1092 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

And this is signed by citizens of Saskatoon. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the shape of the highways. Mr. Speaker, these 
petitions keep rolling in. 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent loss of life 
and injury and also to prevent the loss of economic 
opportunity in the area. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Odessa, 
Francis, Tyvan, Qu’Appelle, Fort Qu’Appelle, and Creelman. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of the citizens of Pangman who are 
concerned about maintaining their school. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to take 
the necessary action to maintain K to 12 education in the 
community of Pangman. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Ogema, Pangman, 
Gladmar, Bengough, and Regina. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise again on behalf of 
citizens who remain concerned on the issue of long-term care 
fees and the potential that those would go up. Mr. Speaker, the 
prayer of their petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today come from the communities 
of Wymark, Herbert, Gull Lake, and the city of Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition here 
with citizens concerned with tobacco legislation: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 

any tobacco products; furthermore, anyone found guilty of 
such an offence would be subject to a fine of not more than 
$100. 

 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Holdfast and Findlater. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by people throughout Saskatchewan who are concerned 
about the outrageous increases in crop insurance fees. And the 
petition reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this petition has been signed by the good 
people from Christopher Lake and Paddockwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise today to 
present a petition from citizens concerned about the changes to 
the crop insurance program. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Perdue, Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise to present a 
petition on behalf of Saskatchewan citizens concerned with 
the damaging changes to this year’s crop insurance program. 
The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plans to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Meacham and Colonsay. 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1093 

 

I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
also rise in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition signed 
by citizens of Saskatchewan in regards to the crop insurance 
premium: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Holbein, Parkside, and Spiritwood. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Peters: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
signed by residents of the province concerned about the 
long-term care fee increases. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petition is signed by folks from Unity, 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise with 
a petition from folks that are still concerned about the long-term 
care fees and where it’s going to go in the next little while. And 
the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, these are signed in total by the good citizens 
of Yorkton. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and are hereby read and received as 
addendums to previously tabled petitions being sessional papers 
nos. 8, 17, 18, 22, 23, 24, 31, and 32. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to 
introduce to you and through you to all members of the 
Assembly, a group of grade 7 students from St. Peter School 
which is located in the Dundonald neighbourhood of my 
constituency in Saskatoon. 

And there are 26 of them; they’re seated in your gallery, Mr. 
Speaker. And they are accompanied by teachers Anita 
Romanoff and Jody Wolos-Knopp, and also chaperones Mrs. 
Schreiner and Mr. Schaw. 
 
And they’re going to be, in addition to observing the 
proceedings here today, they will be having a tour of our 
building, which is their building. And they’ll be having their 
photograph taken with me at 2:30. 
 
And I’ll be happy to . . . I’ll have those photographs available 
for sale to all members of the Assembly. And then I . . . we’re 
going to have, we’re going to have a visit, Mr. Speaker, and 
then we’re going . . . and during our visit . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . well the member . . . during our visit, Mr. 
Speaker . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . no we’re not going to 
the Dairy Queen, but we’re having drinks and we’re having 
Dixie cups, Mr. Speaker. Please welcome the students. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Thomson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have 
guests to invite . . . to introduce today. I’m very happy . . . in the 
west gallery is a group of 29 students from St. Matthew school 
here on Castle Road in Whitmore Park. They are here to tour 
the . . . obviously to witness the proceedings today, to tour the 
gallery. I don’t know if they’re posing for a picture with the 
Minister of Finance, but I will see if he can make himself 
available. And I certainly am looking forward to meeting with 
them later on this afternoon. I’d ask all members to join with 
me in welcoming them. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
would like to introduce a group of people seated in the west 
gallery who do not need drinks or Dixie cups since they’ve just 
had a lunch courtesy of the Minister of Northern Affairs. 
 
We have some very distinguished visitors here from Ottawa, 
Winnipeg, Ile-a-la-Crosse, and just north of Lake Winnipeg, if 
I’m correct. These are gentlemen representing the Freshwater 
Fish Marketing Corporation. 
 
And I would ask that everybody would make welcome Stephen 
Kendall, manager of resources development for Freshwater Fish 
Marketing Corporation; Tom Ritchie, the guy from Ottawa, 
who’s the project officer of Cross Cultural Consulting 
Incorporated. 
 
From Ile-a-la-Crosse, we have Jim Favel, a board member of 
FFMC (Freshwater Fish Marketing Corporation). Also, Andrew 
Bouvier is here, also a board member from FFMC. Jim Bear is 
the Chair, and a very good Chair he is, I might say. And of 
course imported from Newfoundland, doing a pit stop right now 
in Winnipeg and planning to retire in Saskatchewan, and 
probably Saskatoon, is the CEO (chief executive officer) and 
president, Bob Hand. I would like to say to all of the gentlemen, 
Ta wow. 
 
(The hon. member spoke for a time in Cree.) 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1094 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

(13:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I would 
like to introduce to you and through you to the rest of the 
Assembly two guests that are in the west gallery today, my 
daughter, Alaina Wartman, who has just finished her second 
year at university studying political science in Saskatoon; and 
her boyfriend, Drew Hitchcock, who just recently graduated 
from law and will be articling with the Court of Queen’s Bench. 
 
So I’d like all to join with me in welcoming them here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Hamilton: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s a pleasure for 
me to introduce to you and through you two very good people 
seated in your gallery — Tom and Dolores Cameron from 
Cannington constituency. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are very active in their community 
and recently the Minister of Highways and I had a chance to 
visit with them at a spring banquet. I’d also note that Tom and 
Dolores are good friends of good friends of mine and I’d ask all 
members of the Assembly to give them a warm welcome. 
Thank you. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Farm Subsidies 
 

Mr. Forbes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. There’s an old joke 
that involves a blindfolded man with his hands tied behind his 
back, buried up to his neck in sand forced to fight a vicious 
bulldog. When in desperation he opens his mouth and tries to 
bite back, the, quote, referee hits him on the head with a club 
and says, you fight fair, now. Well does this sound familiar, Mr. 
Speaker? 
 
It’s more than a little like the situation Canadian farmers find 
themselves in today. It was announced in the US (United States) 
that farm subsidies, which are already outrageously distorted 
against Canadian producers, have just been increased by as 
much as 70 per cent. As well, it extends subsidies to pulse crops 
which heretofore have not been included. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is not difficult . . . it is difficult not to sputter 
over this. How does one react to a story that says American 
Congress has reached a compromise whereby the maximum 
figure any individual can now collect on the new American 
farm subsidy is $360,000 — $360,000. Some wanted it capped 
at $550,000. This is amazing. 
 
The subsidy differential before was unacceptable and now the 
differential is unconscionable. What are some of the American 
papers saying about this? The Atlanta Journal says in a recent 
editorial: 
 

This is nothing more, nor less than pure pork barrel 
spending . . . the largest corporate welfare program in our 
country . . . 

 

And the Indianapolis Star says: 
 

Instead of helping hard-scrabble farmers, subsidies and 
price supports benefit big grain and cotton farmers. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, this astonishingly unfair announcement has 
been met with a resounding silence in Ottawa, as always too 
typical. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if these are the acts of our friends, we had better 
look for a better class of enemy. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatchewan Party Candidate 
Chosen for Kindersley Constituency 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to tell the 
Assembly about an exciting event that took place last night in 
Kindersley. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party held its nomination meeting and, Mr. 
Speaker, there was a standing-room crowd only at the 
Kindersley Inn. In fact, the media report that over 600 people 
attended the nomination meeting. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there were five excellent candidates that sought 
the Saskatchewan Party nomination, and this contested 
nomination is just but one sign of the growing support for the 
Saskatchewan Party throughout the province. Mr. Speaker, 
more and more prominent citizens are coming forward to let 
their name stand on the next ballot under the Saskatchewan 
Party banner to win the election when the Premier calls it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to report to the Assembly that the 
winning candidate in the constituency of Kindersley was Jason 
Dearborn. Jason was the youngest candidate and his youth will 
certainly bring a new perspective to the Saskatchewan Party 
caucus should he win the by-election. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party caucus fully supports 
Jason and we are confident, very confident, that he will find his 
way into the Saskatchewan legislature very soon. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

International Working Persons’ Day 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, today is 
May 1, the day when we normally get serious about celebrating 
the arrival of spring. But with our current weather we’ll have to 
put that on hold for a couple of days. 
 
Fortunately there’s another better reason to celebrate May 1, or 
May Day as it’s called. This is a special day for working people 
around the world — the International Working Persons’ Day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people are under the impression that May 
Day began as a foreign holiday, a holiday co-opted by that 
soviet empire that the member from Wood River spent his 
productive life opposing. 
 
It’s true that the day is widely observed in Europe, but the fact 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1095 

 

is its origins are right here in North America. In its beginnings 
May Day was a celebration of a workers’ struggle against the 
Pullman rail car company in the 1880s, a struggle that 
ultimately led to the establishment of the eight-hour working 
day — a move I am sure that the member from Redberry Lake 
marks as the beginning of the decline of Western civilization. 
 
On this day, Mr. Speaker, I, and I know all members — well at 
least all members on this side of the House — will want to 
salute the struggles and the accomplishments of working people 
around the world in the never-ending quest for equal rights, fair 
pay, fair play, and social justice. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Soldier Wounded in Afghanistan Returns Home 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, last night 
nearly 400 people jammed into the Cupar town hall to welcome 
home MCpl Curtis Hollister. The walls of the halls were 
covered with banners that the students of our school prepared 
for the special occasion. 
 
During the short program which included welcome home 
greetings from a number of community leaders, Curtis thanked 
everyone for their support and well wishes. He then asked if 
there were any questions. For more than one-half hour Cpl 
Hollister answered questions from young and old ranging from, 
what kind of gun do you carry, to, what do you remember of the 
bomb dropping? 
 
In answer to the latter, Curtis said he remembers seeing a flash 
behind him then literally swimming through the air, which 
seemed to go on forever and eventually landing in a ditch. He 
doesn’t know why he was spared and others near him weren’t, 
but he suspects that his guardian angel today is wearing a lot of 
shrapnel. 
 
Curtis was very happy with all the medical treatment he 
received from the Canadian medics and the American doctors. 
The only complaint he had was the fact that the medics cut off 
all his clothes and he’s going to have to get a new uniform 
before he returns. 
 
MCpl Hollister told the hometown crowd that he was very 
anxious to return to Afghanistan and he said, I’ve got a mission 
to complete and comrades to support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, MCpl Curtis Hollister is a soldier that the 
community of Cupar and all citizens of Saskatchewan can be 
very proud of. Military personnel of his ability and dedication 
should make all Canadians very proud of our armed forces. 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Income Tax Forms 
 

Mr. Yates: — Mr. Speaker, today is the first day of May. The 

day after the day of no return — or in plain speak, Mr. Speaker, 
the day after the deadline for filing our tax returns. 
 
I filed mine and I saw on TV last night that the Minister of 
Finance has already filed his. And, Mr. Speaker, I saw on the 
TV that Saskatchewan taxpayers found it a great deal easier this 
year to file their taxes than in previous years — and for two 
reasons, Mr. Speaker. 
 
First, according to the respected and non-partisan tax expert, 
Wayne Mantyka of CTV News, this year’s tax form is much 
more simple. The Finance minister has removed a number of 
taxes that have been on the books, some for as many as 30 
years. The high-income surtax is gone, the flat tax is gone, the 
debt reduction surtax is gone, and as the movie says, gone with 
the wind, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the main reason filing is easier this year is that the 
Saskatchewan taxpayers are not paying . . . oh not only paying 
fewer taxes, but they are paying less taxes, Mr. Speaker. As 
professor Mantyka pointed out, by this time next year when all 
tax decreases and tax eliminations are complete, taxpayers will 
be paying about $430 million less in income tax than they 
would have if these changes had not been put in place. 
 
That’s two very, very good reasons for a May Day celebration, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Alberta/Saskatchewan Water Agreement 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Under existing 
agreement Saskatchewan is entitled to one-half of the total 
water flowing out of Alberta. Notwithstanding this agreement, 
in the year 2000 only 10 per cent of the Bow River reached its 
confluence with the Oldman to form the South Saskatchewan. 
 
In 2001 none of the Bow River entered the South 
Saskatchewan. The city of Calgary, the eastern irrigation 
district, and the oil fields took up the entire flow. Now there is a 
proposal for three gas-fired generators to supply Calgary. The 
proposals do not include water reclamation so the entire water 
required for coolant will be lost in steam. 
 
The Oldman River presently has one major reservoir. There are 
proposals for a further 14 reservoir sites. If these go ahead the 
Oldman, like the Bow, will simply peter out and never reach the 
South Saskatchewan. This would leave the Red Deer River as 
the sole contributing source of the South Saskatchewan. 
 
We need to be firm. After the finding of the recent North 
Battleford Water Inquiry that the Saskatchewan government 
was negligent and indifferent to its responsibilities, we can only 
hope they do a better job of protecting our interests on this one. 
Otherwise the Alberta premier who once suggested that Ontario 
be left to freeze in the dark, may leave Saskatchewan to choke 
in the dust. 
 

SIAST Graduation, Palliser Campus 
 

Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, on 
Saturday I attended the SIAST (Saskatchewan Institute of 



1096 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

Applied Science and Technology) Palliser Campus graduation 
with nearly 1,000 students and a broad . . . graduating from a 
broad range of trades in the business and technologies, as well 
as basic education. 
 
Mr. Speaker, 93 per cent of SIAST graduates are working 
within six months of graduation and they’re staying and 
working right here in Saskatchewan. In Moose Jaw alone, 
graduates are finding good quality jobs that utilize their talents 
and add to their refinement as young professionals. Employers 
such as Saskferco and the recently built Temple Gardens 
Mineral Spa are just a couple of the places graduates set their 
sights on for employment. 
 
In many of the SIAST programs students begin training in jobs 
prior to graduation. This provides them work experience and 
skills in concert with their education that make them highly 
sought at . . . sought after in our province. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, Palliser Campus was a Canadian pioneer 
in co-op education. Consequently, it’s not uncommon for many 
students to have a job ready and waiting the day that they 
graduate. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m sure that all members of the House wish to 
join me in extending congratulations to the 2002 class of SIAST 
Palliser Campus. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Support for Agriculture 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My question is 
for the Premier. Details contained in the US farm Bill 
announced late last week are now being realized and that they 
will have a huge impact on Saskatchewan agriculture. Today 
the Saskatchewan legislature will debate an emergency motion 
calling for several members of the federal Liberal cabinet to 
visit this province, listen to the concerns of our agriculture 
community, and explain their plans to deal with this issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Saskatchewan Party will second and support 
this motion. But we will also propose an amendment asking that 
federal Finance Minister Paul Martin be added to this list of 
federal cabinet ministers asked to visit this very Assembly. 
After all, Mr. Speaker, he’s the one with the money in Ottawa. 
 
My question: will the Premier and members of the government 
support this amendment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, I’m appreciative of the 
opposition’s willingness to support us in the emergency 
resolution that we have brought to the House today. We have all 
seen the major headlines in our daily papers today. I quote from 
The Leader-Post headline which reads, “Bad news for farmers” 
referring to the trade subsidy Bill of the United States and the 
implications on Saskatchewan and Canadian producers. 
 
In my view, Mr. Speaker, this headline is a bit erroneous. This 

is bad news for Saskatchewan — it’s not just bad news for our 
farm families — this is bad news for Saskatchewan. I’m very 
appreciative of the opposition leader and the opposition caucus 
being willing to support us in this emergency debate. 
 
And to the Leader of the Opposition’s question about the 
friendly amendment to call upon the federal Minister of 
Finance, we absolutely agree. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I thank the 
Premier for that support. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the agriculture industry in Saskatchewan has 
experienced difficulty because of circumstances beyond its 
control such as severe weather and, in particular, international 
subsidies that have driven commodity prices down. But farm 
families in this province have also been hit hard by the fact that 
the NDP tore up the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) 
program 10 years ago and haven’t replaced it as they promised 
they would. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP have also increased property taxes, 
energy costs, and most recently crop insurance premiums. 
Maybe Saskatchewan agriculture would be more resilient in the 
face of the US farm Bill if the NDP hadn’t destroyed or 
weakened . . . 
 
(14:00) 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would just ask 
members to refrain from interrupting the person who is in the 
chair with the loud comments. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I was saying 
maybe then that Saskatchewan agriculture would be more 
resilient in the face of the US farm Bill if the NDP hadn’t 
destroyed or weakened our farm safety net programs and 
increased farm input cost. 
 
Yes, Mr. Speaker, the federal government needs to come to the 
defence of Saskatchewan farm families affected by the US Bill. 
But we ask the Premier, what is the NDP compare . . . prepared 
to contribute in defence of Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I can understand why the 
member from Kindersley moved off this issue so quickly, Mr. 
Speaker, because the member from . . . the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar — sorry, Mr. Speaker — the member from 
Rosetown-Biggar, the Leader of the Opposition, I know why 
he’s moved off the trade injury piece so quickly, Mr. Speaker. 
 
He’s moved off the trade injury, Mr. Speaker, because that 
member is on record, Mr. Speaker, when he served as a 
Member of Parliament for the Reform Party — when he was a 
member from parliament for the Reform Party. And that 
member, Mr. Speaker, is in record saying that he doesn’t 
support, he doesn’t . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1097 

 

Once again would ask the members to refrain from interrupting 
with loud comments. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, that member is on record 
saying that he doesn’t support subsidies to Saskatchewan 
farmers, Mr. Speaker. And what’s happened in this country . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. The refrain from 
loud comments should last at least longer than 5 or 10 seconds. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — The Leader of the Opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, is opposed to subsidies. He’s opposed to providing 
trade injury support, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatchewan producers. 
And I say to the member opposite, you are the only . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. I would ask the 
Minister of Agriculture to continue with his remarks and 
address them through the Chair. 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — I say, Mr. Speaker, that the Leader of the 
Opposition, he is the only individual and his party in Canada 
today, Mr. Speaker, who is saying that the federal government 
shouldn’t be involved in supporting Saskatchewan Canadian 
farmers. He’s the only guy that’s offside, Mr. Speaker. The only 
guy that’s offside. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Minister of 
Agriculture was having a great deal of difficulty stating his 
comments simply because what he was stating was not true and 
the record bears that out. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what the record does indicate is that the NDP’s 
own quarterly polling shows that Saskatchewan people don’t 
believe that their government, the NDP, has done enough for 
the agriculture sector. It’s the second most important issue to 
Saskatchewan people, yet over 70 per cent of the people polled 
— both rural and urban — believe that the NDP had not done 
enough for farm families. 
 
These people were polled in January; that’s before the NDP 
slashed crop insurance coverage, hiked crop insurance 
premiums, and cut the agriculture budget. And now the NDP 
expects Saskatchewan farm families to believe that they are 
concerned about how the US farm Bill will affect them. 
 
The old saying goes — with friends like these, who needs 
enemies? 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the Premier stand in his place and explain 
why he thinks that the federal government will take action — 
which I believe they should — but why would they take action 
when the NDP government of this province has cut its own 
agriculture budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I hear the Leader of the 
Opposition now doing a one eight. Today, today the Leader of 
the Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker, now says that he’s now 
going to be supporting the federal government in their . . . and 
Saskatchewan producers, Saskatchewan farm organizations, and 
Canadian organizations, and the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture for additional money, Mr. Speaker. 

But I want to find out from the Leader of the Opposition, from 
the Saskatchewan Party, I want to find out from him, Mr. 
Speaker, his member, the agriculture critic, that is deputy 
member of agriculture from Watrous said to us in February, 
we’re going to see for Saskatchewan people from our party, is 
what he said, we’re going to see a document on agricultural 
policy for Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. And that was in 
February of this year. 
 
And I want to say to you, Mr. Speaker, that agricultural policy 
that the Saskatchewan Party said that they were going to be 
putting together, I expect right now is with the real leader of the 
Saskatchewan Party — out working in the field at Kindersley, 
Mr. Speaker, is where that . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Increase in School Taxes 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I don’t think . . . the Minister of 
Agriculture’s trying to deflect what his government hasn’t done 
for farmers onto these people. You’ve been in government for 
10 years. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I remind the member to direct 
all her remarks through the Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the 
Minister of Learning. Last night the Saskatoon Public School 
Board unanimously approved a 2.7 per cent increase in 
education taxes for property owners in that city. In spite of that 
tax increase, the board will still be cutting 15 teaching positions 
and 6 administrators from their system. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP cut $5 million of the Saskatoon Public 
School Board’s budget this year, forcing the board to cut 
educational programs and teachers and to increase property 
taxes for people in that city. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the minister and the NDP reduce 
education funding to the point that teachers and programs have 
to be cut right across this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, again the members 
opposite have not got their facts correct. So I’m just going to 
put the facts forward. 
 
In the most recent budget the Department of Learning had an 
increase of 7.2 per cent on its budget, Mr. Speaker. And I want 
to point out with regard to the Saskatoon public board that in 
1999 their provincial grant was a little over $34 million. Today 
it’s over $40 million, Mr. Speaker — an increase of 16 per cent. 
 
And as I’ve said all along in this House and in this Assembly, 
Mr. Speaker, that we cherish the roles of boards of education in 
making decisions for their students and their stakeholders in 
their communities. And they have tough challenges but we have 
increased the funding to that board 16 per cent in the last three 
years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



1098 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

Ms. Draude: — . . . reason why the minister cherishes their 
role is because he . . . they’re taking the blame for what this 
government isn’t doing. They’re having to increase property 
taxes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatoon aren’t the only ones that 
are . . . be hit with an . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Please allow the 
question to be put. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, the people of Saskatoon aren’t 
the only ones that are going to be hit with an education tax 
increase this year. Both the public and the Catholic school 
boards in Regina have announced their budgets will hold a 1 per 
cent tax increase for property owners. And yet they’re going to 
be forced to cut 23 teachers from their public system. 
 
In the 2002 budget the NDP cut $12 million out of the operating 
grant of education budgets. And now school boards — not just 
in Saskatoon and Regina but right across Saskatchewan — are 
having to raise taxes, they’re having to cut programs, and 
they’re having to lay off teachers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP compromising education in 
Saskatchewan by downloading the cost of education onto 
property taxpayers and forcing school boards to cut programs? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, Mr. Speaker, this 
argument about off-loading to the property tax base is incorrect. 
When we have . . . When we put out . . . put forward our 
operating grant budget in 1999, there was $397 million going 
into our operating grant. Today it’s close to 480 million. We’ve 
had an $80 million increase in just three years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — And those members opposite have 
the gall to get on their feet and talk about off-loading. 
 
Well I’ll tell you where the off-loading would have come from, 
Mr. Speaker, right from here — the Saskatchewan Party’s 
platform that promised to freeze spending on education. This 
platform should have said — should have said — the frozen . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. While it’s quite appropriate in 
the Assembly to refer to articles, it is not appropriate to use the 
articles as an exhibit. I would like to bring that to the minister’s 
attention. 
 
Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, now we have the minister trying 
to deflect the blame to somebody else. It’s this government 
that’s doing the cutbacks; it’s nobody on this side of the House. 
It’s their decision and their priority. 
 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Speaker, I think we should outline what 
this province is facing. We have thousands of people leaving 
the province because after NDP government for 10 years we 
have people leaving the province. That means we have 
declining enrolments and a shrinking tax base. That in turn 
leads to education tax increases for property owners and job 
losses for teachers. It means program cuts and it means a larger 
student-to-teacher ratio in the province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the provincial economy is suffering because of 
this NDP, and now the education system is suffering because of 
the NDP. It’s all a result of this NDP’s failure to grow 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP not taking action to stop the loss 
of teachers, to stop the loss of programs, and to stop students 
from leaving this province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Speaker, when we talk about our 
support for the K to 12 education system in this province, it has 
been impressive. We’ve had over $80 million. We’ve seen our 
pre-kindergarten spaces increase by 80 per cent. We’ve more 
than doubled our community schools, Mr. Speaker. And we 
have provided increased dollars to boards of education where 
they have had enrolment increases. 
 
And I must say that even though we’ve had a 16 per cent 
increase for Saskatoon public in the last three years, Mr. 
Speaker, they have seen an enrolment decline of 600 last year 
and 209 this year. 
 
But guess what? We are seeing enrolment increases in our band 
schools. We are seeing enrolment increases in our independent 
schools. 
 
And when you look at the number of children in our K to 12 
system, we have just as many children in the system today as 
we had 10 years ago, Mr. Speaker. And they are staying in this 
province. And we are very happy to support education in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

SaskTel Investments 
 

Mr. Wall: — Thank you. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
question is for the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has now invested $20 million in a 
dot-com called Retx.com based in Atlanta, Georgia. It appears, 
Mr. Speaker, that SaskTel’s share of Retx’s losses is about $5.7 
million last year. We don’t know for sure, Mr. Speaker, because 
the government refuses to table a statement in this legislature 
and report to the taxpayers on this particular investment. 
 
It would appear then, Mr. Speaker, that the current losses bring 
the total losses over two years that taxpayers have incurred — 
thanks to the NDP — to $7 million. 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1099 

 

So the question to the minister is this, Mr. Speaker. Why has he 
still not tabled or released any statement reporting to the 
taxpayers about this investment? And while he’s on his feet, 
Mr. Speaker, would he tell the taxpayers why the NDP lost $7 
million to date on a dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I 
think when we issued the order in council around the 
investment in Retx, we made it fairly clear that in the start-up 
years, it would not be unexpected for that investment to lose 
money. As in many, many private sector companies, Mr. 
Speaker, there are start-up costs. And in the first year or two, 
it’s very common that you would lose money. It’s very clear, 
Mr. Speaker, though that SaskTel has a record that is 
impressive. 
 
And I want to refer, Mr. Speaker, to The Globe and Mail April 
11, 2002 of this year, Mr. Speaker, that says: 
 

Canada’s 100 largest pension funds lost money last year for 
the first time in 22 years . . . 

 
In the private sector, Mr. Speaker, Canada’s 100 top pension 
funds lost money in 2001. You compare that to what our 
Crowns did in 2001, Mr. Speaker; they had a tough year, but 
with SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, they had an impressive year. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, the only reason that 
SaskTel can claim any success at all is attributable to its core 
function, Mr. Speaker. What we’re going to show today is 
where they get into . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
(14:15) 
 
Mr. Wall: — Where they get into trouble, Mr. Speaker, is when 
they get into these out-of-province investments like dot-coms in 
Atlanta, Georgia, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Retx wasn’t the only US-based dot-com that the 
NDP lost money on last year. They also spent $3.8 million on a 
company called tappedinto.com based in Nashville, Tennessee. 
SaskTel lost nearly a million dollars on this investment last 
year, according to the information we can glean from the annual 
report. 
 
Would the minister please stand in his place and explain the 
reasons for this loss? Would he report to the taxpayers why he 
lost a million of their dollars on a dot-com in Nashville, 
Tennessee? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very clear 
that this member’s attack on our Crown corporations has one 
objective and one objective only — that is to so discredit the 
Crowns so that if they ever became government, Mr. Speaker, if 
they ever became government, it puts them in a position to be 
able to sell our Crowns, Mr. Speaker. That’s exactly his 
position. 

I have one question for that member who goes around the 
province, Mr. Speaker, talking about if he became government, 
if that party became government, that they would restrict our 
Crowns to core operations. My question is: tell this House and 
tell the people of Saskatchewan what those core operations are? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, should that member, should that 
minister and that member, squeak out an election victory in the 
next election, he will have ample . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — He’ll have ample opportunity to ask all the 
questions he wants from this side of the House, Mr. Speaker, 
because that’s where he’s going to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP, the NDP has lost . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP has also lost 
millions of dollars in a company called Craig Wireless 
International which operates in BC (British Columbia) and 
Manitoba. Again, according to what information you can glean 
from the annual statement of SaskTel, the NDP has now spent 
$10 million taxpayers’ dollars on the company and they have 
racked up losses of nearly $6 million. That’s 60 per cent of the 
original investment. 
 
We’ll give the minister a chance to stand on his feet today, Mr. 
Speaker, and explain to the taxpayers of the province of 
Saskatchewan about the 6 million of their dollars that he lost on 
Craig Wireless International. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Talk about a question, Mr. Speaker, that 
is right off the wall. Mr. Speaker, I want to quote from The 
Leader-Post, Mr. Speaker, from an article of April 26. And I 
know Murray Mandryk when he quotes me, quotes me very 
accurately, so I’ll try and quote him accurately, Mr. Speaker. In 
reference to SaskTel, Mr. Speaker, he says: 
 

So why does the Saskatchewan Party want to mess with it 
(referring to SaskTel)? Why would a Saskatchewan Party 
government take a Crown that appears to know what it’s 
doing and restrict its ability to do what it does best by 
forbidding CIC from making any non-core investments 
(Mr. Speaker, such as Retx, Mr. Speaker)? Coming from 
the party that purports to speak from the perspective of the 
business community, isn’t this a bit strange? 

 
I couldn’t have said it better myself, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, we’ll have a chance to ask that 
revered columnist his opinion later on after question period. 
Right now, we’d like the minister to answer some questions 
frankly for the taxpayers of the province. 
 



1100 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, the NDP has lost over 7 million taxpayer dollars 
on its dot-com in Atlanta. They lost nearly a million on their 
dot-com in Nashville. They lost 6 million on Craig Wireless 
International. They lost $2.5 million on Navigata. That’s a BC 
telco they bought last year with taxpayers’ money. 
 
And the value of their shares on the Australian stock market in 
their Australian stock market play have dropped by $40 million. 
In fact it looks like all of SaskTel’s out-of-province investments 
lost money last year. 
 
Can the minister explain how these investments grow the 
province of Saskatchewan? Will he explain to the House, Mr. 
Speaker, how they help SaskTel provide services in the 
province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well I 
absolutely will explain it. I’ve explained it many, many times. 
 
I want to say first of all though again — I hope the people of 
Saskatchewan are listening carefully — when that member 
chooses to avoid the question that I ask about him defining for 
us what are the core functions of those Crowns, Mr. Speaker, 
especially SaskTel . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Mr. Speaker, if he doesn’t want to 
answer that question in this Assembly, I ask him and I plead 
with him to please answer the question outside of the Assembly 
for the people of Saskatchewan because those are the people 
that really want to know the answer to that question. What 
functions of our Crowns does that member intend to sell off, 
Mr. Speaker? What would he sell off, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Mr. Speaker, the answer to the question is very simple. We 
invest inside of the province. Roughly 85 per cent of the 
investments that we make are made here in Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. The other 15 per cent of the investments are made 
around Canada and outside of Canada, Mr. Speaker. We make 
those investments to return revenues to the province to provide 
services in the constituencies that they represent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Mr. Speaker, the minister continues to claim that 
these investments generate money for SaskTel. Will it give the 
minister the chance to table to this legislature or release to the 
public an assessment over the last five years or the last ten years 
if this is true. 
 
I bet we will find, Mr. Speaker, that there’s one particular deal 
that allows them to even come close to making that kind of a 
claim, and all these other ones have lost the taxpayers money. 
All these other ones have cost SaskTel the resources they need 
to bring telephony to the province of Saskatchewan, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in the last two years, Retx in Atlanta, Georgia; 
tappedinto in Nashville Tennessee; Craig Wireless 

International, and Navigata Holdings have all been the 
investment targets of this particular government of the NDP. 
They’ve invested 48 million in these four companies in the last 
two years. And between the four of them, they’ve racked up 
losses of nearly 17 million taxpayer dollars — 48 million 
taxpayer dollars gambled, 17 million lost. 
 
Will the minister tell the Assembly how that grows the province 
of Saskatchewan and how it allows SaskTel to provide service 
in the province of Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Sonntag: — Well, Mr. Speaker, this just does not 
make any sense at all. I don’t know where that . . . I don’t know 
where that comes from, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, I say to that member, when I gave 
that member a cigar the other day to smoke, I didn’t mean for 
him to smoke the whole darn thing all at once, with the logic of 
that question, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when that member, when that member was asked 
the other day when we tabled the annual Crown reports . . . 
when we tabled the annual Crown reports the other day, Mr. 
Speaker, he chose to list off some of the investments that were 
losing money in the first year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But when pressed as an example — as an example, Mr. Speaker 
— when pressed, he forgot to include the $51 million profit that 
the NewGrade investment made, Mr. Speaker. The profit that it 
made, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I quote, Mr. Speaker, and here’s what . . . and when he was 
pressed, Mr. Speaker, here’s what he said, and I quote. He said: 
 

Oh (he says) if it’s not on the list, then I guess it should be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you can’t have it both ways. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 39 — The Prescription Drugs 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I move that Bill No. 39, The 
Prescription Drugs Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced 
and read for the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

PRIORITY OF DEBATE 
 

Impact of Proposed US Farm Bill on Canadian Farmers 
 
The Speaker: — Before orders of the day, members of the 
Assembly, I have received a request from the Minister of 
Agriculture pursuant to rule 19, a request for priority of debate. 
And before I rule on this request, I would invite the minister to 
state briefly the nature of his request. 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1101 

 

Hon. Mr. Serby: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. We 
make the request, Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House along 
with members from the official opposition and because, as you 
can appreciate, just recently there has been a decision made 
around the new US farm subsidy Bill. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, this new farm subsidy Bill will bring to 
Saskatchewan producers and Canadian producers, in our view, 
a great deal of hardship as they attempt to compete in the world 
marketplace with commodities of which today we’re trading 
internationally. 
 
And the kind of hardship that we’re talking about this afternoon 
. . . we’d like to talk about this afternoon, Mr. Speaker, is to 
identify two things. One is that the role that needs to be taken 
on the part of the federal government to assist us in dealing 
immediately with the issues as they relate to the new farm Bill. 
And secondly, to state unequivocally the process of which we’d 
like to use to engage the federal government in the process. 
 
The Speaker: — I thank the minister for that clarification. 
 
Members of the Assembly, this morning the Minister of 
Agriculture, Food and Rural Revitalization provided notice for 
priority of debate to the Office of the Clerk, as is required under 
rule 19(2). The notice was distributed pursuant to the provisions 
of the rules. 
 
Having reviewed the case made by the minister, I’m now 
prepared to rule on the matter. 
 
The object of the priority of the debate request is expressed by 
the minister’s proposed motion, which is to call various federal 
ministers to appear before the Assembly by May 24, the year 
2002, to hear and respond to concerns of Saskatchewan 
producers. 
 
Under rule 19, it is the Speaker’s responsibility to determine 
whether the matter should receive urgent consideration. The 
question is whether the matter is sufficiently urgent for the 
Assembly to set aside all other business to discuss this matter 
presently. Rule 19(5) states in part that the Speaker should pay: 
 

. . . regard to the probability of the matter being brought 
before the House within reasonable time by other means. 

 
As a minister of the Crown, the Minister of Agriculture, Food 
and Rural Revitalization does have opportunity to have this 
motion come before the Assembly within two sittings after 
providing notice. If notice was given today as a government 
motion, it would appear on the order paper this Friday, May 3 
ahead of government orders. 
 
As I have stated, under rule 19(5) the Speaker is obliged to pay 
regard to an opportunity to bring the matter before the 
Assembly in a reasonable period of time by other means. 
Although this request does meet the requirement of being a 
matter of urgent public importance, the ability of the minister to 
bring this motion before the Assembly within the next two days 
is an overriding factor. 
 
Therefore given that there is an alternative means for this matter 
to be raised by the minister in a reasonable time, it is the 

Speaker’s decision not to grant the request for priority of debate 
under rule 19. 
 
Why is the member on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, by leave of the Assembly, 
I’d like to move a motion of urgent and pressing necessity 
under rule 46. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Impact of Proposed US Farm Bill on Canadian Farmers 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Well thank you very much, Mr. Speaker, 
and I very much appreciate the opportunity this afternoon to 
outline the rationale and the work that’s been undertaken over 
the last number of years in addressing a very important issue to 
Saskatchewan producers in this province, Mr. Speaker, and for 
that matter Canadian producers. 
 
There is no doubt, Mr. Speaker, that the US farm Bill will have 
a very severe negative impact on Canadian producers, and if 
signed into law by the US President, the farm Bill . . . And I’d 
like to outline, Mr. Speaker, three or four issues that in fact 
would be the result of the signature of this kind of a Bill. 
 
First of all, Mr. Speaker, it would promote overproduction of 
US grains, oilseeds, and pulses, and further depressing the 
world markets in these areas and having a significant 
detrimental impact on the incomes of Canadian producers, and 
more importantly, Mr. Speaker — or as important — our 
Saskatchewan producers right here at home. 
 
Secondly, Mr. Speaker, this Bill would further distort the 
artificial low US feed prices that will hurt the competitive 
advantages of our livestock sector and other value-added 
industries. 
 
(14:30) 
 
And thirdly, that the country of origin labelling provisions will 
distort the trade of livestock across Canada and US border and 
negatively impact on the trade of . . . in livestock and livestock 
products. And fourthly, Mr. Speaker, that the . . . this Bill would 
also damage any credibility the US had in terms of pursuing 
trade liberalization objectives through the next round of WTO 
(World Trade Organization) negotiations and would severely 
impact the ability of the WTO negotiators to make the real 
progress through the . . . (inaudible) . . . around of negotiations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on this side of the House for the past two years 
since I’ve had the opportunity to serve in the capacity as the 
Minister of Agriculture, we have attempted on several fronts to 
take this issue to Ottawa, to other parts of the world through our 
tri-national negotiations to try and bring some semblance and 
reason and rationale to both our federal government and to our 
US counterparts and our friends in terms of the impact that this 
particular piece of legislation . . . or this has, that the trade 
distortions have, on our Canadian Saskatchewan farmers in 
particular. 
 



1102 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, I want to go through a short sort of preview of the 
kinds of things that we’ve been working on since the year 1999, 
where we started out with the Fredericton agreement of the 
60/40 share and said to the federal government that the 60/40 
share is simply not fair for Saskatchewan producers given that 
we compete internationally in a free trade marketplace and 
accordingly, our farmers are disadvantaged because they are 
competing in a marketplace today where US and European 
farmers get a cheque in the mail, where our Saskatchewan 
farmers by and large depend on the marketplace to support 
them. 
 
And so we made a number of representations since the year 
2000 and 1999 to today, Mr. Speaker, to try and encourage the 
federal government to understand the kind of position we were 
in. 
 
And I say first, Mr. Speaker, in the spring of 2000 in this 
Assembly, we held an emergency debate where we called farm 
organizations and farm groups and farm leaders to this room 
and had a — to this Assembly — and had a detailed debate 
about how important it was for our national government to 
understand the kinds of pressures that our Saskatchewan 
farmers are facing and said to them in Ottawa that we need to 
have some sort of trade subsidization mitigation. 
 
And we travelled to Ottawa, Mr. Speaker — this Assembly . . . 
members from this Assembly, from the opposition party, from 
the government, farm leaders, and farm organizations. And we 
made a case with the federal government in the year 2000 and 
highlighted for them the importance of making this change. 
 
However, Mr. Speaker, what we got from that kind of debate 
and discussion were two things. One is that when we returned 
back to Saskatchewan and to each of our individual provinces, 
the federal government said to us, we’re going to only provide 
funding to the safety nets that are in place today — for CFIP 
(Canadian Farm Income Program) and for crop insurance and 
for NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account) — and that there 
would be no money available, Mr. Speaker, for any sort of trade 
distortion or injury for Saskatchewan producers. 
 
Of course then, Mr. Speaker, we took our plight to a variety of 
different other venues. In July of 2000 we took our plight to 
Saskatoon where we had the Mexicans and the Americans in 
our country at the Tri-National Accord. And there we spoke, 
Mr. Speaker, about the importance here of getting the trade 
subsidies out of the way. 
 
And then in September of 2000, Mr. Speaker, we attended a 
convention and a conference in South Dakota of which we met 
with South Dakota and US farmers and farm organizations and 
leaders of which, Mr. Speaker, attended at that meeting was the 
Right Hon. Mr. Ralph Goodale who at that time was in charge 
of the Saskatchewan . . . the Canadian Wheat Board. And also 
at that meeting was Mr. Vanclief who represented Canada on 
the agricultural file. 
 
And I remember vividly, Mr. Speaker, how Mr. Vanclief and 
also Mr. Goodale stood up in the debate in South Dakota and 
said to the American farmers and to the elected members of the 
US states in the north and in the central part of the country. And 
he said very passionately about how important it was for the 

national government in the US to begin to reduce the subsidies 
because they were having a tremendous impact and providing 
. . . and tremendous hardship on Saskatchewan producers and 
Canadian producers was what both Mr. Vanclief and Mr. 
Goodale expounded in the meetings in South Dakota in 
September of the year 2000. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, we went on to a number of other events 
from 2000 onwards. And I won’t list . . . go through them 
individually in any detail, but to say to you that in the spring of 
2001 at the Ag ministers’ meeting in Quebec City, this ministry 
and our department and our government made a representation 
to see that we have trade distorting subsidies included in our 
discussions for farm safety net money for the future. 
 
In the spring of 2000, Mr. Speaker, we had asked at the WTO 
update, Mr. Speaker, we asked that the federal government 
include in their discussions at the WTO table a reduction in the 
amount of subsidies that are being provided to American and 
European farmers in order that our Canadian and Saskatchewan 
producers would be able to compete fairly. 
 
And then, Mr. Speaker, in the spring of 2001, we went to 
Washington. Canadian representation of western ministers and 
the federal government attended with us and we made a 
presentation to the federal government . . . or to the national 
government in Washington indicating to them the importance of 
not proceeding down this path. Face to face with American 
leaders, American farm groups, saying to them the kinds of 
hardships, Mr. Speaker, that this would bring about for us. 
 
And then of course in June of 2001, Mr. Speaker, we went to 
the Standing Committee on Agriculture in Ottawa. This 
minister and our department folks and the member from 
Kindersley at that time, we travelled to Ottawa and we made a 
presentation to the standing committee in Ottawa at that time. 
 
And some of the key highlights, Mr. Speaker, of that discussion 
to the standing committee were the argument that we made 
regarding the subsidies. And I quote, Mr. Speaker, what we said 
at that meeting. We said, under the heading of “What Do 
Saskatchewan Farmers Want?”, Mr. Speaker. We said: 
 

(The) Saskatchewan farmers want an opportunity to 
compete in (a) world . . . (market) based on a level playing 
field and fair . . . rules. In this type of . . . environment, 
current safety net and disaster programs will be more 
effective for grain and oilseed producers (Mr. Speaker). 

 
And then we said: 
 

. . . in the meantime, Saskatchewan farmers want . . . (the) 
commitment that (the) government will help . . . (to) 
compete against the treasuries of the US and the EU. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, at that meeting, at the Standing Committee 
on Agriculture, which was on June of 2001, the member from 
Kindersley and the opposition party supported us in that 
representation, Mr. Speaker, and said that we needed to see the 
subsidies removed and that we needed some sort of mitigation, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then of course, we met later that day with the standing 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1103 

 

committee, Mr. Speller, the Standing Committee on 
Agriculture, which is the Prime Minister’s standing committee. 
And we made a presentation to them at that time highlighting 
the importance of removing the subsidies. 
 
And then we went on, Mr. Speaker, in June of this past year or 
the June of 2001, where we met in Whitehorse at which we put 
together the agricultural policy framework for Canada, where 
we talked about at that meeting, Mr. Speaker, the importance of 
the five different pillars that we’re going to have for use for 
Canadian policy in agriculture. 
 
And what we said at that time, Mr. Speaker, is that if in fact 
we’re to move towards having a new Canadian agricultural 
policy what will be required here is will be required some 
additional money to mitigate or to offset the trade injury for the 
US subsidies that are being provided today. And that’s been our 
position all along, Mr. Speaker, that we should see in this 
country, in this province, some mitigation to the fact that we 
have a US subsidy today in place. 
 
Then, Mr. Speaker, in October of 2001, our Premier met with 
the premiers across Canada in the first ministers’ meeting. And 
he provided at that time, Mr. Speaker — and I know that this 
Assembly has had an opportunity to see the report — but the 
report to the premiers and it’s called A Fair Deal for Canadian 
Farmers, Mr. Speaker, which was submitted in October of 
2001. 
 
And this document, Mr. Speaker, speaks to the notion and to the 
effects of what subsidies are doing in the European and the US 
marketplace and the kinds of impact that these subsidies are 
having for our Saskatchewan and our Canadian farmers. And 
we put that document forward, Mr. Speaker, in October of 
2001, and have requested that the federal government respond 
in a fashion that would provide into the future mitigation or 
some injury relief for our Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And then, of course, what happened, Mr. Speaker, right after 
our Premier submitted the report, we had a federal budget in the 
fall of 2001. And as we all know, Mr. Speaker, in that federal 
budget, there was absolutely not one additional penny for 
Saskatchewan or Canadian farmers. They froze the funding, Mr. 
Speaker, at the rates of 2001, saying to us that there’s going to 
be no new funding for Canadian/Saskatchewan farmers until 
some time in 2003. 
 
And then, of course, in 2002, Mr. Speaker, we met again in 
Toronto, very specifically on the call of the Saskatchewan 
minister, to talk about the impact of trade injury. And we spent 
an entire day with the federal ministers and ministers across 
Canada, talking about the impact of trade injury as it relates to 
our Saskatchewan producers. 
 
And then, of course, Mr. Speaker, this year we submitted our 
report or our document to the federal government, our position 
paper on the future of Saskatchewan agriculture, Mr. Speaker. 
And in our document we speak very clearly about having a crop 
sector individual program. And the crop sector program 
identifying itself to mitigation on subsidies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now to date, we’ve heard from the federal minister — I know 
that the Minister of Finance has just recently returned from his 

discussions in Ottawa . . . or Fredericton — and the response 
from the federal government, Mr. Speaker, is that there will be, 
at this point in time, no additional money to offset the kinds of 
difficulties that Saskatchewan and Canadian producers are 
facing. 
 
And we have today Canadian organizations, farm organizations, 
we have farm leaders, we have all of the governments in 
Canada of agricultural ministers calling on the federal 
government unanimously. We have the Canadian Federation of 
Agriculture that’s just released its report in context with the 
Canadian Wheat Growers Association saying that for Canada 
we should have a $1.3 billion injury relief because of the 
subsidies that are occurring in the United States. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our paper of this spring, in February of this spring, 
the Saskatchewan provincial government’s paper on what the 
future of agriculture and the risk management package should 
look like called for a billion dollars of mitigation for Canada. 
 
In that scenario, Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan producers 
would receive somewhere in the neighbourhood on the current 
formula 500 to $600 million if that package was to address 
itself specifically based on the size of the industry. Based on the 
size of the industry Saskatchewan producers, Mr. Speaker, 
would receive somewhere in the neighbourhood of 500 to $600 
million of the package if we were to get the $1.3 billion. 
 
Today our net farm incomes in Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker, 
because of the marketplace of which we compete in, is about 
500 to $510 million is what our projected incomes will be for 
this year. 
 
If we were to receive the trade subsidy mitigation, Mr. Speaker, 
if we were to receive the trade injury, our net farm incomes 
today would go to somewhere about a billion dollars annually. 
And that’s what our Saskatchewan farmers deserve. That’s what 
our Saskatchewan farmers are working for, Mr. Speaker, to 
receive the same kinds of fair deal as our US farmers and 
European farmers are receiving. 
 
And who, Mr. Speaker, should be responsible for that? The 
responsibility on negotiating the trade rules in Canada today are 
done by our federal government. And I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker — and on the record again today as I’ve been on many 
occasions on this front — that there is only one government 
that’s responsible for trade injury. There’s only one government 
that’s responsible to ensure that there should be subsidy relief 
for our Canadian farmers, and that needs to be the national 
Government of Canada in the same way that it’s the national 
Government of the US and the same way that it’s the national 
governments of the European countries, Mr. Speaker. That’s 
who should be responsible today for providing our farmers with 
some answers. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, when I take a look at the 
federal government’s position in terms of what they’ve been 
saying over the last six years or seven years, every time that 
they go to the World Trade discussions or they go to the 
NAFTA (North American Free Trade Agreement) discussions; 
they say to us, you just hang on, you Western Canadian 



1104 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

producers, you just hang on. What we’re going to do is we’re 
going to see the reduction of the European and the American 
subsidies is what they continue to tell us. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we have . . . and we’ve just been hanging on 
on some fronts; we’ve just been hanging on. But more than that 
in this province, we’ve diversified our grain and grain sector 
and our pulse sector in a fashion which is unprecedented in 
North America. 
 
Today in this province, Mr. Speaker, our Saskatchewan farmers 
are growing somewhere in the neighbourhood of 55 to 60 
different crops. When if you look back to what happened in the 
past 15 or 20 years, you would . . . have a hard . . . you’d be 
hard-pressed to find half of those crops that would be produced 
in this province. Diversification in this province, Mr. Speaker, 
has happened in spades by our producers competing against an 
international marketplace which is subsidized, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So today when we measure what’s happened in the 
marketplace, what’s happened with the subsidies by 
comparison, Mr. Speaker, I want to just share — and for the 
record — what’s happened in the wheat, in the barley, and in 
the oilseed side, Mr. Speaker. 
 
(14:45) 
 
If you take a look at what the numbers were in the EU 
(European Union) in 1986, from 1986 to 1988, the percentage 
of subsidy on wheat, Mr. Speaker, was 52 per cent. The 
percentage in the EU countries in the year 2000 dropped to 43 
per cent, down 17 per cent. 
 
In the US, Mr. Speaker, over that same period of time, the 
subsidies were at 49 per cent in 1986, 1988. And the subsidies 
in the year 2000, Mr. Speaker, are 49 per cent. Exactly what 
they were in 1986. Haven’t moved one iota on the wheat crop. 
And similarly, that comparison goes to barley. 
 
When you look at what happened to Canada, Mr. Speaker, in 
that same period, 1986 to 1988, the Canadian subsidies were at 
45 per cent on wheat. Today, Mr. Speaker, or in the year 2000, 
those subsidies were down to 17 per cent, Mr. Speaker, is 
what’s happened. 
 
Our federal government has encouraged the farmers of Canada 
to take their subsidy levels, remove the subsidy level, and 
compete in an international marketplace today where we’re 
down by 62 per cent, Mr. Speaker. And that’s the problem with 
this particular issue across Canada today and for our 
Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And then what we have, Mr. Speaker, today is a brand new 
farm Bill. A brand new farm Bill that doesn’t remove the 
subsidies of which . . . in a way we see them today. And there is 
no intent here, Mr. Speaker, on the part of our US friends to 
reduce the subsidies. In fact they’ve taken our subsidies, Mr. 
Speaker, and they’ve grown them, based on the information that 
we have today. And what will that do, Mr. Speaker, when we 
look at what’s happening in our farm economy? 
 
Just a couple of days ago, I had a conversation with a farmer 
from Biggar who hauls some of his barley to the feedlots in 

Alberta. And he says to me that as he arrived at the feedlot in 
Alberta which . . . where he’s been hauling his feed now for 
several years, he gets to the feedlot and what does he find? 
Three trucks lined up ahead of him. And on every one of those 
trucks, Mr. Speaker, is a US licence plate hauling up subsidized 
American corn. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, that this is what our Saskatchewan and 
Canadian farmers are competing against. They’re competing 
against a commodity, Mr. Speaker, today that’s subsidized in 
the US, that’s making its way up through the borders into 
Canada, into the . . . into Alberta, now into some of our feedlots 
in Saskatchewan. 
 
So we have subsidized corn and subsidized commodity coming 
up to our country today when we’re trying, Mr. Speaker, at the 
same time to build a new industry in agriculture, in livestock, in 
ethanol, Mr. Speaker. And if in fact, Mr. Speaker, we don’t see 
a change in this particular focus of our national government, 
Saskatchewan and Canadian farmers are going to be hugely, 
hugely disadvantaged, and we’ll see in this province that 
diversification that we’ve been working hard to achieve eroded 
in a hurry, Mr. Speaker. Eroded to the point where some of our 
Saskatchewan producers, Mr. Speaker, will need to abandon 
some of the hard work that they’ve done — will need to 
abandon that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I say to, I say to you, Mr. Speaker, that this debate today in 
this Legislature and the message that we need to send our 
national government . . . And I very much appreciate, Mr. 
Speaker, the motion and the support that we’ve had from our 
opposition here, Mr. Speaker. Because as we’ve debated and 
discussed this issue over time, there has been reference and 
inference here, Mr. Speaker, about the strength and wisdom and 
the acceptance of our opposition party to participate in this 
issue. 
 
Because, Mr. Speaker, from time to time — not today, Mr. 
Speaker — from time to time, Mr. Speaker, we’ve heard in the 
past, we’ve heard in the past, Mr. Speaker, that subsidies in 
Saskatchewan and subsidies to farmers are detrimental to the 
direction that we want to go. And I’ve heard that from time to 
time. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I support that concept. I support that 
concept, Mr. Speaker, that subsidization of an industry, 
subsidization of an industry, Mr. Speaker, creates hardship on 
some fronts. And absolutely this holds true in Saskatchewan 
today in a fashion of which we’ve never seen it before. And so 
when I see today — and appreciate very much today, Mr. 
Speaker — the members opposite saying that we need to be part 
of this debate, we need to be part of this discussion, we need to 
set aside some of the partisan issues of which we’ve held in the 
past on this issue. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, and I have the document here that 
speaks and addresses today to the position that’s been taken, 
Mr. Speaker, by the Canadian Alliance Party. And this is an 
important discussion, Mr. Speaker, because the Canadian 
Alliance in Canada has said on many occasions that they don’t 
support subsidies in this country, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And today we have the Canadian Alliance on record saying this, 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1105 

 

Mr. Speaker. And this is important because, Mr. Speaker, this is 
important not only to this Assembly and to the people of 
Saskatchewan, but also it’s important for our opposition, Mr. 
Speaker, because they need to stand beside agricultural 
producers, they need to stand beside farmers, they need to stand 
beside government today in a full-fledged fashion. 
 
Because I’ve been part of an exercise in the past, Mr. Speaker, 
where in fact we’ve gone to Ottawa, we’ve had the debate, 
we’ve encouraged that Ottawa be on side and provide additional 
support for Saskatchewan farmers. And we weren’t home for 
five minutes, Mr. Speaker, we weren’t home for five minutes 
where we had members at those times — and maybe this is a 
different day, Mr. Speaker, maybe this is a different day, and I 
hope it is — but we weren’t back in Saskatchewan for 10 
minutes after our trek to Ottawa with the farm organizations 
and the leaders of the past, Mr. Speaker, and the opposition and 
they were on the front page of the newspapers, they were on the 
television sets, saying that we don’t support this process. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, there is only one government today 
that’s responsible for trade mitigation, and that government, Mr. 
Speaker, is at the national level. 
 
And I appreciate the comments of the Canadian Alliance today 
where they say that in the year 2000, or the last election in the 
year 2000, they lost the election, Mr. Speaker, because they 
didn’t support the subsidy structure which Canadian farmers 
were talking about. And their policy statement says today, led 
by Mr. Hilstrom, and I quote, he said: 
 

Hilstrom pleads that the approved policy to support and use 
the safety-net programs to assist producers to struggle 
against the conditions outside of province, subsidies, be 
now included (Mr. Speaker). 

 
So now we have the members from the Canadian Alliance, of 
which I know, Mr. Speaker, we have affinity on the other side 
of the House. And I make that point from that only perspective, 
Mr. Speaker, that we have affinity here. 
 
And we need to make sure that as we proceed with the motion 
and we make our debates, and as we proceed to make our 
inclusion to have the national government involved in providing 
the mitigation, that we stand united on this piece, Mr. Speaker 
— that we stand united. 
 
And I know that the members opposite will get up today and 
they’ll speak in their places about how in fact they think that the 
Saskatchewan government should be a partner in providing 
some of the money to this. I know that I’ll hear from that . . . 
that from them. 
 
There should be no mistake, Mr. Speaker, that on this side of 
the House, the Saskatchewan government today provides to the 
farm economy 5 per cent of our budget to the agricultural file 
— 5 per cent, Mr. Speaker. 
 
When you take a look at what’s happening at the national level 
today, the national government provides to agricultural 
producers 1 per cent of its entire budget — 1 per cent, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 

And when you take a look, Mr. Speaker, of what needs to 
happen in Saskatchewan . . . We need to grow our agricultural 
economy on many fronts, which we’ve identified. We need to 
grow the ethanol file; we need to grow the livestock file. We 
need to continue to grow, Mr. Speaker, the pulse industry in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
But all of those things, Mr. Speaker, will be under tremendous 
hardship, and in some cases the advantage that the pulse 
industry has in our province today will disappear with the blink 
of an eye, with the blink of an eye, the minute that that 
document is signed, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And that pulse industry that we’ve been growing, the new 
processors that we’re in the midst today of developing just 
outside the edge of Regina here where you have a new Turkish 
company who are here who are going to split, Mr. Speaker, our 
peas, going to split our lentils, are going to ship it worldwide. 
 
And this farm Bill, Mr. Speaker, if it passes or when it passes, 
and that kind of money makes its way into the subsidy regime, 
our pulse and lentil advantage that we have today in Canada, 
where we produce 97 per cent of the pulse and lentil in this 
country, will disappear. 
 
And so I say, Mr. Speaker, to this Assembly, to this House, that 
we need to stand united. We need to call on our federal friends 
to advise for us and tell us, tell us fully, what they’re prepared 
to do here, Mr. Speaker, to assist us. 
 
Are they prepared to get engaged in the subsidies of which 
we’re talking about? Are they prepared to provide the trade 
mitigation today that everybody in Canada is calling for? And 
even the endorsement of our opposition party in Saskatchewan 
today says they’re part of that, Mr. Speaker. So now we have 
nobody in Canada who’s not supporting the importance of 
getting this in place, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So I want to conclude my comments, Mr. Speaker, on this 
notion. We’ve called on several occasions for the past two years 
for the national government to engage themselves; we’ve called 
on the national government to move forward and to provide the 
trade injury support that we need. 
 
And today we’re calling on the federal government to make 
their way to our province — to make their way to our province 
and to state to the producers of Saskatchewan, and to the 
governors of Saskatchewan, and the policy-makers of 
Saskatchewan, whether or not they’re prepared, Mr. Speaker, to 
pony up the kind of support that is necessary for the future of 
this industry. 
 
And so today, Mr. Speaker, I want to provide for the Assembly 
the notice of motion, and I’ll find it in a minute, Mr. Speaker, 
because I know that it’s in my package here. I want to say, Mr. 
Speaker, that I call today on the federal government . . . The 
motion is: 
 

That this Assembly call on the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, the federal Minister responsible for the 
Canadian Wheat Board, and the federal Minister of 
International Trade to appear before the Assembly on May 
24, 2002 to hear and respond to our concerns and the 



1106 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

concerns of the Saskatchewan producers in regards to the 
devastating impact of the new US farm Bill. 

 
The motion, Mr. Speaker, is by personally the member from 
Yorkton, seconded by the member from Watrous. 
 
And I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Fort . . . 
Qu’Appelle on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. With leave, 
to introduce guests. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and 
members, for that leave. I wouldn’t normally take time to 
introduce guests during an emergency debate like this, but I 
would like to introduce two guests who are with us in the 
gallery today who have been strong fighters for producers’ 
rights over many years, worked hard on this front — the 
president of the Farmer Rail Car Coalition, Sinclair Harrison, 
and technical adviser for the Farmer Rail Car Coalition, Jim 
Robbins. 
 
And they are continuing in their struggle to try and get the 
federal government to support producers in this province by 
encouraging, struggling to get them to turn over the 13,000 
federal hopper cars. So we thank them for their work and 
welcome them to this emergency debate. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MOTION UNDER RULE 46 
 

Impact of US Farm Bill on Canadian Farmers 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — . . . to join in this debate today and second 
the motion by the Minister of Agriculture. 
 
It’s been a difficult number of years for the producers of this 
province. Part of the difficulty is getting people to understand 
why agriculture has gotten to where it is and why it seems to be 
in a crisis situation. And I think people are starting to 
understand, but not fully. 
 
And in order to do so we have to go back a little bit in history 
and we have to come to the understanding that globally, 
countries many, many years ago decided that they wanted to 
control their food supply. And it was a choice on countries’ 
parts and there was varying reasons from different countries as 
to why they wanted to control their food supply. But Canada 
was no exception. 
 
So because they want that control, they manipulated the 
industry over the years through the design of their regulation, 
their policies, the infrastructure that they put in place, and the 
tax incentives that they gave different facets within the industry. 

I believe there’s probably no other industry in our country that 
has less control on an individual basis of its own destiny than 
the different areas of the agriculture industry. And initially the 
federal government profited from this control and they enjoyed 
the riches that it gave them. But it has become more and more 
difficult to sustain and it hasn’t been as profitable. 
 
And again there’s a number of reasons for that, and a large one 
of those is the fact that another countries . . . or more and more 
countries producing and they’re subsidizing their producers. 
 
(15:00) 
 
The difficulties that the federal government has made . . . or 
made through their own decisions, they’ve also chosen to 
ignore it. They’ve chosen to ignore that these are decisions that 
they made throughout history of time. And they’ve hung the 
front line workers in the industry — which is our producers — 
they’ve hung them out to dry on this. 
 
The agriculture industry was structured on government 
dependency. And it was not done so necessarily because the 
producers of our province wanted it to be that way, but it was 
because the governments wanted it to be that way. And they 
said to the producers, basically through their policies, that they 
didn’t have to worry, that the government would look after 
them. And unfortunately it’s made its . . . it’s designed the 
picture of why the agriculture industry looks the way it does in 
our province. 
 
Our producers have evolved over time and they have 
diversified. They’ve become more efficient. They have looked 
for different markets; they’ve grown many different varieties of 
grain; they have expanded into livestock — both traditional 
livestock and exotic livestock. They have investigated different 
avenues of adding value to their products. And they’ve 
implemented as many of those added-value processing as they 
can and as they’ve been allowed under the present government 
restrictions and controls. 
 
And they have survived. They’ve survived a number of years 
where it’s become more and more difficult to survive in the 
industry. And they’ve survived through their own initiatives and 
through their determination. But they cannot continue to do this 
and they cannot beat the competition of global trade subsidies. 
They cannot single-handedly evolve an industry that was 
structured on government dependency. And they certainly 
cannot evolve their industry as fast as the government, and in 
particular the federal government, is backpedalling out of their 
financial obligations. 
 
With control, I think what the federal government has to come 
to realize, if you want to control an industry’s destiny and then 
choose to sort of back out of that, there . . . you have to take the 
responsibility. Control must always come with a sense of 
responsibility. And that’s where our federal government is 
failing to realize. 
 
Agriculture used to be so important to the federal government 
that I was told that it used to be part of the Department of 
Finance. But now it’s become a department that they basically 
choose to ignore the Western provinces. 
 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1107 

 

When I keep talking about control, one of the areas, you know 
— just to sort of explain and give examples — one example of 
the control of policy that the federal government put into place 
was the Crow. And we can argue what happened to agriculture 
when the Crow rate was taken away, but had it never been 
there, had it never been put in place right at the beginning, 
agriculture would have looked differently in our province 
because we would have processed our grain. We wouldn’t have 
been encouraged by federal government policy to ship raw 
material out east and have the processing all done in the eastern 
provinces. 
 
And they’ve benefited from that control because now that 
whole processing industry is established in the eastern 
provinces. 
 
Another area or an example of where they chose to control the 
industry is through the Canadian Wheat Board and that’s . . . 
today it’s a very controversial issue. But again I believe it has 
inhibited our producers from adding value to their own product. 
 
So now basically, as the countries in this particular . . . Today 
we’re addressing the US Bill. As they subsidize more and more, 
our federal government has traded it away and they basically 
have sold the family farm. They have said . . . they’ve told us in 
Saskatchewan that they’re complying with the trade agreements 
but they’re doing so, Mr. Speaker, before any other country is 
complying with the trade agreements. And they’re doing so 
before our very competitors are complying with the trade 
agreements. 
 
And they keep telling us that they cannot subsidize the damages 
that these subsidies in other countries is doing. They keep 
saying that they cannot possibly meet those subsidies because 
it’s against the trade agreements. But you hear more and more 
that they could do more and still be within compliance of the 
agreements. So I don’t feel that the federal government has 
been coming clean on this whole issue. 
 
So with the US farm Bill there can be no doubt our agriculture 
producers have diversified into areas that is more profitable 
than those that have been subsidized in the past in the US. This 
new farm Bill is also going to devastate and gut the markets for 
those particular grains that I’m talking about, the pulse grains in 
our province. 
 
And they are going to basically devastate the whole market that 
our farmers have worked hard and diligently at expanding and 
growing into, and the federal government if they choose to 
ignore yet this subsidy as well, I hope that they realize that 
they’re dreaming in absolute technicolor if they think that they 
can ignore it and it’s not going to cost our country and our 
province a great deal of money. 
 
There is going to be a tremendous cost to the federal 
government continuing to ignore this issue. 
 
In our nation of Canada one in seven jobs comes from the 
agriculture and food industry. The taxes that both levels of 
government collects from agriculture producers, from products, 
from the input costs, from all sectors of the industries, the 
machinery sales, the businesses that are kept open that are 
dependent on the agriculture producers is absolutely 

tremendous. 
 
Society has complained bitterly that they do not want to 
subsidize farmers. They do not realize it’s a very, very 
well-kept secret how much the agriculture industry subsidizes 
society. The machinery dealerships, the manufacturers, the food 
producers, the food outlets that can sell food at a lower cost 
because the transportation cost is lower if it’s produced locally, 
the hardware stores, the other small businesses, the 
slaughterhouses, and that’s just to name a few that are all 
paying taxes. And they are paying taxes because they have the 
producers to keep them open and going. 
 
I think that Ottawa has completely forgotten about 
Saskatchewan. They have looked after their particular area 
where they have many supply-managed producers. So the 
supply-managed producers are not being affected by the 
subsidy wars. They have chosen to continue to sort of accept 
that Saskatchewan is going to ship raw product without helping 
Saskatchewan evolve towards producing or processing its own 
product. And they have chosen to just let Saskatchewan sink or 
swim on its own. 
 
The bulk of the processing is already being done on the Eastern 
coast, so they don’t have any concerns there. They just need us 
to ship them the product and they’ll be fine. But what is going 
to be the cost? There’s going to be a cost to this. 
 
Saskatchewan 2000 realized net farm income at 271 million is 
down 56 per cent from the ’95 to ’99 average income. And in 
2001, it’s estimated that we’re only going to realize a net 
income of $224 million, which is down 63 per cent from the 
’95-99 average. 
 
So there’s going to be a cost. There’s going to be a loss of taxes 
and there’s going to be businesses closed and there’s going to 
be jobs lost. And the shining light to address this over the past 
within our province has been the pulse crops and our livestock, 
expanding in those areas. And now we’re looking at that too 
being jeopardized by a decision that is out of the control of the 
Saskatchewan farm producers. 
 
The federal government has got to realize they have a drastic 
responsibility. They have got to realize that they’ve got to step 
up to the plate. 
 
In this country, we have representation by population and the 
Minister of Agriculture touched on this. And by having 
representation by population, they’ve left us in a position where 
we are supposed to, with a fewer . . . or a smaller population but 
more arable acres, we’re supposed to come up with the same 
formula funding as all other provinces that have better 
population and fewer acres. This just simply isn’t going to work 
for our province. 
 
We have got to address that we need representation by region. 
And the federal government has got to realize that unless there 
is representation by region, unless there’s some recognition that 
we are . . . we have more of the arable land than any other given 
province in our country, unless they can start to see that and 
realize that, Saskatchewan is going to be devastated on into the 
future. We cannot continue to sustain the agriculture industry 
against Europe and the US. 



1108 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

Too often the producers have been blamed for their own 
problems. And I find that that’s been done both federally and 
provincially, unfortunately. We tend to think the . . . we say the 
agriculture industry is the reason for you know a number of our 
problems. But they have done so much. They have worked so 
diligently. They have tried and tried to change, and yet every 
time that they have done so it seems like everything is taken 
away from them by just the stroke of a pen; in this case, by the 
United States. They have evolved this industry but evolution 
takes both time and it takes money. And unfortunately the 
deterioration of the industry is happening more rapidly than 
they can possibly make the changes. 
 
I find it amazing that the federal government to this point has 
been ignoring the obvious that’s happening in Saskatchewan. 
The income revenue dollars is so obvious that we’re struggling. 
The drought is a reality. And it doesn’t take long before, you 
know, it doesn’t take a lot of statistic finding to know where the 
moisture levels are at in our province. 
 
And I cannot believe that they do not recognize that all this is 
going to come at a cost. If they continue to ignore it . . . They 
can maybe not spend the initial dollars, but there is going to be 
a cost. There’s going to be a cost to our infrastructure. There’s 
going to be a cost to our service delivery. There’s going to be a 
cost to our education institutes. There’s going to be a cost to our 
businesses. There’s going to be a cost to our recreation 
facilities. And there’s going to be a cost to society as a whole. 
 
These issues go so far beyond the actual family farm. The 
family farm is the pillar of the industry, but basically if the 
family farm folds, the industry tumbles shortly thereafter. 
 
The entire industry was built on trust. And it was built on the 
trust of the policies of the federal government and the 
provincial government. And I feel that that trust has been 
betrayed quite severely on the federal government. 
 
If the federal government is going to make the decision in 
isolation of consultation or knowledge about the industry in our 
province, then they better take the responsibility of the effects 
that it’s going to have on our province. 
 
They designed safety nets. They say this is going to be the 
answer in their AIDA (Agricultural Income Disaster 
Assistance) and CFIP and we all know in Saskatchewan what a 
failure they were and how they treated Saskatchewan 
inequitable to the other countries . . . or pardon me, Mr. 
Speaker, the other provinces. 
 
Now they say they are designing a new framework. And I know 
the Minister of Agriculture has sounded excited about this, and 
I hope he’s right. Because I’ve looked at some of the 
information on this new framework and the five different pillars 
they are suggesting and I don’t see any detail. And I keep 
thinking, this Bill in the US isn’t a total surprise; they’ve been 
talking about it for a while. The drought in Saskatchewan is not 
a total surprise; we’ve been talking about it for a while. The 
decline in the income, net income that farmers can realize from 
their land isn’t a total surprise. 
 
So I question if the five pillars will be enough and it definitely 
is going to be too late. And I . . . you know, the fear is, is it 

going to be too little too late? Because these problems haven’t 
just happened overnight. 
 
They did a . . . the federal government did a so-called 
consultation process and it was a quick one-day affair through 
our province. And they didn’t even let the people who were 
involved in the industry, they didn’t even give them a heads-up 
or time to put together a presentation to meet with them. They 
swept through the province, gave them, some of them, a 
24-hour notice that here we come. You know, this is so 
important. If they are redoing the whole policy framework, why 
did they give the stakeholders in our province, some of them, 
just a 24-hour notice for their input? 
 
It makes you kind of suspect that Saskatchewan isn’t in the big 
picture of the framework for the new policy. 
 
They have taken and promised tiny fixes and tiny steps, but 
there’s been no direction and there’s been no idea on the federal 
government’s behalf on how they are going to bridge the 
industry from where we are today to where they so . . . are 
telling us they want it to go. And actually I shouldn’t even say 
they are telling us where they want it to go; they haven’t told us 
where they want it to go. They are basically saying, we want 
you guys to just float along and we’ll come up with a 
framework down the road. 
 
(15:15) 
 
But again I go back to: what cost. I think our province knows 
better than any that if you continue to neglect this industry 
there’s going to be a cost. We’ve seen out-migration; we’ve 
seen loss of jobs; we’ve seen a declining economy. There is a 
cost to neglecting the agriculture industry. 
 
There’s a cost to neglect and there’s a cost to refusing to accept 
responsibility. And the cost is that it reduces your own revenue 
dollars. And it reduces your ability to look at the other issues 
within your responsibility. 
 
I wasn’t going to bring this up, Mr. Speaker, but the Minister of 
Agriculture made mention of the coalition, the all-party 
coalition, that was formed in 1999 and made a trip to Ottawa to 
negotiate with the federal government on the effects of 
subsidies. 
 
And I know it’s come up more than one time in this House, Mr. 
Speaker, what happened to that coalition. And the interesting 
thing is, the negotiations were done by the coalition behind 
closed doors. And the only member that’s in this House today, 
Mr. Speaker, that was behind those closed doors was myself. 
The only member that knows what was said behind those closed 
doors, first-hand, is myself. 
 
To continue to insinuate that Mr. Boyd or myself were the ones 
that basically caused the demise of the coalition is simply false. 
And at some point in time — but this is not the right time or the 
right place or the right debate — we will have that discussion 
and it will be explained . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Not in 
the negotiations. The member from Saltcoats was not in the 
negotiations. He was in the coalition that went to the trek to 
Ottawa but he was not behind closed doors when the 
negotiations took place. 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1109 

 

So our provincial government has to take its own responsibility 
for its own areas of neglect. They have to acknowledge that 
they too have had areas that they’ve neglected. But ultimately, 
for the trade subsidies, we need the federal government to come 
and to listen and to try to understand our difficulties here in 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The price tag of ignoring the effects of this US Bill is going to 
be absolutely astronomical to our province. It’s time to do the 
right thing, and it’s time to accept responsibilities in our 
country, and it’s time to give the agriculture industry back its 
respect and the dignity that the producers of this province 
deserve. 
 
So with that, Mr. Speaker, I am more than happy to second the 
motion of the Agriculture minister. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. And 
I want to, just at the outset of my remarks, again repeat my 
thanks to the Leader of the Opposition and to the opposition 
caucus for supporting us in the emergency debate that we 
brought to the House, or a debate of urgent and pressing 
necessity. I thank them and the Leader of the Opposition for 
their support. 
 
I would invite the Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, 
Mr. David Karwacki, to also indicate his support for the motion 
that is before this House, that he may speak . . . we may speak 
as political leaders in this province with a united voice. And I 
look forward later this afternoon in the debate that the member 
from North Battleford, I am hopeful, will enter the debate in 
support of this extremely important motion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I . . . we are often greeted with headlines in the 
daily press that will cause us concern. I can hardly imagine a 
worse headline than we read in the daily papers today. I’ve just 
with me The Leader-Post of Regina, with the headline, “Bad 
news for farmers,” describing the impact on our farm families, 
on our farmers, on our producers, that will result from the new 
farm Bill in Washington. 
 
As I said earlier today, and I’ve said many times today, this 
headline might more accurately read, this is bad news for 
Saskatchewan. This is not simply bad news for our farm 
families, this is bad news for Saskatchewan because the impact 
. . . we have seen the impact of the existing subsidies in terms of 
the effect on our farm families, on our producers. We’ve seen 
the effect; that layered on, of course, by the conditions of 
drought in the past year and the concern we have this spring 
with drought. 
 
But we’ve seen the effect. We’ve seen the downturn in the 
agricultural economy in our country. We’ve seen the loss of 
employment in agriculture. 
 
And what’s happened, Mr. Speaker? Many of our farm families 
have responded to these international subsidies by finding new 
production, new crops. They’ve diversified. They have found a 
way to remain competitive in the international market by 
moving into many of the pulse crop areas. 
 

And that’s what makes this so disastrous — this new American 
farm Bill. Never mind that they are, according to the press here, 
increasing their subsidy level to the traditional grains by 70 per 
cent — by 70 per cent — they are now extending the subsidies 
to the pulse crops; to the peas, and the lentils, and the chick 
peas, the areas where our producers have moved so that they 
could compete. And having moved there, they compete with the 
best in the world. 
 
And around that new diversification, we have seen the result in 
our province, in processing, in many of our communities. Only 
this past couple of weeks, we celebrated the new plant in 
Avonlea. 
 
Today we are greeted with some very, very bad news. Now as 
the Minister of Agriculture and the critic of Agriculture have 
pointed out, we’ve known about this circumstance of subsidy 
for some period of time. And we have been, at every occasion 
available to us, bringing this to national attention. 
 
As the Minister of Agriculture has indicated in the House this 
afternoon, following a meeting of the Canadian premiers, first 
ministers’ meeting, premiers’ meeting last year, I raised this 
issue with my colleagues from across Canada. They asked of 
me then to return to them in the fall of 2001 with a report on our 
behalf, on behalf of premiers, to be sent to the Prime Minister 
and the federal government. And I was very pleased on behalf 
of premiers to undertake that work. 
 
And in this report, which we entitled the Fair Deal for 
Canadian Farmers, we documented exactly the impact of the 
subsidy . . . international subsidies on Canadian agriculture, the 
subsidies as they existed last year. And if I may, Mr. Speaker, 
for the record, I would like to quote into the record the 
conclusion . . . some of the conclusions that I drew in this report 
and provided to the federal government. 
 

The challenges faced by Canadian farmers created by trade 
distorting subsidies are national challenges for all 
Canadians to address. It is, therefore, primarily a federal 
responsibility to provide the support necessary to offset 
disadvantages resulting from competitors’ higher subsidy 
levels. It is a federal responsibility to aggressively negotiate 
better trade rules — rules that will constrain the EU and 
(the) U.S. Only the federal government (I repeat, Mr. 
Speaker, only the federal government) has the fiscal 
capacity to act and only the federal government can ensure 
that Canadian farmers are treated equitably. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — And then in conclusion, I said this, Mr. 
Speaker: 
 

It is time (it is time) the federal government admitted that 
the likelihood of a short to medium term negotiated 
solution to the problems of international subsidies appears 
remote. Canada will need to act more aggressively if a 
successful outcome in international negotiations is to be 
achieved. 
 
In the meantime (in the meantime), Ottawa should act on 
behalf of all Canadians to support our farmers adversely 



1110 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

affected by these international subsidies in accordance with 
the values that Canadians share. 

 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — Mr. Speaker, on the most recent Team 
Canada, led by the Prime Minister of Canada and joined by the 
majority of Canadian premiers, we visited, we visited in 
Moscow and we visited in Germany. 
 
I had opportunity in Germany to sit across the table from the 
now chancellor of Germany, Gerhard Schröder, and I addressed 
the matter of subsidy with the chancellor of Germany. 
 
We later, in that Team Canada, had opportunity to meet across 
the table with the current President of Bavaria who some are 
suggesting in Germany may well be the next chancellor. I had 
opportunity, with Edmund Stoiber, to raise the matter of the 
European subsidies. 
 
Now Chancellor Schröder took the point of view that is shared 
by our government, that we need to move to the level playing 
field in the international sphere. We need to reduce the national 
. . . the level of international subsidies. 
 
I’m sorry to report that the challenger for chancellor in 
Germany, Edmund Stoiber, took a different point of view and 
argued that they will continue to subsidize their farm families 
for as long as he could foresee into the future. This is 
troublesome, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We saw what we believed to be some progress at the recent 
world trade talks, where nations were committing to lowering 
the subsidy, including the United States of America. In fact, as 
my colleague says, in some ways the United States of America 
led the debate to bring down the national level of subsidy. 
 
And that, Mr. Speaker, is what is so appalling from my point of 
view and our point of view about the farm Bill in Washington 
today — when you say one thing on the international stage but 
when it comes to the politics of American elections, you’ll do 
quite the opposite, quite the opposite. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, unless there’s any mistake about this, there 
is no unanimity in the United States about this farm Bill or this 
level of subsidization. In fact there are many, many in America 
who see this just for what it is, and I quote from The Atlanta 
Journal two days ago, a headline: “Farm legislation illustrates 
worst (the worst) in corporate welfare.” 

 
And here’s what The Atlanta Journal says: 
 

A 10-year, $171 billion subsidy to agribusiness will be 
parceled out according to (the) size of the business. Small 
farmers need not apply. The top 10 percent of the largest 
recipients of crop subsidies, for example, get two-thirds of 
the money. The bottom 80 percent receive barely enough to 
justify . . . the paperwork — an average of $1,132 per year. 

 
So is this the support for the American farm family? No, it’s 
support for American agribusiness. That’s what’s going on 
here. It was reported to us in this House earlier today that the 
maximum subsidy level is to be $360,000. Three hundred and 

sixty thousand dollars. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not a program to support the American 
small farm family. This is a program to support American 
agribusiness. And meanwhile the American administration will 
go to the World Trade Organization and talk the good talk about 
wanting to reduce American subsidies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m hoping to have an early opportunity to at least 
speak with one of the governors, perhaps the Governor of North 
Dakota, around some of these issues. But let me say this: our 
opportunity to change what is going on in Washington is very 
minimal, and highly unlikely that that will be changed. 
 
Therefore it is the call of this government and this legislature 
that our national government must step up to the plate. There is 
now no alternative. There is no alternative. 
 
We therefore today are calling upon representatives — the 
appropriate representatives — of our national government to 
come to Saskatchewan, to come to this Chamber, meet with the 
legislators of Saskatchewan, meet with producers in 
Saskatchewan and their representative organizations to 
understand, if they do not, completely the implication of this 
American subsidy Bill. 
 
Now we have on occasion — many occasions — gone to 
Ottawa. We’ve gone to Ottawa on many occasions. It is our 
view it’s time for Ottawa to come to us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Calvert: — I am optimistic that those appropriate 
ministers — and I understand that the opposition will be 
offering a friendly amendment to include in the list the Minister 
of Finance of Ottawa, entirely appropriate — I am optimistic 
that those appropriate ministers will come, will understand, and 
will act. Because as I said a moment ago, Mr. Speaker, this now 
has gone beyond hurt. This now has gone beyond hurt. 
 
And as our Minister of Agriculture has described it very 
recently in meetings with his colleagues, this is a matter of trade 
injury. This is a matter of trade injury. We will not stand by 
while the producers of food in Canada are injured. We will not 
stand by when the producers of Saskatchewan, when our farm 
families are injured by this kind of subsidization across the line. 
We will not stand quietly by. 
 
And so today, we call from this legislature upon the appropriate 
ministers of the federal government to come, to come to 
Saskatchewan, come and understand the issue, come and work 
with us in what they can do to solve this issue. This is not the 
time for Ottawa to stand idly by. This is the time for the 
national government of Canada to come to the aid of Canadian 
farm families and producers. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And, Mr. 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1111 

 

Speaker, I am pleased to join in on the debate, this emergency 
debate on the ramifications of the most recent US farm Bill on 
Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I was pleased that the Assembly agreed 
unanimously to hold this debate. I was pleased with the motion 
brought forward by the Government of Saskatchewan and we’re 
very pleased to second the motion. I was particularly pleased 
that when we made a friendly amendment, that the Premier was 
willing to also support the amendment to the motion. And, Mr. 
Speaker, on the conclusion of my remarks I will move that 
amendment here in the House. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there is no argument that what the Americans are 
doing is unfair, not well thought out, and will certainly be 
damaging to one of Saskatchewan’s primary industries, that 
being agriculture. This Bill is more far-reaching and will be 
more damaging than previous US farm Bills which have had a 
negative impact on Saskatchewan’s oldest and most important 
industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the effects of this farm Bill will not only be 
devastating to traditional crops like wheat and oilseeds but, Mr. 
Speaker, it now will reach into the pulse crop area — one of the 
bright spots in Saskatchewan agriculture that has increased the 
income of many farm families — and it has implications for the 
livestock industry as it calls for country of origin identification 
on meat that is being exported to the United States. And that 
will have an implication on the profitability of that sector 
growing, an important sector of the Saskatchewan economy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we believe that Canada needs to take a strong 
stand in opposition to this US farm Bill and also make a strong 
statement and go beyond a statement and take action to 
counteract the negative impact on our agricultural sector of their 
legislation which they have committed themselves to 
implement. 
 
Mr. Speaker, $73.5 billion US is a lot of money. It’s a lot of 
money that will be in direct competition with producers in 
Saskatchewan who receive far less in the way of subsidies. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we all recognize that there are responsibilities. 
And producers in Saskatchewan realize that those 
responsibilities are shared by themselves, who are the producers 
of agriculture goods that feed not only those of us in 
Saskatchewan, but people around the world; they recognize that 
there is a provincial responsibility; and they recognize that there 
is a federal responsibility. And they recognize that those 
responsibilities differ depending on circumstances. 
 
It used to be, Mr. Speaker, that producers in Saskatchewan were 
often divided. On just about any issue you might raise that 
impacted agriculture, you would see a division amongst 
producers. But you see less and less of that in our province all 
the time. Saskatchewan producers are becoming more market 
oriented, and they are searching for crops that will return and 
agriculture products that will return a good rate of return for 
their investment and for their time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, our industry in Saskatchewan, our agricultural 
industry, is strong, it is flexible, and it is for the most part 
optimistic even in the face of great difficulties. Yes, the 

producer has a responsibility to read the marketplace. They 
have a responsibility to pursue the proper technology to be 
environmentally responsible, and to be contributors to the 
Saskatchewan economy. And by and large, Saskatchewan 
producers have fulfilled this responsibility to the highest level 
of excellence and should be graded an A plus. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government cannot claim such a good 
record. The federal government is responsible to protect the 
industry from unfair trade action — unfair trade action like 
we’ve seen from Europeans and as we are now seeing in an 
escalating form, from the Americans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the federal government’s responsibility lies in 
making sure that trade rules are followed and that a strong voice 
is brought forward on behalf of our industry when it’s being 
attacked by the actions of our competitors in other nations. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we agree with the government that we need 
to — in a unified voice and in a strong voice — tell the federal 
government that action is required in this case; that they cannot 
be passive and stand by and watch the American action damage 
our industry. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, there is also a provincial responsibility. And 
we can argue as to what degree or what level of comparison it 
has to the farmer’s responsibility and to the federal 
responsibility, but we know that the province is responsible to 
make sure that there is a good crop insurance program in this 
province. 
 
We know the province is required to provide the infrastructure 
that the agriculture sector needs. And we know that the 
province’s responsibility is to create an economic climate that 
fosters diversification and a strong growth in the agriculture 
sector. And we’ve seen that in other provinces in spite of the 
failures of the federal government and in spite of in the past a 
lack of unity amongst the producers. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, it’s not correct to always point the finger at the 
guy and say it’s always the other person’s fault. We must all 
look at what our responsibility is and be prepared to shoulder 
that responsibility. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I was privileged shortly after the 1999 
election to make the visit to Ottawa with the former premier of 
Saskatchewan, Mr. Romanow, and with the former minister of 
Agriculture, Mr. Lingenfelter. And we went down to Ottawa, 
and I think we made a fairly strong case, except the federal 
government had done its homework. They knew we were 
coming and they were looking for a weakness. They were 
looking for a way to be able to get off the hook for their 
responsibility. 
 
And they found a way, Mr. Speaker. They brought forward to 
our delegation the new economic numbers that said that farm 
income was going to be increasing substantially in 
Saskatchewan, that our numbers were all wrong. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, quite frankly Mr. Romanow and Mr. 
Lingenfelter didn’t have a good response for that argument. But 
all we had to do was sit down and look at the fact that they had, 
the federal government had calculated its figures on numbers 



1112 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

prior to the harvest coming off, and the harvest was much 
smaller than they had forecast and prices had dropped. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, in a spirit of co-operation, we met with the 
Minister of Agriculture, we met with the premier . . . the former 
premier of Saskatchewan, and we said this is the flaw in the 
federal argument and we raised that issue. And in fact in the 
long-term, we were right and the federal government was 
wrong because they revised their figures later. And in fact, 
Saskatchewan farm income was lower than it had been 
previously projected by the federal government. 
 
I bring up this example to say that the federal government will 
look for a weakness in the province’s position. They know that 
logically they should be defending producers in this province. 
They know that logically and legally they are responsible for 
the position on trade issues that we are involved in and that we 
are debating today. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, they can look at the provincial government 
and say, why should we move forward to protect and to defend 
this industry when the provincial government is not doing the 
same, when the provincial government has reduced crop 
insurance coverage, increased crop insurance rates, and reduced 
its Agriculture budget? 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we tell this to the provincial government not 
to embarrass them, but to tell them to be prepared. Be prepared 
for the arguments that the federal government will make. 
 
We welcome the ministers of the Crown, the federal Crown, 
coming to Saskatchewan and coming to this Assembly. And we 
want to make a strong argument, a united argument, in support 
of the need for more federal action in defending our producers 
against unfair American trade action. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a time . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. I’d just ask all members to 
allow the member to make his remarks in full on this very 
important debate. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Thank you, Mr. 
Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture in his 
comments questioned, questioned my commitment to the 
subsidy issue and my position on the subsidy issue. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to talk about the past when the debate was 
on whether or not the Crow subsidy would be continued. Mr. 
Speaker, it was my position at that time and it still is my 
position that if other countries are subsidizing their producers, 
Canada must respond. 
 
Canada would be better off — and Saskatchewan producers 
included would be better off — if the Americans and the 
Europeans reduced and eliminated their subsidies. And quite 
frankly, if the Americans and the Europeans eliminated their 
subsidies — and I would imagine that the Minister of 
Agriculture would agree — if they eliminated their subsidies, 
Canada would move in the same direction. 
 
And we would be better as Canadian producers if we were on a 
level playing field because American producers and European 

producers are subsidized to a far greater degree than Canadian 
and Saskatchewan producers are subsidized. So obviously it is 
only a logical argument that if we could convince our 
competitors to reduce their subsidies, we would be better off 
and we should move in the same direction. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I have never said, and I never will say, that 
Canadian producers should receive less subsidization for their 
product when our competitors — the Americans and the 
Europeans — are increasing theirs. 
 
And in fact at the time of the Crow debate, my argument was 
that the funding that went into the Crow transportation subsidy 
should be put into a trade distortion subsidy to maintain that 
support for the industry so that we could fight fire with fire, and 
if the Americans brought forward unfounded farm Bills like the 
one that they’re bringing forward now, we would have the 
means to counteract the impact of that action. And, Mr. 
Speaker, that is still being debated today as a good plan of 
action. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, I only mention these things to set the record 
straight. Above all and beyond all else, I want to see the 
Saskatchewan agriculture sector move forward. And we’re 
prepared to work together with the government in any way 
possible to see the actions of the Americans blunted and the 
federal government standing up for the producers of our 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, we make that commitment 
to the government and we will keep that commitment. We will 
keep it because it’s the right thing to do and because it is the 
moral and proper thing to do, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, we would call on the provincial government 
to do its homework. I hope as the Premier suggested that those 
four cabinet ministers from Ottawa will come and meet with us 
in this Assembly. It’s an intriguing idea, Mr. Speaker. And 
quite frankly, the federal government needs to improve its 
image in Saskatchewan and this is an opportunity for them to 
show good faith. 
 
And we warmly invite them. They’ll be warmly received. If 
those four ministers come into this Assembly, we will not be 
berating them. We will appreciate their presence among us, and 
we will, we will be as hospitable as Saskatchewan people 
always are. 
 
But we’ll make our case very strongly. We will very strongly 
indicate that the federal government has a key responsibility to 
protect producers from unfair trade action and that they need to 
take strong and aggressive action on behalf of our producers. 
We will work with the government and we will work with the 
voices of agriculture in Saskatchewan to make that message 
clear and certain in the minds of the four ministers should they 
accept this invitation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is in this spirit that we not only support the 
government’s motion but that we make a friendly amendment. 
And I would move, seconded by the member from P.A. (Prince 
Albert) Northcote: 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1113 

 

That the following be added after the words “Canadian 
Wheat Board”: 
 
the federal Minister of Finance. 

 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We will look forward to a positive 
response from the federal government and we look forward to 
progress in this very important and emerging situation. Thank 
you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(15:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Thank you very much, Mr. 
Speaker. I want to say what a pleasure it is to join a debate that 
I think all of us would rather not have had to be a part of. 
 
The Premier alluded today to the headlines in the Regina 
Leader-Post as being bad news for farmers, the actions taken by 
the Americans indicating that it’s bad news for Saskatchewan. I 
want to add to that, Mr. Speaker, by saying I believe it’s bad 
news for Canada. 
 
The extension to pulse crops, which is the area that our farm 
community had moved to support their incomes because of the 
unfair disadvantage that was created by American/European 
subsidies as it related to wheat, is now an advantage that they 
can no longer use. The introduction of the identification of 
livestock and hogs as it relates to labelling requirements that 
may come in the United States is another area that I believe will 
be devastating not only to Saskatchewan livestock and hog 
producers, but other provinces across our country as well. 
 
And I find it quite interesting, Mr. Speaker, sad, the Americans, 
our large neighbours to the south who tout themselves to be free 
traders, supporters of free trade agreements, are the same 
people, the same people who are distorting now the livestock 
industry, the cereal grains industry, the pulse crop industry, and 
the softwood lumber industry, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This province is attempting to build and diversify and grow our 
economy. And we’re succeeding in the softwood lumber 
industry by oriented strand board plants that include both 
softwood and hardwood, by dimensional lumber mills, by 
looking at opportunities to expand in pulp and newsprint, Mr. 
Speaker, all of which is now under attack by our American 
neighbours. 
 
The livestock, the intensive livestock industry, we’re working 
very hard with private sector investors to develop an ethanol 
industry to ensure that we can support and that we can expand 
the intensive livestock industry here in our province, create 
economic development in rural Saskatchewan, all throughout 
our province, by supporting the ethanol production. Mr. 
Speaker, it’s an area that we’re counting on to build and grow 
and diversify away from the primary side of agriculture, in our 
agricultural sector, all of this now under attack. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s been said by . . . I think all members of this 
legislature can probably say they’ve heard the same thing from 
. . . same kind of comments from their constituents. Those 
comments that if this was central Canada and this impact was as 

dramatic on central Canada as these trade actions are having 
and if the impact was as great on central Canada, that this 
debate, this discussion wouldn’t be going on very long because 
the federal government would act and would act soon. 
 
And I say, Mr. Speaker, it’s a comment that none of us want to 
hear. We have a strong country, hopefully, a unified country. 
And what members of this legislature on both sides of the 
House today are asking for is a recognition that the federal 
government needs to step up to the plate and they need to be 
part of the support that it will take in order to ensure fairness for 
our agriculture community. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I recognize that there is a 
Liberal presence, although small, in this legislature. This 
Liberal presence can and has been very vocal on many issues. 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, I’m asking on behalf of the 
million people in this province, for that member to stand up and 
urge his federal cousins to be supporting this motion; have 
those people come out here, those members of parliament, those 
cabinet ministers come out here and hear first-hand from 
Saskatchewan people how this is impacting on their livelihoods 
and on our province. 
 
And I’m hopeful that his leader, the newly elected Mr. 
Karwacki, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Liberal Party, can 
have some impact on his federal counterparts. Mr. Speaker, 
there have been two massive budget surpluses in Ottawa. The 
last two surpluses have been of a fairly large magnitude, and 
clearly, there is some room if there is some will. 
 
And I’m saying, Mr. Speaker, that it’s not enough for any of us 
to stand by as our agriculture industry, not only our agriculture 
industry — our forest industry, our livestock industry — is 
under attack by the actions that our American friends to the 
south have taken. 
 
And I say it’s not good enough to stand back, which is why we 
introduced this motion today. And I’m pleased to say it was 
supported by members of the Saskatchewan Party because I 
think it will take a unified voice in Ottawa in order to bring 
attention to the concerns that we as a province have. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party today made 
some comments with respect to some history and his 
involvement with the former premier and a former member of 
the cabinet, a former Agriculture minister, as they travelled to 
Ottawa, and he indicated that Ottawa was looking for a 
weakness to exempt itself from involvement in support for 
Saskatchewan agriculture. And they found some numbers that 
they were able to use to mount an argument that would not 
support our submission that we needed financial support here. 
 
But I find it interesting that a day when we’re looking for unity 
and a day when we’re looking for a common support base to 
Ottawa, this member chose to suggest there were deficiencies in 
terms of the homework that was done by that administration 
when he himself was part of the delegation and didn’t have an 
answer to the question that very day, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I want to say that members on this side of the House are 
very clear in terms of the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party as it 
relates to support for agriculture. We’re very clear of his 



1114 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

involvement as a Canadian Alliance Member of Parliament. 
We’re very clear the parliament or the position that the 
Canadian Alliance took as it relates to agriculture policy. 
 
And it was on this side of the House also, Mr. Speaker, very 
clear of the fact that the spokesperson for agriculture from the 
Canadian Alliance after the ’99 election indicated that their 
failure to support the agriculture community as it relates to 
involvement — whether it be in trade actions taken by other 
communities in terms of creating a level playing field — that 
was one of the reasons they weren’t able to succeed in that 
election. 
 
And I say to the Leader of the Saskatchewan Party that we on 
this side of the House and Saskatchewan people understand 
very clearly so we should not go there. What we should do is 
we should work together to ensure that we build and grow and 
diversify this economy, and that we take a common voice to 
Ottawa — a common voice in support of our agricultural 
community and in our forestry community and in our livestock 
producers. That’s what we need. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I know that the support through this motion 
is here today. It’s been indicated that that is the case by the 
Saskatchewan Party. I’m hoping it’s going to be here tomorrow 
and I’m hoping that it’s going to be here next week because this 
debate is not finished today. 
 
And I want to say to the Leader of the Liberal Party in 
Saskatchewan, this debate does not end today. We are asking 
you, sir, Mr. Karwacki, to take a public position, to take a 
public position supporting Canada as opposed to your political 
friends because that’s the kind of action that’s required here. 
 
And I’m saying that I’m hoping — and I believe — that every 
member of this legislature will ensure that we carry this debate 
forward because we have a strong case in Saskatchewan. We 
have a strong case based on the history and the support that our 
agriculture community hasn’t had as it relates to agricultural 
support. And our federal government now has to understand the 
severity of this circumstance — an increase to the subsidy on 
wheat of 70 per cent, Mr. Speaker, over and above a huge large 
subsidy, seventy-three and a half billion dollars in support of 
subsidies in the United States. 
 
To put that in context, Mr. Speaker, our entire revenue for our 
entire budget in this province is in the neighbourhood of $6 
billion, six and a half billion. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is unfair. It is unfair what the Americans are 
doing — distorting trade. And all we’re asking for is a level 
playing field — the agricultural community in this province — 
and until we get that level playing field, Mr. Speaker, there 
needs to be support by our federal government. 
 
Regina, Saskatoon, Prince Albert, the communities in our 
province cannot wage a subsidy war. We can’t create a level 
playing field. We need the support of our national government. 
That’s why this federation of provinces and territories, Mr. 
Speaker, can be strong. And that’s why we’re asking our federal 
members of parliament to work with us in creating a fair and a 
level playing field. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I find it so interesting, so interesting but yet so 
disappointing. The Republican right-of-centre administration in 
the United States — supposed proponents of free trade, 
supposed proponents of fair trade, supposed proponents of an 
open and a free marketplace — are the same, very people, the 
same administration, Mr. Speaker, who are not true to their 
rhetoric when it comes to trade. 
 
And the countries who have been fair and who have been at 
world trade talks and who have played by the rules — countries 
like Canada — who have moved into niche markets, whose 
agricultural community has moved into niche markets, 
believing in fairness of trade and believing that those large 
producers with their massive subsidies will some day move to a 
free and a fair marketplace, Mr. Speaker, have been, I believe, 
betrayed. 
 
They’ve been betrayed by the concept of fair trade because right 
now there is no fair trade. This is an imbalance created by a 
large, powerful, right-wing nation, Mr. Speaker, and I think it’s 
a shame. Because when you hear what they say and you see 
what they do, it can only lead you to believe that they’re not 
being genuine. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it almost leads you to believe that the motto and 
the modus operandi is winning at any cost. And, Mr. Speaker, 
all the people of Saskatchewan and Canada are looking for is 
fairness. 
 
And I want to say, Mr. Speaker, to the people of Saskatchewan, 
this government will not stop. We will not stop in our quest for 
fairness and in our fight for fairness and in our fight for equity, 
and we will not let the federal government off the hook on this, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — They’re going to be here as our 
partners whether they like or whether they don’t. We will do 
what it takes to have them understand that this discussion 
doesn’t end here today. We want to work with them, we want to 
co-operate with them, because that’s how we can create a fair 
and a balanced circumstance for Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I am asking for every farm group and every 
man and woman who makes their living, who derives their 
income from agriculture, or industries that support agriculture, 
to support their government, to support this administration in 
their quest for that fairness. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this isn’t about politics. This is about economics. 
This is about the survival of our province. It’s about the success 
of diversification of our agricultural industry. It’s about the 
success of being able to allow Saskatchewan men and women 
to make their living in businesses and working for businesses in 
the agriculture sector and in the value-added agriculture sector, 
and in forestry and in the livestock industry. That’s what this is 
about. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, that can’t happen over the long haul without 
fairness. And that’s where this debate has to take us. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know I really find it more than disappointing 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1115 

 

— more than disappointing — when I see the kind of actions 
taken by people who have so much, a country who has built so 
much wealth, created so much wealth based on the natural 
resources and the ingenuity and, yes, I would say the integrity 
of their people, the Americans, our neighbours. 
 
And it’s so disappointing when they ignore the circumstances 
that are put in place with respect to fairness as it relates to trade 
and the quest for that fairness. And they ignore that and don’t 
want to see the same kind of wealth creation and wealth 
generation by people who have been, although we’re a small 
country, we’ve been very good neighbours to the Americans. 
We’ve been very good allies to the Americans. 
 
And we ship them our resources as it relates to natural gas and 
oil; and there’s fair trade in natural gas and oil. We have 
resources in our forest sector and we ship them our resources to 
build their homes. And when they have hurricanes as they’ve 
just had that destroys their infrastructure, we’re willing to trade 
on a fair basis. And it’s been proven that we trade in our 
forestry sector fairly. Every time we go to a court, every time 
we go to seek world opinion, find out that yes, we’re fairly 
trading. 
 
I say, Mr. Speaker, this is not an act of friendship. And I say, 
Mr. Speaker, this is not an act of fairness. 
 
And I want to close by saying this government recognizes that 
we can’t fight these people alone. And we’re asking our 
neighbours in Alberta, and British Columbia, and in Manitoba 
to join us in this fight. Because we have to fight as a nation to 
ensure that our industries and our people and our provinces and 
our country is protected. Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It certainly is a pleasure 
to enter into this emergency debate, Mr. Speaker. As the 
speakers before me have indicated, this is a very, very serious 
issue for Saskatchewan and particularly for the farmers of our 
province. 
 
But as other speakers have indicated, it not only will affect the 
farm families of this province but it will affect all citizens of 
this province. This US farm Bill will have . . . has the potential 
to have a huge negative effect on this whole province, and the 
farm families of this province will bear the brunt of that impact, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
This farm Bill has $73.5 billion of new money in it, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s over and above the $107 billion that was 
already there. And that’s over a 10-year period. That’s $173 
billion, or $17.3 billion per year, Mr. Speaker, which is huge. 
 
And as other speakers have indicated, it not only continues to 
subsidize the existing commodities such as wheat and corn and 
soybeans — which affect the prices of our wheat and canola 
and cereal crops — but it also now for the first time has 
included the pulse crops. And, Mr. Speaker, some of the 
subsidy levels or loan rates that are set under this new farm Bill 
will have a devastating impact on our pulse crops, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And this comes, Mr. Speaker, this new farm Bill comes from 

our neighbours to the south, as one of the speakers said, under a 
new president who purports to support free trade, comes from 
the land and the home of the free traders, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as one of my constituents said to me here just yesterday, he 
says, the Americans may be our neighbours but after this farm 
Bill it doesn’t seem like their our friends any more, Mr. 
Speaker. And I’m afraid I have to agree with him. 
 
We have the senator from North Dakota, Senator Byron 
Dorgan, who was one of the main architects of this increased 
subsidy, who constantly berates our institutions and our 
programs here, who constantly attacks the Wheat Board, and 
yet at the same time was one of the elected officials who was 
instrumental in these new and increased subsidies, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you have to ask the question, why? Why at this point in 
time, this period of time would the US bring forward this 
massive increase in farm Bills? And there’s a number of 
reasons as I see them, Mr. Speaker, as to why we see these 
increased subsidies. 
 
One being the strong farm lobby that US farmers have down 
there to the south of us. They have strong farm organizations. 
They hire professional lobbyists and they get their message 
across and they’re obviously very effective. 
 
The second reason is that there are many in government who 
actually care about the US farmers and care about their 
well-being. 
 
And then of course, we can’t exclude the impact of September 
11 that it has had on our neighbours to the south. They’ve 
become inward-looking, they seem to only think about their 
own well-being, and they are very, very concerned about 
security of their food supply. And I’m sure this all impacted on 
the decisions that were made here just . . . over the last few 
days. 
 
As I said, Mr. Speaker, this new US farm Bill continues to 
support at increased levels for most of the farm commodities 
that were under the Bill in its former phase. The subsidies on 
the majority of the commodities has gone up, Mr. Speaker. The 
only one that I could see, the information that I have, is the only 
subsidy of the major crops that has decreased is soybeans and 
that decreased marginally. 
 
The subsidy on the . . . or the loan rates which translates into a 
subsidy for all the other crops has gone up, Mr. Speaker, and 
that’s going to have some continued and further deleterious 
effects on the prices that our farmers receive. 
 
The way this farm Bill works, it’s basically enhanced the old 
program that they have — the old farm Bill was in effect for 
five years; this one is going to be in effect for six years. 
 
They have a combination of a number of things, but the items 
that really will affect Western Canadian farmers, and 
particularly Saskatchewan farmer, are things . . . are the loan 
rates and the loan deficiency payments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And I could maybe perhaps use an example that would illustrate 
how this will work. The current US . . . under the current 



1116 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

program the loan rate for corn is $1.89 per bushel US. So an 
American producer, if he can sell his corn for whatever price he 
feels he can get in the marketplace . . . and he really doesn’t 
have to worry whether that price is low or high because he’s 
guaranteed that $1.89 per bushel. 
 
So for an example, they can be dumping their corn . . . we’ve 
heard tell of the feedlots in southern Alberta bringing up 
semi-loads of corn to replace western feed barley. And for 
example, if they’re bringing it in . . . selling it at $1.40 per 
bushel US, well then that American producer will . . . he’ll get 
the $1.40, but then he just goes to the farm program, and gets 
the 49 cents that he . . . to make up that total price of $1.49. 
 
So there’s really no incentive for him to search out markets, and 
market wisely, and so on. He can just basically dump his 
product on the market, and that’s what’s happening, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Now the new provisions, which are very onerous . . . will have a 
very onerous effect on Saskatchewan, is the pulse crops have 
been included for the first time. And the new loan rates, which I 
think our Canadian producers would find very, very attractive, 
in Canadian dollars peas are going to be . . . the loan rate is 
going to be set at 5.94 a bushel which is a floor price. So 
producers of peas will be guaranteed that price. 
 
Well that’s a very good price, Mr. Speaker. If you talk to any of 
the pea producers in this province, historically that’s a very 
good price. And if our producers were guaranteed almost $6.00 
a bushel, we would see fenceline to fenceline in peas. 
 
The other commodity, the other pulse that will be severely 
impacted, is lentils. The loan rate is set at 18.7 cents per pound. 
And that is, Mr. Speaker, for number three grade. They’re not 
even talking about number one, it’s for a third-rate product, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And that is — under today’s market conditions — 18.7 cents a 
pound Canadian is a good price for lentils. And I’m sure it’ll be 
a good price for our American producers and we will see them 
— probably not this year — but next year they’ll be going into 
producing these crops. 
 
We’ve also seen the loan rates for chickpeas and small 
chickpeas and the desi . . . they’ve left out the large kabulis 
because the California producers didn’t . . . weren’t happy with 
that. 
 
The other major effect, Mr. Speaker, that this Bill is going to 
have, and other speakers have talked about it, is the mandatory 
labelling on meat products being sold in US supermarkets. And 
that under the farm Bill only meat products that were . . . was 
born, raised, and processed in the US will qualify for a US 
labelling. All other animals that are brought in as feeder animals 
and finished and slaughtered in the US will have to have the 
country of origin. In our case, if they come from Canada, they’ll 
have to have the Canadian labelling on them. 
 
And I’m sure, given the mood of the American people that’s 
present now with as a result of September 11, and as I said, 
their inward-looking and patriotic stance, I’m sure they will 
give the . . . the American consumer will give preference to the 

US products. And there again which will severely impact on our 
livestock industry. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as I said, the inclusion of the pulse crops in this 
new US farm Bill will have the devastating effect on our pulse 
industry. We’ve seen our pulse industry grow from a few 
thousand acres some 20 years ago to this year about five and a 
half million acres will be planted to pulses. 
 
We’ve seen the explosion of pulse processing plants all across 
this province, Mr. Speaker. There’s been . . . a number of them 
have opened within the last 12 months; a number are in the 
process of being constructed. In fact, this government has some 
investments in some of the pulse processing plants, Mr. 
Speaker. And the dark cloud that hangs over our pulse industry 
is certainly not good news, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And as I indicated, the labelling issue will certainly . . . is 
certainly not good news to our livestock industry, an industry 
that we’re looking to grow and help grow this province now has 
another . . . has a dark cloud hanging over it. 
 
I’d like to give a couple of examples, Mr. Speaker, that I’ve 
been able to pick up off the Internet as to the effects of this 
subsidy on US farmers. Senator Harkin of Iowa, the Chair of 
the Ag Committee, estimates that a typical Iowa farm of 1,000 
acres of corn and soybeans will receive about $84,000 US in 
subsidies under this program. 
 
Well if my math is anywhere near correct, I estimate that to be 
about $135,000 Canadian or about $135 an acre. Well I think 
some of our farmers would be very happy with a mere fraction 
of that kind of support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I raise the issue . . . I mentioned that peas are 
being subsidized at a fairly high level. And an example that I’ve 
been able to come up with on . . . as to how these subsidies will 
affect pea producers in North Dakota, for instance . . . as I’d 
mentioned, the base grade for peas under their program is feed 
peas. Well those people that are involved in producing and 
selling peas that know that there’s quite . . . quite often, there’s 
quite a large difference between edible peas and feed pea prices. 
And in this example, the writer of this example uses the 
scenario of the . . . using current prices in North Dakota. 
 
The current price for feed peas in Canadian dollars is $4.71 a 
bushel. Yet the price for edible peas is $6.21 a bushel. But 
under the farm program, it doesn’t recognize that. So when the 
farmer, the North Dakota farmer sells his peas, the program . . . 
he sells them for 6.28. The program recognizes it, the value as 
4.71. The loan rate is 5.94. So if you do all the math, at the end 
of the day, that North Dakota farmer ends up with $7.51 a 
bushel. That’s a very profitable price for feed peas, Mr. 
Speaker. I think any farmer in Saskatchewan would be more 
than happy to obtain those kind of prices. 
 
So what do you think that’s going to do to the pea production 
down . . . across the 49th? The North Dakota farmers are having 
disease problems in their cereal crops. So they’re going to go to 
these pulse crops in a big way and, of course, that’s going to 
have a huge negative impact on us, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what can we do, Mr. Speaker? What can the Saskatchewan 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1117 

 

farmer expect from our governments? Well, Mr. Speaker, if he 
looks to what the federal government has been telling him in the 
last number of years, he really certainly isn’t very optimistic. 
 
Our federal counterparts in Ottawa, they view Saskatchewan 
farm production, particularly the grain and oilseed sector, as a 
sunset industry. In other words, a dying industry. And they 
don’t really see any advantage in putting taxpayers’ dollars into 
that industry. 
 
Now I’m not saying that I agree with . . . I certainly do not 
agree with that analysis of our industry, Mr. Speaker. But 
unfortunately, the bureaucrats and some of the federal ministers 
have that view of our industry and it’s a difficult view to . . . 
and it’s very difficult to change their minds. 
 
(16:15) 
 
In 1996 the federal government withdrew their support for grain 
transportation. They cancelled the Western Grain 
Transportation Act which brought in about $300 million in 
freight subsidy to Saskatchewan, and they didn’t replace it with 
anything. 
 
At that time the grain prices were rising and they felt that there 
was no need to replace it. And of course they were also 
undergoing budgetary restraints and trying to balance their 
budget. And I’m sure that was the major factor in them 
withdrawing that program. 
 
They also don’t recognize the fact that other . . . our federal 
counterparts certainly don’t recognize the fact that other 
governments, national governments, are continuing to 
subsidize. We keep hearing in this province and all across 
Western Canada that we’re going to work . . . we’re going to 
talk to the Americans, we’re going to talk to the Europeans, and 
get them to reduce our subsidies and then we’ll have more of a 
level playing field. 
 
Well as other members have said in this House, that simply is 
not happening. And the recent issue of a Wheat Board 
publication has some information on the levels of subsidy. And 
this is taken from the OECD (Organization for Economic 
Co-operation and Development). The level of support in the US 
for a bushel . . . or a tonne of wheat in Canadian dollars is $135 
per tonne; in the EU it’s 113; and in Canada it’s 26; and the 
Australians are at $9, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But our federal government keeps saying, well we’re going to 
talk to the other governments around the world and get them to 
reduce their subsidies. Well it’s not going to happen. It’s a fact 
of life and we see it in this US farm Bill. And the Europeans 
have told our federal ministers over and over again, go away — 
don’t talk to us about this issue because we’re going to continue 
to subsidize, and if your farmers are suffering that’s your 
problem and you better deal with it. And to this point in time 
our federal government certainly isn’t dealing with it in a very 
effective manner. 
 
As a matter of fact, Mr. Speaker, I think that Western Canadian 
farmers are the cannon fodder in this trade war and our federal 
government really doesn’t care a whole lot about what’s 
happening out here. They’re more concerned about protecting 

their industries in Central and Eastern Canada, particularly the 
auto industry and those type of industries. Our counterparts in 
Prince Edward Island saw the same ineffective federal 
government when they had their problems with potatoes here 
just very recently, Mr. Speaker. 
 
However, the provincial government also has a role to play in 
this whole area. And I would like to look at this point in time at 
the provincial record. And I’d like to do this, Mr. Speaker, in a 
factual way, not in a critical way. What are the facts out there? 
And what is this NDP government’s record, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Well we all know, we’ve heard it many times in this House and 
everyone knows how this government tore up GRIP back in the 
early ’90s and they said that they’d replace it with something. 
 
Perhaps the GRIP program was too rich and it couldn’t be 
sustained from a fiscal point of view, but it certainly . . . there 
was a need to replace it, Mr. Speaker. And to this point in time, 
we haven’t seen anything. 
 
And then we’ve had a few periods . . . a period of a few years in 
the middle ’90s where — as the members opposite point out — 
agriculture was doing fairly well. Canola was at 8 to $10 a 
bushel, wheat was up around 5, and all those sorts of things. 
Cattle prices were fairly reasonable. And so there wasn’t a great 
need for a safety net. And so these people across the way were 
keeping their fingers crossed that that would continue and they 
wouldn’t have to deal with the problem. 
 
Well we all know what happened. Things went south, as they 
say, in the late ’90s — ’98, ’99, when hog prices hit an all-time 
low; grain prices hit a low. And so here we were once again in 
an income crisis. Other countries were subsidizing and the 
Saskatchewan farmers really had nothing to fall back on. 
 
So what the . . . We had the emergency debate in December of 
’99 and then we had sent representatives from both sides of the 
House down to Ottawa to talk to the federal government. And 
the NDP government and the minister of Agriculture of the day 
apparently hadn’t done their homework completely and didn’t 
have sufficient facts and figures to back up their position and 
got blindsided by the Prime Minister. 
 
The Saskatchewan Party representatives, the people who were 
part of that delegation, provided the minister of Agriculture 
with the current facts and figures very shortly . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. All members 
will have their opportunity to speak. 
 
Mr. Hart: — But nonetheless it was a joint effort and everyone 
was working towards a common purpose. And eventually I 
believe, if memory recalls, there was a bit of a program that was 
put in place, kind of a stop-gap measure that did at least ease 
some of the hurt. But it was again — it was a stop-gap, nothing 
long term. And to this point in time, we still don’t have 
anything long term. 
 
And then that brings us to the present, Mr. Speaker, to this 
year’s budget. And we see this government backing away from 
agriculture — reducing the coverage under the crop insurance 
program, eliminating the tax rebate on . . . education tax on 



1118 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

property, agricultural property, and allocating less money to 
their provincial budget for agriculture, Mr. Speaker. And so 
what kind of message — when you look at that type of history 
— what kind of message does that send to other parts of the 
country? 
 
I’m sure the federal people — the federal Agriculture minister, 
the federal Finance minister, perhaps the Prime Minister — 
they’re looking and saying well, is this government . . . is this 
Saskatchewan NDP government really serious about 
agriculture? Do they . . . do they . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. Order, please. Order. Order. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, as I said when I started my remarks 
in this section, I’m not trying to be critical, I’m just trying to lay 
out the facts as they may be seen in Eastern Canada, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
And I think it’s important that we all take this issue very, very 
seriously because it is a very, very serious issue. And that this 
government has to make a . . . make some kind of a movement, 
send some sort of a signal to our federal government that this is 
a very serious issue, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So farmers of Saskatchewan are asking, well where do we go 
from here? And I would say, Mr. Speaker . . . I have a couple of 
suggestions that we, as elected legislators can do. 
 
I think we could support the farm organizations from across 
Western Canada that called on the federal government to come 
up with the $1.3 billion trade distortion payments, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Those farm organizations were made up of various 
organizations right across this country — the Grain Growers of 
Canada, the Keystone Producers of Manitoba, APAS 
(Agricultural Producers Association of Saskatchewan) from 
Saskatchewan, and Wild Rose from Alberta. Mr. Speaker, I 
think all farmers across Canada recognize that we have a huge 
problem here, Mr. Speaker, and I think we should support that 
initiative. 
 
We need to talk to our American neighbours. Perhaps what we 
need to do is have joint meetings between elected officials — 
whether it be at the federal or provincial level and the state 
level, Mr. Speaker. We need to put our case forward and let 
them know how their programs are hurting us, Mr. Speaker. 
And I would encourage farm organizations to do the same, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
But having said that, if those . . . if those discussions don’t lead 
to any solution of this . . . with this problem, Mr. Speaker, I 
think it’s time that we, as Canadians, stand up to our American 
neighbours. I think it’s time to stand up to the schoolyard bully. 
 
If you stand up, you better be prepared to maybe get a bloody 
nose, but I think it’s time to draw that line in the sand and say, 
look, this is enough. We’ve been there for you in Afghanistan, 
we’ve been there for you in other areas of the world, and this is 
what you’re doing to us. And I think we have to urge our 
federal government to do that, Mr. Speaker. 
 

So, Mr. Speaker, having said that, I think, as I said, I think it’s 
very important that we as united elected representatives send 
this message to Ottawa that this has huge potential . . . potential 
for huge damage to our industry and to our province, Mr. 
Speaker. And so, Mr. Speaker, I would say that I would be very 
happy to support both the motion and the amendment, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Members here 
will know that it isn’t every day that I get up and speak on a 
subject pertaining to agriculture. But I think it’s important that 
we all take part in this debate and that people from rural areas 
and urban areas, such as I am, stand together with respect to this 
issue because it is an issue that affects everyone in the province. 
It does not just affect producers and rural people — it affects 
producers and rural people for sure — but it affects the people 
that live in the towns and the cities, and ultimately, it affects the 
provincial treasury. And I want to talk about that, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I want to start out by saying . . . by making this point, Mr. 
Speaker, and that is that it is pretended by our federal 
government in Ottawa that we have free trade between Canada 
and the United States. That is what our federal government does 
— it pretends we have free trade between those two countries, 
and it designs its farm policies based upon the pretence that 
there is free trade so that the federal government says we don’t 
have to subsidize our farmers because we have free trade with 
the United States, even though the United States pays heavy 
subsidies to its farmers, as the other members have said. 
 
And I want to say that as the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood said, Mr. Speaker, and as others in the 
debate have said, these subsidies are not going to go away — 
they are not going to go away. The federal government wishes 
that they would go away and pretends that they would go away 
or have gone away. 
 
But we know from the meeting of the GATT (General 
Agreement on Tariffs and Trade) countries that took place 
earlier this year that when — or last year, I should say — that 
when they agreed that they would begin to negotiate the doing 
away of agricultural subsidies, they set out a schedule of 
negotiations over the next nine years. They will talk about it for 
nine years before something might happen — it might happen. 
 
But I agree with what the members here, including the Premier 
and the member from Last Mountain-Touchwood, said. It’s 
something that might happen. But you know what? It’s not 
going to happen. 
 
It’s not going to happen because people who live in Europe and 
have suffered under wars on their land and, as the member from 
Last Mountain-Touchwood said, people in the United States 
who were shaken up by September 11 want security, and they 
want security of food supply. And so those subsidies aren’t 
going anywhere. But we pretend as a matter of federal policy 
that they have, or they will. And it is totally untrue. 
 
And in that sense I think it’s fair to say when referring to 
federal farm policy, the emperor has no clothes. The emperor 
has no clothes whatsoever because the whole policy is based 
upon a pretence. 
 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1119 

 

And I might add that the United States in engaged in a pretence 
as well. Because the United States, in their rhetoric, pretends 
that they believe in free trade. They don’t. They believe in free 
trade when it suits them, and they don’t believe in free trade 
when it doesn’t suit them. So we get hit by the softwood lumber 
duties when we try to sell our lumber, and our producers get hit 
by farm subsidies when they try to sell their farm products. 
 
And I agree with, and I think we all agree with what the 
member from Prince Albert said, the Minister of Industry and 
Resources, which is that we know that our producers are 
amongst the best and most efficient in the world, and the quality 
of the product that they produce is among the best in the world. 
And they could not only compete on a level playing field — 
they would win hands down, Mr. Speaker. There is no question 
about that. 
 
But there is no level playing field because they are thrown onto 
a world market where it is absolutely impossible for them to 
succeed. It is impossible for them to succeed. And the member 
from Last Mountain-Touchwood actually described it very well. 
Because he said, it doesn’t really matter what price the 
American producer gets for his product, because as long as he’s 
guaranteed his income from the Government of the United 
States, it doesn’t make any difference what the price is. 
 
And it is impossible for a Canadian farmer to put his or her 
product on that kind of market and make a living. It’s simply 
not possible. And it has nothing to do with the ability of the 
producer in Canada. It has nothing to do with that at all. It has 
to do with artificially low prices because the price doesn’t 
matter when you’re paid by the government. 
 
(16:30) 
 
And in the United States, they’ve been paid by the government 
for a long time. Now it’s getting a lot worse. And the same is 
true in Europe. They rely — the farmers in Europe and the 
United States — on direct payments from their federal 
governments. 
 
And I want to tell the House, Mr. Speaker, as I did in a release I 
sent out last week, that when I went to Corner Brook, 
Newfoundland last Wednesday for a meeting that took place on 
Thursday and Friday with the federal Finance minister and the 
other provincial Finance ministers . . . they were there to 
discuss fiscal arrangements as between the federal government 
and the provinces. In other words, how much equalization do 
we get? How much transfer support for Health do we get? And 
it was mainly about Health. 
 
But I want to report to the House that when I had the 
opportunity to raise in front of my provincial colleagues, but 
most importantly the federal minister in Corner Brook that — 
Paul Martin, the federal Minister of Finance — my words then 
were exactly as they are today except abbreviated. And that 
was, I said to him, Mr. Minister, you are pretending that we 
have free trade, but you are throwing our producers, you know, 
onto the mercy of a market in which they cannot compete and 
we have to acknowledge that. We have to acknowledge that 
federal policy is based on a falsehood. 
 
Mainly I wanted to tell the House that this is something that 

when we have the opportunity, we raise with the federal 
government at every opportunity. Although, I also know that 
the provincial Minister of Agriculture, my colleague, the 
Deputy Premier, is raising this constantly with the federal 
government, and I think meeting with the federal minister very 
soon this week perhaps or next week. 
 
Well I said at the beginning of my remarks that I wanted to 
speak on this because it affects us all. And I wanted to speak on 
it as provincial Finance minister as well. Because when you get 
right down to it, what has happened here is — and it’s been 
going on for a long time, but now it’s accelerating and it’s 
going to continue unless something is done — the producers in 
Saskatchewan and elsewhere, in Manitoba, Alberta, and if they 
have grain producers in Ontario and BC to some extent, they 
are being robbed of their incomes by these international 
subsidies. That is what is happening. 
 
And, as I said, it’s impossible for them to compete. And for the 
provincial economy, that doesn’t just affect the producers, that 
affects everyone. Because it means that the producers’ profits 
are not there; the profits that they deserve and that should be 
there. And so that money doesn’t go to them and then it doesn’t 
go into the provincial economy generally, whether you’re 
talking about implement dealers, or contractors, or retailers, or 
input suppliers who will sell to farmers, and ultimately the 
provincial treasury, you know. 
 
And I think of my neighbour in Saskatoon who is an implement 
salesperson, and that’s how he’s made his living for a long time 
— I think almost his whole life — but he’s not an implement 
salesperson any more, Mr. Speaker. And some of the 
dealerships are gone too because the money isn’t there. 
 
So when farmers get less, the service industries that serve 
farmers get less, and businesses generally get less because 
farmers are like everybody else — they spend their money. And 
ultimately the provincial treasury gets less, and so that we have 
less to deal with on behalf of all of the people of the province. 
 
And so we all lose by this, Mr. Speaker. We all lose. The 
producers lose but so do all of us and we all suffer the effects of 
it, the effects of very distorting trade wars. 
 
And we all have been left high and dry by the federal 
government which pretends the problem doesn’t exist — and 
that is the long and the short of it. We’re left high and dry by a 
federal government that, in this instance, simply pretends that 
the problem doesn’t exist when it stares us in the face. 
 
And now I want to say of course, the question . . . When we’re 
under this kind of pressure which affects us all, and it affects us 
in government when we’re trying to put a budget together 
because we don’t have the revenues that we would like to have, 
because farm incomes are down and therefore the economy’s 
down and incomes are down generally, and the question may be 
asked, well, you know, if the farmers are in difficulty then 
you’re the government — looking at the province — why don’t 
you come up with the money? 
 
And I suppose I would say this, Mr. Speaker — it’s obvious but 
sometimes it needs to be said — the provincial government is 
only the provincial taxpayer in the sense that whatever we do, 



1120 Saskatchewan Hansard May 1, 2002 

 

whatever we spend on behalf of the province, we have to get 
that money from the taxpayer. 
 
Now the problem, of course, is that the provincial taxpayer base 
has been eroded, as I’ve tried to say, and made weaker when the 
farm economy is hit by this kind of situation. 
 
And it seems clear to me, and I would make the argument, that 
you can’t ask the provincial taxpayers, the taxpayers of this 
province to go head to head or toe to toe with the treasury of the 
United States of America. Most reasonable people would know 
that’s not going to work. And you can’t ask them to go toe to 
toe or head to head with the treasuries of Europe because the 
provincial taxpayers don’t have that kind of money. 
 
And it seems to me that we need to be united here because we 
are, in Saskatchewan, 3.4 per cent of the population of Canada 
but we have 42 per cent of the arable farmland. In other words, 
we’ve got the biggest problem from this situation but we don’t 
have that many people; and clearly, therefore, it is a federal 
responsibility to deal with international trade issues, to fight 
international trade wars, and to match the subsidies paid by 
other federal governments. 
 
And I think most people would understand that that is the case 
when we in Saskatchewan, with 42 per cent of the farmland, are 
really the ones that are most severely targeted or affected by the 
US subsidies. We should not be left alone, Mr. Speaker. We 
should not be left alone by our federal government to fight this 
fight. 
 
And I have to say I always was in agreement with — and still 
am — something the former minister of Agriculture, Eric 
Upshall, used to say and I thought it described the situation very 
well. And that is, he used to say, you don’t ask somebody who 
is bleeding badly to give themselves a blood transfusion. You 
don’t ask somebody who’s bleeding badly to give themselves a 
blood transfusion. 
 
And I think all of us in this House have to be united and realize 
if we’re bleeding badly as a province and a people because the 
producers are hurting and the businesses are hurting and the 
provincial tax . . . provincial treasury is hurting, if we’re the 
ones that are bleeding, we shouldn’t be looking to ourselves to 
give ourselves a transfusion because we’d have to get the ones 
bleeding to donate the blood. We’ve got to have some 
assistance from the federal government. 
 
And it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that this has gone well 
beyond — well beyond — the situation that anybody is whining 
and complaining or crying wolf about a problem that doesn’t 
exist. This is a real problem that affects real producers and 
affects real people in a very real way. It has got to be dealt with 
and it affects everybody. 
 
So it seems to me, Mr. Speaker, that for those reasons we need 
to be very united and focused. We need to be dealing with a 
very serious situation in a united way. And to do that it’s seems 
to me, with the greatest of respect to any who may disagree, 
that we need to, in a united way, focus our efforts on the federal 
government and not be divided in our message but say to them: 
we’re bleeding; we can’t give ourselves a transfusion; please 
come to our assistance in the way that a national government 

should. So thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
pleased both as member for North Battleford and on behalf of 
my party to express my wholehearted support of the motion 
before this House. 
 
Now I would like to also say that I appreciate the comments of 
the Leader of the Opposition to the effect that we had the farm 
. . . the farm crusade to Ottawa. It is time now for key leaders 
from Ottawa come . . . to come to Saskatchewan and to see the 
situation here first-hand. And that if they do come — and I trust 
they will — they will be welcomed because we know that this 
country works when all regions and all sectors of the economy 
are treated fairly. 
 
We know that, as a country, when there is a crisis — say in the 
cod fishery of Newfoundland — we expect our federal 
government to respond. When there is a crisis in . . . with farm 
commodity prices in Saskatchewan, we again believe that we 
have an economic and a moral right to call on the support of our 
fellow Canadians and on our federal government. 
 
Now a number of members have mentioned that shortly after 
the last provincial election, there was a delegation composed of 
all parties in this House and a number of leaders in the farm 
community that went to Ottawa to meet with the members of 
the House of Commons in Ottawa to explain the position. And 
sadly, I am forced to concede that that trip to Ottawa was not a 
success. Not only did we not succeed in getting additional help 
from our farmers but furthermore . . . furthermore, the delegates 
were not even treated with a great deal of respect. 
 
And the federal Liberals, who had strongly supported the 
establishment of a coalition, I think history will say they 
weakened the coalition at that point. 
 
But more important, it led to a discouragement of our producers 
here in Saskatchewan and their right to know that their federal 
government stands behind them. I think in other . . . in other 
international meetings we went to — and I’m pleased with the 
comments of the Premier this afternoon — in other meetings we 
went to, for instance world trade in Seattle, we fell in line with 
the federal government in saying that the first order of business 
must be to reduce international subsidies. 
 
Well at first glance that seems to be a worthwhile goal. But I, 
like the Premier, increasingly upon listening to our colleagues 
in other countries in the world, came to the conclusion it was 
simply a non-starter. The US says they have subsidies because 
the European Union has subsidies; and the European Union I 
think made it abundantly clear to us that this is a matter of 
policy with them and they are not going to change. 
 
The Europeans use the phrase multi-functionalism. Now that’s a 
$10 word that’s hard to get your tongue around, but as I 
understand it, it means social policy. They are going to support 
agriculture as a matter of social policy. They don’t care how 
much it costs, they are not going to change. They are not going 
to change their policy. 
 



May 1, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 1121 

 

Therefore we have to adopt our national policy here in Canada 
around the given that other countries will be subsidizing. And it 
is simply a blind alley for us to develop Canadian policy 
around, well, Europeans and Americans shouldn’t be doing this; 
because Europeans and Americans are doing it and are going to 
continue doing it. So how will we respond? 
 
I’d also like to say, Mr. Speaker, that I agree with the Deputy 
Premier that farm support cannot be based on 60/40. I agree that 
this province simply does not have the tax base to support much 
in the line of agriculture support programs if we have to 
contribute to the tune of 40 per cent. 
 
The figures we have heard from the media suggest that US farm 
subsidies will be in the region of $17 billion a year. Now that’s 
American dollars, that’s not Canadian dollarettes. Put in another 
sense, that is five to six times the total provincial budget of 
Saskatchewan. Saskatchewan clearly does not have the 
resources to compete, and indeed I would question whether the 
whole of Canada does. 
 
(16:45) 
 
But in pressing our federal government to support our 
producers, I think we should not totally lose sight of the fact 
that the goal has to be a viable and sustainable agriculture 
industry, not one based on a false economy. And I think that the 
ACRE (Action Committee on the Rural Economy) committee 
members did us a service on Monday night when among the 
information they supplied us was to the effect that, despite US 
subsidies, North Dakota producers are in fact no better off than 
Saskatchewan producers. 
 
Now how can that be, Mr. Speaker, in view of the billions of 
dollars going into North Dakota? The answer appears quite 
simply, the answer appears quite simply that the . . . that it has 
gone into the price of farmland. And farmland that would go for 
$400 an acre in Canada goes for $2,000 an acre in North 
Dakota, and that’s where the subsidy money has been lost. 
 
While I said that I accept that we cannot afford to participate in 
major programs that are 60/40 shared, I’ve said that our federal 
government has to stand behind our producers, however, I 
would like to say that the . . . when I was part of the Romanow 
government, they brought in the 25 per cent reduction in the 
property tax. And I think that was a small step by the then 
Agriculture minister, Dwain Lingenfelter, to try and come to the 
aid of our producers. 
 
And I think that was important, at least in a symbolic sense, 
because it seems to me that we cannot, as a Saskatchewan 
legislature, call on Toronto taxpayers to care more about our 
farmers than we care. We can’t be in the position of saying, 
well Toronto should care even if we don’t. 
 
And we know that, we know that now Dwain Lingenfelter is 
gone from the government. We know that there are other 
members of the government who have taken the position that 
their back alleys . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
Order. 
 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We know that there 
is, there is some tension, some rift in government ranks between 
those who agreed with Mr. Lingenfelter that coming to the 
support of our producers was important, and those who took the 
position that their back alleys in Saskatoon were more 
important than the highways connecting our small communities. 
Now unfortunately, in this year’s budget when the 25 per cent 
rebate on the education tax on farmland was dropped, I think 
we know which group is now in the ascendancy. 
 
But that said, I do concede that we cannot support our 
producers without the assistance of the federal government. I 
believe and say that we have both an economic and a moral 
right to that assistance from our federal government — that part 
of being a nation, part of being a federation, is that all regions, 
all sectors of the economy have a right to fair and equal 
consideration. 
 
And I hope and believe that when ministers of our federal 
government visit this province, when they see first-hand the 
situation in this province, that we will have the sympathetic ear 
that we deserve and that frankly we did not receive when we 
went to Ottawa in October of 1999. 
 
And I support both the motion and the amendment. 
 
Amendment agreed to. 
 
Motion as amended agreed to. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, leave to introduce a 
motion of transmittal. 
 
Leave granted. 
 
Hon. Mr. Lautermilch: — Mr. Speaker, I move, seconded by 
the member from Cannington: 
 

That by leave of the Assembly, the Speaker, on behalf of 
the Legislative Assembly of Saskatchewan, transmit copies 
of the emergency motion just passed by this Assembly to 
the Prime Minister of Canada, the federal Minister of 
Agriculture, the federal minister responsible for the 
Canadian Wheat Board, the federal minister responsible for 
International Trade, and the federal Minister of Finance. 

 
I so move. 
 
Motion agreed to. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:52. 
 


