















































Hansard: April 17, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 791 
 April 17, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 
Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf 
of citizens of Saskatchewan concerned about changes to the 
deductible for the prescription drug plan in Saskatchewan. The 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
As is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the residents of Porcupine Plain and 
Bjorkdale. 
 
I so present, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise today 
to present a petition on behalf of citizens of Saskatchewan who 
would like to see the SGI (Saskatchewan Government 
Insurance) deductible policy changed. And the petition reads as 
follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to work with SGI to develop more fair 
guidelines for deductibles on vehicles that are damaged as a 
result of an attempted car theft. 

 
And the signatures on this petition, Mr. Speaker, are from 
Bradwell and Allan, Saskatchewan. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition to 
present today from people who are concerned about long-term 
care home rates: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
The people who have signed this petition are from Melfort, 
Saint-Front, and Wynyard. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too rise on 
behalf of citizens who are most concerned about the exorbitant 
fee increases for long-term care services. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

Signatures on this petition today, Mr. Speaker, are from my 
home community of Melfort, and also from Gronlid and 
Tisdale. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition 
to present today, Mr. Speaker. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signators, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Gerald, Esterhazy, Stockholm, and Churchbridge. 
 
Mr. Stewart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
citizens concerned with the deplorable condition of Highway 
339. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
repair Highway 339 in order to facilitate economic 
development initiatives. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed, Mr. Speaker, by individuals from the 
community of Avonlea. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m gratified to stand 
this afternoon to present a petition to halt crop insurance 
premium hikes and coverage reductions. And the prayer reads 
as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures on this petition come from producers and other 
interested individuals in the community of Eastend. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today to 
present a petition on behalf of citizens of the province that are 
concerned about the increase in long-term care fees. And the 
prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 



792 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Radville, 
and Fillmore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present a 
petition today as well. It’s on the subject of tobacco control 
legislation. And the prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products. 

 
Mr. Speaker, several petitioners from the city of Swift Current 
and as well as one from Stewart Valley, north of the city of 
Swift Current. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition here to halt crop 
insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions. The prayer 
reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens from Kenaston, Saskatoon, and 
Macrorie. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Mr. Speaker, I have a petition this afternoon in 
regard to the harmful effects that tobacco smoking has on 
public health. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that would make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 
 

Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the good folks of Duck 
Lake. 
 

Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also rise to present 
a petition to halt crop insurance premium hikes and coverage 
reductions. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Biggar and Saskatoon. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have yet another 
petition about the deplorable state of Highway No. 15. And the 
prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for the Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And again, the signatures demonstrate how well-travelled this 
highway is. The signatures are from Saskatoon, Caronport, 
Nokomis, Moose Jaw, Outlook, Watrous; East Selkirk, 
Manitoba; Edmonton and Sundrie, Alberta; and Cranbrook, 
British Columbia. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been received as addendums to previously tabled petitions 
being sessional papers no. 7, 8, 11, 18, 23, 24, and 31. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice I shall 
on day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the Minister of Government Relations. Can the minister 
please provide this Assembly with which communities 
were turned down under the Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure Program that applied for funding for water 
and sewer upgrades in the calendar year 2001. 

 
Further to that: why were these communities turned down? 

 
INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 

 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
my privilege to introduce 41 of some of the best-looking young 
men and women in west central Saskatchewan to the Assembly. 
From the North West Central School in Plenty, there are 41 
students from grades 10 to 12 sitting in the east gallery. They 
are accompanied by their teachers, Cindy Thomson, Melissa 
Trann, Erin Jones, and Cheryl Dipple. 
 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 793 

 

Now I believe that I share some of these students with the 
constituency of Kindersley. So on behalf of both the ridings of 
Rosetown-Biggar and Kindersley, and to all members, would 
you welcome these students from the Plenty high school. 
Welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

University of Regina Receives Research Funds 
 
Mr. McCall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m happy to report 
on some good news in new and exciting research taking place at 
my alma mater, the University of Regina. Two significant 
projects will be receiving $130,000 from the province through 
the innovation and science new opportunities fund — money 
which will match a federal contribution through the Canadian 
Foundation for Innovation. 
 
First project, a state-of-the-arts biophysics lab is being funded 
for Professor Tanya Dahms, who is doing research on how 
drugs work at the molecular level. Her research will lead to the 
development of better strategies for pain management, the 
treatment of drug addiction, and other uses, Mr. Speaker. 
 
As well, the university is purchasing a mass spectrometer to aid 
in the research of Professor Michael Chen, whose studies of 
carbon dioxide will aid in a more economically feasible 
reduction of greenhouse gas emissions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I may have been an arts major but I do understand 
the significance of these projects. I also understand the 
government’s support of research and development as 
represented by these two examples and how it will make our 
research institutions more attractive to other researchers. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is an investment in innovation and it will 
ensure that my university as well as that other one too, will 
continue to be able make — pardon me, Mr. Speaker — will 
continue to be able to attract and retain the best and brightest 
researchers, faculty, and students. Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Shellbrook Elks Win Senior A Crown 
 

Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The hockey 
season has nearly come to an end and in rural Saskatchewan, 
places like the town of Shellbrook, it ended on a very, very 
positive note. The town of Shellbrook is a very sports minded 
town, and it’s no exception when it comes to the game of 
hockey. 
 
The Shellbrook Elks hockey team won the Saskatchewan 
Hockey Association’s Senior A Crown. You might want to ask 
who they beat in the finals. 
 
Well my seatmate, the member from Last 
Mountain-Touchwood, represents the team from Southey which 
was defeated by Shellbrook in two straight games. 
 
Under the leadership of coach Denis Cromartie the team played 

with a winning attitude and winning they did. 
 
Manager Bruce Clements quoted, “the team had a lot of 
character.” The Southey coach, or pardon me, the Southey 
playing coach, Warren Fry, said: “with good goaltending and 
great defence, what could they do, they played great.” 
 
Shellbrook got to the finals by defeating Melfort, Conquest, 
Cudworth, and Meadow Lake. Southey had to eliminate 
Bethune, Esterhazy, Avonlea, and Semans to get to the final, 
and Shellbrook was the victorious winner. 
 
The Shellbrook team was crowned in front of the largest crowd 
in history at the Shellbrook Recreational Centre that night. 
 
I just want to say to the coach, Denis Cromartie, manager, 
Bruce Clements, assistant manager, Warren Hintz, and of 
course the players of the Shellbrook Elks hockey team, 
congratulations on a great, great season and thank you from all 
the fans. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Ernest Lindner Painting 
Returned Home to Saskatchewan 

 
Ms. Atkinson: — Thank you. For about two years in my first 
term as MLA (Member of the Legislative Assembly) for 
Saskatoon Nutana, I was honoured to have as a constituent, 
Ernest Lindner, one of Saskatchewan’s — in fact one of 
Canada’s — best known and most original artists. He was a 
remarkable man in many ways: artist, teacher, innovator, 
soldier, father, grandfather, and a friend to many. 
 
His paintings are in museums and private collections across the 
country, including the MacKenzie and Mendel galleries, and the 
Saskatchewan Arts Board collection. 
 
I mention Mr. Lindner because like his many admirers, I was 
happy to hear that one of his most significant paintings is 
coming home to Saskatchewan. Mr. Speaker, the painting is 
coming home from Alberta where it was found rolled up around 
a piece of metal downspout. It was auctioned to raise money for 
health care in Alberta. 
 
Our Western Development Museum bought this very large 
Saskatchewan landscape painting and will eventually circulate 
it amongst its branches in Saskatoon, Moose Jaw, North 
Battleford, and Yorkton. First it will be displayed in Saskatoon 
and the public will be able to watch the restoration as it 
progresses. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Lindner came to Saskatoon from Austria in 
1926. He died in 1988. He was a member of the Order of 
Canada, a founding member of the Saskatchewan Arts Board, 
an original member of the Emma Lake Artists’ Workshop, and 
an invaluable citizen of our province. 
 
He would, I am sure, be pleased that this piece of work will 
now belong where it belongs here in our province. Thank you, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



794 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

(13:45) 
 

Carrot River Implements 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
Carrot River Implements recently marked 35 years of service. It 
was on April 15, 1967, that Jim and Caroline Doherty began 
operating Versatile implements in Carrot River. When they 
began operating, they were the fifth implement dealer in the 
community, and 35 years later, they now are the only one. 
 
The reason Jim gives for the survival of his business is 
dedicated staff and a philosophy of service. One employee has 
been with the company for 22 years and three other employees 
served over 20 years before retiring. At present there are seven 
employees. Regular customers include members of at least one 
four-generation farm family. 
 
Jim has seen many changes over the years. There have not only 
been the obvious changes in price of equipment, but also the 
many changes in the entire agriculture industry. Jim is also the 
mayor of Carrot River and has served on town council for over 
18 years. Jim was very involved in the fight to keep the Carrot 
River hospital open, and though unsuccessful, he is proud of the 
community’s ability to maintain two doctors. Caroline has also 
been very active in the community and has served for many 
years as a leader with the 4-H club. 
 
I would ask all members to join me in congratulating Jim and 
Caroline Doherty on the 35th anniversary of Carrot River 
Implements. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

16th Annual Rotary Golden Wheel Awards 
 
Hon. Mr. Cline: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
yesterday five Saskatoon residents were honoured at the 16th 
annual Rotary Golden Wheel awards ceremony for their 
contributions to our community: in education, Dr. Gwenna 
Moss for her contribution to the fields of adult education and 
extension learning; in arts, Gerry Gullickson, who has been 
extensively involved in Saskatoon’s music community for over 
40 years; for commerce and industry, Doug Tastad, who for 22 
years has guided the development of Innovation Place, with 
growth in agriculture, telecommunications, resources and 
environment, computing technologies, health, and engineering; 
charitable volunteer, Don Ravis, a board member and past Chair 
of the Saskatoon Foundation, fundraiser for several worthy 
causes, and former Member of Parliament; outstanding 
Rotarian, Elmer Lundback, a retired schoolteacher and 
administrator who served as the administrator for Manitou 
Lodge in Watrous. 
 
Mr. Speaker, these people are examples of the rich and proud 
history that this province has in volunteer activity and we salute 
them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Joints in Motion Marathon 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We’d like to talk 

today about a remarkable resident of Davidson. In January 6 of 
this year, Shelley Cross travelled to Orlando, Florida to attend 
the Joints in Motion marathon for the benefit of the Arthritis 
Society. Mrs. Cross completed the 42k (kilometre) marathon to 
fulfill the pledge of $4,500 she raised on behalf of the Arthritis 
Society. 
 
To take part in this marathon, Joints in Motion team members 
must raise money on behalf of someone who has arthritis. Mrs. 
Cross ran on behalf of her mother-in-law, Joan Cross, who has 
had rheumatoid arthritis for many years. Unfortunately, in 
January of 2001, Shelly herself was diagnosed as having 
rheumatoid arthritis, giving her added incentive to tackle the 
challenge of completing the charity marathon in Florida. 
 
She was one of the 56 runners on Saskatchewan’s Joints in 
Motion team who were among 290 Canadians who participated 
in the marathon. In Saskatchewan, runners raised $219,000 
which was added to the 1.1 million raised in Canada. 
 
Twenty-one thousand people took part in the marathon, which 
followed a 42k route through Disney World’s Orlando theme 
parks. Only 8,000 of these participants finished a full marathon 
of which Shelley Cross is one of the finishers. She said it was 
difficult running as the day started out sunny but quickly turned 
into a rainstorm. Rain-soaked running shoes quickly created 
painful blisters, but Mrs. Cross was able to finish. The entire 
Canadian Joints in Motion team finished the marathon. 
 
Mrs. Cross said the support from the town of Davidson was 
tremendous. People can really put a face to arthritis in a town 
like this. You can see what arthritis does to people. 
 
I would ask all the members to join me in congratulating 
Shelley Cross. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Lumsden One of Canada’s Prettiest Towns 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise today 
to speak about the cover story from the WeekEnder in the 
Regina Leader-Post Saturday, April 13 edition. Mr. Speaker, 
the title of this article reads, and I quote: 
 

LUMSDEN: One of Canada’s prettiest towns. 
 
Cradled in the Qu’Appelle Valley, Lumsden was named the 
“the prettiest town on the prairies” when the village was 
born in 1889. 

 
Now it has been renamed that back in the ’60s, I’m told, and 
then again recently. That description holds true today. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is one of the prettiest towns in the country. 
Editors of Harrowsmith Country Life magazine researched 
towns and villages across Canada and came up with the 10 
prettiest towns in the country. Lumsden, Mr. Speaker, joined 
the ranks with towns such as Stratford, Ontario, Greenwood, 
BC (British Columbia), and New Glasgow, PEI (Prince Edward 
Island), just to name a few. 
 
Surrounded by undulating hills, Lumsden is between the 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 795 

 

confluence of Wascana Creek with the Qu’Appelle River on the 
west and Boggy Creek on the east. 
 
Mr. Speaker, not only the absolute beauty that Lumsden 
possesses ranked it amongst the prettiest towns in Canada, but 
also its sense of community. It is a home to and inspiration for a 
thriving community of a wide variety of artists, a tremendous 
community that works together on a number of projects, and all 
of that goes together to make it one of the prettiest and one of 
the best communities in this country. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Implications of Increases in Long-Term Care Fees 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. My 
question today is for the Premier. 
 
Yesterday the Saskatchewan Party moved a motion calling on 
the NDP (New Democratic Party) to reverse its massive rate 
hike on Saskatchewan seniors. The NDP defended its attack on 
seniors. And the member for Saskatoon Eastview went one step 
further. She suggested that in order to lessen the impact of the 
rate hike, elderly couples should apply for involuntary 
separation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about couples who have been 
married for 50 or even 60 years. And now in the last few years 
of their lives, the NDP is telling them to get separated. 
 
My question to the Premier is: does he support this suggestion? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, the issue that the leader 
opposite has raised relates to some of the things that happen as 
people grow older. There are times when people have to live 
apart for no reason of their own. 
 
The term that’s used right across Canada is involuntary 
separation. We have a process within our system in long-term 
care, and it’s been there for years, which allows for this 
application to be made, which says I can’t live in the same place 
as my spouse, therefore we have to make some adjustments on 
the financial arrangements. 
 
We have worked out over the years a very good way of dealing 
with this particular problem, and it recognizes the changes in 
life as people grow older. We will continue to meet the needs of 
people in their health care. We ask the members opposite to be 
working together with us. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The NDP is 
trying to minimize this idea of involuntary separation. But I can 
tell you, Mr. Speaker, that we have heard from many, many, 
many seniors, many elderly couples, and they are appalled at 
the idea of calling themselves separated. 

Mr. Speaker, I’d have a hard time looking at my wife in the 
eyes after 25 years of marriage and saying we have to become 
involuntary separated. It’s just not the right thing to do. 
 
Telling a couple who have been married for 50 years . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please, members. Order, 
please. The Leader of the Opposition will continue. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Telling a couple 
that have been married for 50 years is simply unacceptable. It’s 
psychologically damaging to seniors. It should be above the 
dignity of this government to do that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, in many cases it’s against their personal beliefs or 
their religious beliefs to do so. They feel that they are betraying 
their spouse and that they are betraying their marriage vows. 
 
Mr. Speaker, if this is a simple way to allow a couple to reduce 
their long-term care fees, why make themselves declare 
themselves to be separated? Why can’t the government simply 
allow them to calculate their long-term fees based on individual 
income? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, my colleagues last night, 
when this issue was being debated, presented a very good 
explanation of how this works. Unfortunately the member 
opposite I don’t think was here, so he could not respond . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. Order. Order. Members are 
reminded they are not to comment about the presence or 
absence of any other member in the legislature. That goes for 
debates; that goes for question period. 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to 
read for the member the exact wording of the application form 
around the particular issue that he says it’s . . . is a problem. It 
says . . . it’s called “Long Term Care Optional Designation For 
Determining Resident Charge”, and it sets out information at 
the top that says: 
 

Please check the designation applicable to your situation 
. . . With the designation only the resident’s income is 
considered in determining the resident charge. 

 
First box: 
 

My spouse and I live in separate dwellings for reasons 
beyond our control. However, our marital status has not 
changed. 

 
Okay? Then, then you can . . . there’s a second box where you 
can say: 
 

I am separated from my spouse pursuant to a separation 
agreement or a judicial separation (put the) Effective Date. 

 
This form and this particular process has been created to deal 
with exactly the problem that the member opposite has raised 
because we are very concerned about this. 
 



796 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

One of the things that comes up again and again in this 
legislature, across the way, is that the people do not get very 
good advice from their advisers. They lack some of the people 
they need, to give them good advice. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
want to quote from yesterday’s Hansard, and it’s the member 
from Eastview speaking and she says . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
The Leader of the Opposition may start over. 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The former 
associate minister of Health said last night: 
 

To address this concern, involuntary separation is now 
offered as an option. Involuntary separation is a term used 
to recognize those situations where married couples live in 
separate dwellings for reasons beyond their control . . . 

 
Mr. Speaker, we are hearing from married couples that find this 
offensive. They find this impossible to cope with after 50 or 60 
years of marriage. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m appealing to the Premier, I am appealing to 
the Premier. Will he please drop this bureaucratic requirement 
of forcing couples to declare themselves separated in order to 
reduce their long-term care fees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. What we do on 
this side of the House is that we work with people to address 
particular problems. That particular concern was raised years 
ago and we’ve worked out, together with the people involved, a 
very clear method that allows for individuals to say, it’s not my 
fault, it’s not my husband’s fault, but we’re living in separate 
places; we need to adjust the income that we’re sharing between 
us in a way that allows us to continue on in the situation that 
we’re in. That is a responsive way of dealing with these things. 
 
And I’m very surprised that the member opposite would come 
on these kind of questions. It shows that they do not have 
people who are working with them that can give them proper 
advice on what the issues are. 
 
Look around for some more people to help them out. Do you 
need some lawyers? Do you need some accountants? What do 
you need? I don’t know. But get somebody who can help you 
ask some decent questions in this House. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Hermanson: — Mr. Speaker, I am, I am profoundly 
disturbed by the insensitivity of the Minister of Health and I am 
extremely disappointed that the Premier did not have the 
courage to address the issues that are being, that are being 
raised by seniors right across Saskatchewan. 
 

Mr. Speaker, yesterday the member from Eastview said, and I 
quote: 
 

(She said) that involuntary separation was necessary, 
because prior to October of 2000, people were finding that 
in some cases the spouse that continued to live in the 
community did not have enough money left to pay for 
essentials. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP member was admitting that even prior to 
the massive rate hike in this year’s budget, elderly couples were 
having trouble making ends meet. So what was the NDP’s 
solution? What do they offer? Jack the rates up another 40 per 
cent, Mr. Speaker. How insensitive can you get? 
 
My question to the Premier, and I appeal to the Premier to 
answer. Will he admit that the NDP’s attack on seniors was a 
mistake and will he cancel his huge hike on long-term care 
fees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, when we took a good hard 
look at this particular area and we needed to figure out how to 
provide some more funds in our health system, we looked very 
carefully to make sure that those people with the lowest income 
would not be affected. 
 
And I would like to quote Mr. Wally Coates from Senior Power 
because he said that: “most people will not notice a big impact 
from the change in (this long-term) fee formula.” And he says, 
quote: 
 

If they were going to cut services to people who couldn’t 
afford them, or if they only had a basic income, then I think 
that would be hurting. 

 
The point is that we went to the people that had more income, 
we protected those people on the bottom end of the scale. 
That’s what we will continue to do. 
 
I ask the members opposite, get some better advice, get some 
better questions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Municipal Revenue-Sharing Grants 
 

Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the minister of Municipal Government. It begins 
all over again, Mr. Speaker. The city of Regina announcing that 
residents are facing a 14.3 per cent tax hike over the next five 
years. And the school boards haven’t even had a chance to set 
their mill rates yet. 
 
Ten years of NDP government downloading onto the 
municipalities across the province is finally catching up with 
municipalities and property owners. People from all over the 
city this morning were calling saying they’d had enough and 
were thinking of leaving Saskatchewan. 
 
They know that this city has tried to hold the line, even last year 
when the NDP froze funding . . . 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 797 

 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order, please. 
The member will continue for about 15 seconds. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, they 
know the city last year tried to hold the line even when the NDP 
froze revenue-sharing grants. But this year they can’t hold the 
line. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister stand in the House and explain to 
residents of Regina why the NDP has reduced revenue-sharing 
grants to municipalities for the last 10 years? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The one thing 
that this coalition government has not done is increase taxes, as 
the members opposite would do if they were on this side of the 
House, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Let me just . . . I’m not sure where the opposition has been, Mr. 
Speaker — and I’m not referring to their presence or absence 
from this House — but they’ve missed the fact that this year 
revenue sharing was increased for municipalities by $10 
million. 
 
I’m not sure whether they were here for the budget or not, Mr. 
Speaker, but on this side we are concerned about municipalities, 
we are working with them, their revenue sharing has increased. 
And, Mr. Speaker, we plan on working with those 
municipalities to meet their needs the best we can under these 
circumstances. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, if 
revenue sharing has been raised adequately why is the city of 
Regina having to raise taxes to every resident of Regina? 
 
Mr. Speaker, municipalities have endured 10 years of neglect 
by this government. Ten years of less money for infrastructure 
like roads, water, and sewer; 10 years of reduction to 
revenue-sharing grants; 10 years of downloading 
responsibilities. Thousands of people and jobs leaving 
Saskatchewan that have left municipalities with a reduced tax 
base all thanks to that government. 
 
Imagine how municipalities across the province feel when they 
hear their request for $20 million in revenue sharing denied. Yet 
the NDP have that exact amount to spend in Georgia, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Imagine what municipalities in this 
province could have done with that money. 
 
Mr. Speaker, why did the NDP choose to spend $20 million in 
Georgia instead of municipality revenue sharing in 
Saskatchewan? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well, Mr. Speaker, thank you. Some of the 

questions that the member is asking would best be asked of the 
mayor of this great city of Regina because he has those 
answers, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But I just want to once again . . . I just want to refer to some 
newspaper articles, Mr. Speaker. “No tax hikes for two cities 
thanks to revenue sharing . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you once again, Mr. Speaker. Those 
questions need to be asked of the city of Regina, and if they 
have reserves perhaps they might consider, as the coalition 
government did, go to reserves to help finance programs that 
this province desperately needed. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. I am unable to hear the 
minister’s response. Twenty seconds for the minister. 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you again, Mr. Speaker. I guess 
good news is pretty tough for the members opposite to take. 
They try and drum up the most negative — most negative 
questions, most negative attitudes towards this great province of 
ours. 
 
Mr. Speaker, “Losing streak ends for municipalities”. 
“Province’s $10 million increase in municipal revenue-sharing 
reverses 20-year trend”. 
 
We are working with the municipalities, Mr. Speaker, we do 
support them. I don’t think they do. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m sure Pat Fiacco and the Regina council are going 
to be happy to hear that they’ve resorted to blaming 
municipalities for higher taxes in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this tax increase is only for the city of Regina. 
Other cities, towns and villages will be announcing their tax 
changes in the coming days. Rural municipalities will also be 
announcing their mill rates, and they’ve even been hit harder 
than urban Saskatchewan, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And then we go to school boards who have to set their mill 
rates, and will probably have to raise them. 
 
Mr. Speaker, across this province property taxpayers will be 
facing another round of tax increases, all because of this NDP 
government and downloading for the last 10 years. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain how forcing 
municipalities to raise property taxes helps attract people to 
Saskatchewan; how it encourages people to stay in 
Saskatchewan; how does it plan to grow Saskatchewan . . . 
(inaudible) . . . downloading on these municipalities? 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Well once again, Mr. Speaker, I must 
remind the members opposite that there has been an increase in 
revenue sharing for municipalities. In 2002-2003, the municipal 
sector will be provided over a $104 million through a number of 
programs, including revenue sharing, Mr. Speaker. 



798 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

Municipal portion of grants in-lieu-of, Canada-Saskatchewan 
Infrastructure, the Centenary Fund, the urban parks, municipal 
libraries, and it goes on, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One thing that this coalition government did not do, they did 
not do what the envy of the members opposite to the west have 
done, is reduce grants to municipalities in the amounts of $45 
million for property taxes. Is that what they envy, Mr. Speaker? 
Small businesses will see their exemption rate rise by 50,000 to 
35,000, originally planned to $100,000. 
 
We did not do what their friends in Alberta have done to their 
people. We are concerned about the people in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Information Services Corporation 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, one of the 
costs that municipalities must cover, generally through the local 
tax base, is the cost they incur for land transaction fees. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, my question is for the minister responsible for 
the Information Services Corporation. Mr. Speaker, can the 
minister assure this House that the NDP’s $80 million land 
titles automation project will not drive up land transaction costs 
for Saskatchewan municipalities and their local property 
taxpayers? 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Yes, Mr. Speaker, I can. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, thank you, Mr. Speaker. That’s a very 
interesting answer. 
 
The Saskatchewan Assessment Management Agency, which is 
contracted by many Saskatchewan municipalities to assess their 
property . . . properties for tax purposes, outlined their 2002 
budget at their annual general meeting last week in Saskatoon. 
 
According to the SAMA’s (Saskatchewan Assessment 
Management Agency) 2002 budget, their administrative costs 
will be going up this year by over 36 per cent or $300,000, and 
here’s why. And here’s why, Mr. Speaker. It’s note 4 on 
SAMA’s 2002 budget document and it says as follows, I quote: 
 

The primary reason for the increase in SAMA’s 
Administration costs can be attributed to changes to the 
land titles system which are projected to increase (by) 
$300,000 over 2001. Cost estimates are based on acquiring 
electronic land titles from Information Services 
Corporation. 

 
Mr. Speaker, I’ll ask the minister again if he will guarantee this 
Assembly that the $80 million land titles automation will not 
result in any downloading to municipalities in terms of their 
land transaction fees? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, what I can guarantee, 
Mr. Speaker, is that we have the best land titles transfer system 

in the world, Mr. Speaker. We have people coming from all 
over the world to utilize it, Mr. Speaker. We have a system 
which has cut transfer costs for residents in the municipalities 
the member is talking about by half. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, let me just read a little bit about the Alberta 
land registry system, Mr. Speaker. Because, Mr. Speaker, that 
system, which I presume they like, said . . . the newspaper 
article just a little while ago: 
 

The land registry system in Alberta runs slowly and already 
cannot handle many critical transactions. And this 
government is liable for the losses caused by errors (Mr. 
Speaker). 

 
The system, the old system doesn’t work. Our system does 
work, Mr. Speaker. And it’s time that the member began to 
support the work, the efforts, the business initiative of IT 
(information technology) companies in this province, and the 
people who are working for ISC (Information Services 
Corporation of Saskatchewan), Mr. Speaker. 
 
This is good for the province. He knows it, and he knows it’s 
good for the voters too. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Wall: — You know, Mr. Speaker, the opposition, the 
opposition finally gets a direct answer to a question, with my 
first question this afternoon, and it’s wrong, Mr. Speaker. The 
answer was wrong. Because the answer is no. The answer is 
that this government is downloading on municipalities through 
the Information Services Corporation. 
 
And I would like the minister, Mr. Speaker, if he would stand 
on his feet today and give some assurances to the municipalities 
of the province and to SAMA that he will do whatever it takes 
to avoid downloading onto municipalities in terms of 
transaction fees and, more importantly, onto the property 
taxpayers of the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Mr. Speaker, no doubt the member’s 
researchers forgot to remind him that in fact 1.7 million more 
dollars into SAMA this year, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the member should look at the systems 
across the country, Mr. Speaker. He should look at Ontario’s 
system, which is falling apart. He should look at Alberta’s 
system, which is falling apart, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And he should listen, he should listen to those who work in land 
titles systems across, across this country, Mr. Speaker, who say 
that there is a market for this system across the world worth 
maybe $4 billion, and that this is a system which is good for the 
residents of Saskatchewan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Water Quality in Maple Creek 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 799 

 

question today is for the minister responsible for safe water, the 
Minister of the Environment. 
 
Yesterday a boil-water order was placed in the community of 
Maple Creek due to a positive test for E. coli in the tap water of 
one home. Of course the citizens of the community are very 
concerned about the situation and are hoping that they will 
receive an answer soon as to the source of the contamination. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister explain to this House today when 
the contamination was first reported and the steps that the 
various government departments have taken in the interim to 
determine the extent of this serious problem? 
 
(14:15) 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Yes, thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I would 
like to thank the member opposite for the question and for the 
very responsible manner in which it was put. I would indeed 
like to outline the steps because this is an example of the system 
working, Mr. Speaker. Health and safety are the top priority. 
 
Mr. Speaker, initially someone was not feeling well. They 
thought maybe it might be a water-borne illness, so the doctor 
encouraged them to have their water tested. The staff were sent 
to the home immediately. That was on the 11th. 
 
A sample was taken on the 11th. It was sent then to the 
provincial lab in Regina. It was received in the lab on the 13th, 
Mr. Speaker. It was then read early Monday morning on the 
15th. The water sample was put on the Petri dish, on the agar. 
The Monday morning showed that it tested positive for fecal 
coliform and total coliform. 
 
The Speaker: — The member’s time has elapsed. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
citizens of Maple Creek understand how necessary the 
boil-water order is to take every precaution for the safety of 
residents in that community. But they are anxious today to hear 
the results of all of the other testing that has been carried out 
since the boil-water order was put in place. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when does the minister expect to hear the results 
of all other testing and when will the town of Maple Creek be 
advised of those results? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Ms. Lorjé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. After the test 
came back positive for coliform, we then tested for E. coli. We 
then went back in and took additional samples. At 4:30 
yesterday afternoon we took eight samples throughout the water 
distribution system. The town also took samples. Those have 
now been sent to the provincial lab. 
 
We expect that the results will be available by about noon or 1 
o’clock tomorrow afternoon. By 3 o’clock I will be able to 
inform the member opposite exactly what the status is of those 
tests. 
 
I would encourage everyone in this House to remain calm. A 
boil-water order has been issued. This is an example of the 

system working properly as the people of Maple Creek know 
very well. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 28 — The Inter-jurisdictional Support 
Orders Act/Loi sur les ordonnances alimentairies 

interterritoriales 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 28, The Inter-jurisdictional Support Orders Act be now 
introduced and read the first time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 

The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order, 
please. Order. Order, please. 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m not sure that I 
heard the request for the questions but when you stand up I 
think it’s my turn. 
 
Mr. Speaker, with leave today I am very pleased to table 
responses to written questions 103 and 104. 
 
The Speaker: — Responses to 103 and 104 are tabled. 
 

GOVERNMENT ORDERS 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 21 — The Collection Agents 
Amendment Act, 2002 

 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I rise today to move second reading of The Collection Agents 
Amendment Act, 2002. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the main purpose of this Bill is to implement the 
harmonized list of prohibited collection practices developed by 
the Consumer Measures Committee. The Consumer Measures 
Committee is a federal/provincial/territorial working group that 
was established to improve the marketplace for Canadian 
consumers and to encourage the harmonization of consumer 
protection legislation across Canada. 
 
The proposed amendments include a number of new provisions 
that provide enhanced debtor protection. Collection agents will 
be required to serve written demand letters on debtors before 
attempting to collect payment of debts. Debtors will have the 
right to notify collection agents, to communicate with them in 
writing or through their legal counsel. 
 
Collection agents will be prohibited from threatening to publish 
or publishing a debtor’s failure to pay. Collection agents will 
only be able to contact the debtor’s family or friends for the 



800 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

sole purpose of locating a debtor’s address or telephone number 
unless the debtor has requested that the collection agency 
discuss the debt with that person, or the person has guaranteed 
the payment of the debt. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, collection agents will only be able to contact 
the debtor’s employer on one occasion and then only for the 
purpose of confirming the debtor’s employment, business title, 
business address unless the debtor has authorized otherwise. 
 
Collection agents will be restricted from contacting a debtor at 
the debtor’s place of employment unless the collection agent 
does not have the debtor’s home address or home telephone 
number in which case the collection agent will be able to 
contact the debtor at his or her place of employment on one 
occasion only and only for the purpose of requesting the 
debtor’s home address and home telephone number. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, collection agents will be prohibited from 
collecting or attempting to collect the money from a person who 
is not liable for a debt. If a person has informed a collection 
agent that he or she is not the debtor, a collection agent will be 
prohibited from continuing to communicate with that person 
until the collection agent has taken all reasonable steps to 
ensure that the person is, in fact, the debtor. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, collection agents will be prohibited from 
threatening to commence legal proceedings against debtors 
unless they are lawfully authorized to commence such legal 
proceedings. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the proposed amendments will also continue to 
provide for a number of existing protections. Collection agents 
will continue to be required to indicate the name of the creditor 
with whom the debt was incurred, the balance owing on the 
account, and the identity and authority of the person making the 
demand when making calls or communicating to collect 
payment of a debt. 
 
Collection agents will continue to be prohibited from harassing 
a debtor or the debtor’s family or friends. They will continue to 
be prohibited from making collect calls to debtors. And 
collection agents will not be entitled to collect any charges 
incurred by a collection agent or incurred by a creditor in 
employing a collection agent to collect a debt. 
 
Also, Mr. Speaker, collection agents will continue to be 
prohibited from making calls to collect debts during certain 
times of the day and certain days of the week. The proposed 
amendments allow the specific times during which calls may 
not be made to be set out in the regulations. 
 
Mr. Speaker, today’s Bill also includes provisions to update and 
modernize Saskatchewan’s legislation. The Bill includes 
provisions that will allow the registrar to enter into agreements 
with other regulators. In particular, it authorizes the registrar to 
enter into agreements for the purposes of sharing licensing 
information and encouraging co-operative enforcement. The 
ability to enter into agreements with other regulators is 
particularly important as collection agents are often licensed to 
carry on business in a number of jurisdictions. 
 
The proposed amendments also update the registrar’s inspection 

and investigative powers and update penalties for 
non-compliance with the Act. Updating these provisions will 
allow for a more effective regulation and improve the 
enforcement of the Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the introduction of this Bill is one more important 
step towards harmonizing consumer protection legislation 
across Canada. Collection agencies are increasingly carrying on 
business in a number of jurisdictions and both debtors and 
collection agents will benefit from the implementation of fair 
practices that are consistent in all provinces and territories. 
 
Mr. Speaker, thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Bill 
21, The Collection Agents Act, a Bill to amend that Act has a 
number of different parts in it that, I think, need much further 
investigation. 
 
I was listening to the minister, Mr. Speaker, talk on this Act and 
he really went through how a collection agency . . . some of the 
dos and don’ts of a collection agency — what they can do, and 
when they can talk to a person that hasn’t paid up, I guess, how 
many times they can go to their address, how many times they 
can go to their place of work, that type of thing, certain days 
when they can phone the person, certain . . . they need to know 
how much and the exact person. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I think there’s the other side of this argument 
too. Now certainly, any time that money is owed to a company 
or whatever, of course it should be paid up. But there’s the 
other side of the issue and it certainly . . . when I was listening 
to the speaker it was giving a little, certainly giving a lot more 
leeway for the person that owes them money. If I was to owe a 
company money, there’s only certain times that the collector 
can come and talk to me and certain places the collector can 
come and talk to me and that type of thing. 
 
And that’s all find and dandy. I mean, that’s great. But you have 
to look on the other side of it when business is owed a 
significant amount of money and they have to finally resort, 
after all the means that they would no doubt take, before they 
even resort to hiring a collection agency. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, now are we tying the hands of a collection 
agency too much for a company to receive their money back? I 
mean, certainly there’s rights on both sides of this issue, not 
only for the person that owes the money because of 
circumstances that he can’t pay the debt or whatever it might 
be, but there’s also the other side of the issue for companies that 
are owed the money, and are their hands tied now in receiving 
proper payment, Mr. Speaker? 
 
So I think, especially in the province right now when we see 
more and more people leaving the province, a lot of people out 
of work and people having a hard time in the agriculture sector, 
I’m . . . not too many people run up a debt and expect not to pay 
it. Most people expect to pay it, Mr. Speaker. 
 
But the problem is, is that if we give too much leeway for a 
person to owe money and the collection agency no avenues, or 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 801 

 

start restricting the avenues that a collection agency has to 
regain this payment, it directly affects the business that has 
hired that collection agency. 
 
So although a number of the issues that were raised by the 
minister look like they may be moving in the right direction, I 
think it’s only fair to look at the other side of it, and look at 
small business and large business and how this will affect them 
when they are owed money and have to go to a collection 
agency, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So until we are able to talk to the other side of the argument — 
the business, small business, the main engine of our economy, 
Mr. Speaker — we move to adjourn debate on this Bill. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 23 — The Registered Plan (Retirement Income) 
Exemption Act/Loi portant insaisissabilité des régimes 

enregistrés (revenu de retraite) 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m pleased 
to rise today to move second reading of The Registered Plan 
(Retirement Income) Exemption Act. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the purpose of this new Bill is to implement an 
exemption from enforcement measures by creditors for 
registered retirement income plans. 
 
Mr. Speaker, pension plans are currently generally exempt from 
enforcement measures by creditors, and this has created an 
ongoing inequity in treatment between wage earners who 
receive pensions for retirement purposes and those who are 
self-employed and whose retirement planning occurs primarily 
through the use of RRSPs (Registered Retirement Savings 
Plan). 
 
Mr. Speaker, in 1999 following extensive consultations, the 
Uniform Law Conference of Canada adopted the uniform 
Registered Plan (Retirement Income) Exemption Act, which 
provides for the implementation of an exemption from 
enforcement measures by creditors for certain retirement 
income plans. This Uniform Law project is the basis of our Bill. 
 
Mr. Speaker, wage earners who are provided pensions are 
protected from credit enforcement measures in recognition that 
it is in the broader public interest that retiring members of our 
community not be left destitute. 
 
It’s our view that while it is of course the responsibility of 
debtors to pay their creditors, those members of our community 
who are self-employed should receive the same retirement 
protection as those wage earners who are beneficiaries under a 
pension plan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Bill is careful to indicate that it is only 
registered retirement savings plans, registered retirement 
income funds based on those plans, and deferred profit-sharing 
plans that would receive this protection. Furthermore that 
protection would only apply while those funds remained locked 
in a registered plan. Any early withdrawal of funds out of these 
plans would be subject to standard enforcement measures. 
 

I’d also note, Mr. Speaker, that the general exemption from 
enforcement measures will be subject to enforcement efforts 
under The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders Act, 1997, in 
the same manner as pensions. 
 
Mr. Speaker, by adopting the Uniform Law Conference of 
Canada’s recommendation with respect to this important issue, 
Saskatchewan will once again be in the forefront of law reform 
in this important area. 
 
This is a province that has a great number of self-employed 
individuals, and levelling the playing field for their retirement 
planning with that of wage earners strikes us as simple fairness 
for our small-business owners, farmers, professionals, and other 
entrepreneurs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to note for this Assembly that while 
the Bill is based on a Uniform Law Conference Bill that was 
developed on a national basis and is recommended for 
implementation in all provincial jurisdictions, the Institute of 
Chartered Accountants of Saskatchewan and their executive 
director played an important role in the initiation and 
development of this project. And I’d like to thank them for their 
efforts. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m please to move second reading of An Act 
exempting Registered Retirement Plans from certain 
Enforcement Processes. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, on the surface this does seem like . . . to be a piece of 
legislation that brings equity and fairness to the treatment of 
RRSP and pension funds; that those funds that are 
self-administered are treated in a similar manner to those funds 
that are controlled and regulated through a business where you 
have a company pension plan, Mr. Speaker. That is all to the 
well and good. 
 
Mr. Speaker, though, again, we have another pension Bill here, 
as we have other similar Bills, that failed to deal with a problem 
that is developing in our society and that’s the availability, Mr. 
Speaker, to transfer pension plans. 
 
This talks about that ability, Mr. Speaker, to be able to transfer 
between one pension plan to another pension plan but it doesn’t 
deal with, Mr. Speaker, with transfers dealing with separations 
of spouses. And that needs to be dealt with, Mr. Speaker; it’s an 
ongoing problem. And I would have hoped that the minister 
would have included that in one of his pension Bills — this one 
or one of the other ones that he is bringing forward to deal with. 
 
The Bill does deal with transfers of property from pension plan 
to pension plan. 
 
He should have also taken a look at dealing with not real 
property, but capital investment — the money that you have in 
your pension plan, the funds — to be able to transfer that to 
another person’s pension plan in the cases of separations, Mr. 
Speaker. That would have gone a long way to easing some of 
the difficulties that people are facing in this province, Mr. 
Speaker. 



802 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

We need to take a look, Mr. Speaker, at just how the transfer of 
property is going to be accomplished and what impacts that 
may have on the pension funds that are put in place, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
So at this time we would move adjournment of debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 3 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Thomson that Bill No. 3 – The 
Correctional Services Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The Bill that we 
have before us at this particular time, Bill No. 3, The 
Correctional Services Act, is an Act that has a lot of particular 
aspects to it. And we’d like to cover some of those this 
afternoon and discuss some of the validity of the changes that 
are made and also some of the concerns that we have with it. 
 
And I guess it’s probably one of the more critical areas that this 
government is moving in because we have seen in the past 
decade provincial crimes, crime rates, going up dramatically to 
the extent that we’ve become leaders, unfortunately, across 
Canada and in some cases across North America for crime 
rates. 
 
And this isn’t just in rural or urban areas. This is all the way 
across. We have small towns that have some serious concerns 
with crime rates; we have those concerns right here in Regina, 
Saskatoon, and some of the other cities. 
 
Saskatchewan overall, as I said, has a very high crime rate and 
one of the highest crime rates across the country. In specific, 
Mr. Speaker, we’ve had the record in car thefts in North 
America. We are in fact the car theft capital of North America. 
 
In fact even the Justice minister has fallen prey to having his car 
stolen so there’s absolutely no immunity from this plague. And 
maybe that’s what finally urged the Justice minister to go ahead 
and bring this Bill forward, to try and protect his cars. I don’t 
think he’d probably get a ride too quick if he was thumbing his 
way across this particular city. 
 
But I don’t think that this particular Bill will do much to reduce 
that. It addresses some of the issues but it doesn’t do much to 
reduce the crime rate in Saskatchewan. And I think that’s one of 
the concerns we’re going to spend a fair bit of time on in this 
particular spring session, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And part of it is due to chronic underfunding and part of the 
priorities of this NDP government. We had a commitment, as 
we’re all aware, from this government some time ago, at the last 
election, a commitment for 200 more police officers. And we’ll 
bring this up a number of times today because I think it says 
very directly, or speaks very directly to the priorities of this 

particular NDP government — priorities that have very little to 
do with policing. 
 
We had that commitment that was made and, till just very 
recently, Mr. Speaker, as we all know, the number was 42. The 
election seems to be a long time ago, and yet we’ve only had 42 
police officers added to the number in Saskatchewan, a long 
ways away from the commitment that was made. 
 
And there’s an odd number of things that have happened here. 
A recent report to Regina City Council indicated that Regina 
Police Service have the highest workload of any major city in 
Western Canada — highest workload. 
 
Okay, so that means that their people aren’t sitting around with 
nothing to do. They are working hard. They have a lot of crime 
to go ahead and . . . crimes to solve. They have security 
concerns to take care of, and added to all of that, there’s the 
other part that’s expected of a lot of our police forces and that’s 
to interact with the youth in the schools in our communities to 
create a positive attitude and an atmosphere with law 
enforcement officers and the youth of today. So the highest 
workload of any major Western Canadian city exists right here 
in Regina. 
 
However, what’s then interesting is that it shows that 
Saskatchewan has the most police per capita of all the 
provinces. Now that just doesn’t seem to work on the same 
page. We have the highest workload, but we have the most 
police per capita. So what exactly is happening to create that 
situation? 
 
Now if we have the hardest working police officers — we 
believe they are the hardest working, but more than that, they 
have the heaviest workload — and we have the most police per 
capita then we should, Mr. Speaker, logically have the lowest 
crime rate, or one of the lowest crime rates in Canada. That isn’t 
the case. That’s not the answer. 
 
There are other issues that need to be addressed, issues that the 
NDP may be aware of but really have no idea to handle. Had 
they dealt properly over the last 10 years — in fact, Mr. 
Speaker, since 1944 when they started chasing business and 
opportunity out of Saskatchewan — had they dealt throughout 
that half century with issues such as poverty and unemployment 
and opportunity and substance abuse, and a whole wide-ranging 
set of issues, Mr. Speaker, I don’t think we’d be in the situation 
that we are in Saskatchewan today where we have, 
unfortunately, these excessively high crime rates across the 
province. 
 
Car thieves have said repeatedly that one of the things that they 
need some address . . . things that need to be addressed is 
substance abuse, because these two things, Mr. Speaker, go 
very, very closely hand in hand, very closely, because the 
stealing of cars can very easily be linked to a need for some 
money to maintain a substance abuse habit. On the other hand, 
if there’s a substance abuse that takes place, the rational 
thinking that’s out there with the young people is obviously not 
as good as it should be. And so something like stealing a car 
becomes much more acceptable to them in that situation. 
 
Now substance abuse needs to be dealt with. But is it being 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 803 

 

dealt with by this NDP government? No, it is not. No, it is not. 
They’ve shut down situations. They’ve shut down facilities. But 
those need to be addressed. 
 
We had . . . One of our members from this side, a day or two 
ago, spent quite a bit of time dealing with the need for the NDP 
government to deal with substance abuse. And all we heard 
from them was a lot of complaining that we were even talking 
about that particular issue. 
 
And what’s really serious when we discuss this, Mr. Speaker, is 
that it’s . . . that what we have done, what the NDP has done is 
failed the youth of this province. They’ve failed the youth of 
this province, which basically sets up the possibility of a 
lifetime involvement in crime. And very specifically, that 
government, that NDP government has to take responsibility for 
that and has to take the total responsibility for it. And to what 
extent this particular Bill is going to address that, we’ll have to 
see as we discuss it and as we debate it. 
 
In a province that has a relatively high percentage of seniors, 
the crime rate must obviously cause a lot of concern for that 
because that’s one of the things that seniors are always 
concerned about, is security. They just don’t feel they have the 
ability to protect themselves. They don’t have the mentality of 
invincibility that younger people tend to have. And they know 
that, if someone breaks into their home, they may not be able to 
protect themselves. In many cases, they know they can’t protect 
themselves. And so, when we aren’t dealing with that issue 
correctly, it’s definitely a concern for our seniors. 
 
Women and children are also often victims of crime. 
StatsCanada reports that 55 per cent of all female homicide 
victims are likely to be killed by someone they knew, compared 
with only 6 per cent of male victims. 
 
Well we’re dealing with The Correctional Services Act and 
we’re going to want to see how that addresses that issue and 
does it actually provide some more security for those people in 
our society who need it so much. 
 
There are some measures in this Bill that we believe, Mr. 
Speaker, will move in addressing some long-standing issues. 
But overall this Bill still won’t be addressing the serious crime 
problems that exist in Saskatchewan. 
 
Now let’s look at some of the positives on this particular Bill, 
and there are some there, Mr. Speaker. 
 
One of the measures that we do agree with is that the NDP has 
finally given the victims of crime some rights. And I think 
that’s been an issue that has sort of been developing over the 
years where victims felt, we have to have some say in what’s 
going on. We’ve been the ones that have been victimized; we’re 
the ones whose property has been vandalized; we’re the ones 
who have suffered for this. So we need some opportunity 
through the justice system to be able to be heard and to be able 
to be given some say in what’s being addressed and how it’s 
being done. 
 
Bill No. 3, Mr. Speaker, does that. Bill No. 3 does that. For 
example, that when an offender is being considered for release, 
the victims must be notified. And I think that’s a very good 

measure. So the victims don’t sort of have to say, it’s up to us to 
find out what’s going on in corrections, it’s up to us to find out 
whether there’s an early parole, it’s up to us to find out where 
this person is being transferred. 
 
They do not have to take the initiative and, Mr. Speaker, they 
should not have to take the initiative. These are the victims of 
crime. This Bill gives them the ability to know that when the 
perpetrator of the crime for which they were the victim is being 
released, it is the responsibility of the justice system to contact 
them and say, the person who perpetrated that crime on you is 
now being released into society. 
 
We do recommend that. That is a good move and we support 
that fully. I think if we talk to any victims in our society, we 
will say that something has to be there. 
 
We often also hear that people who are offenders are being 
coddled and that the system often turns its back on the criminal 
and it is the victim actually that is being coddled. It seems that 
this Bill is going some direction in looking toward the victims 
and saying they have some rights, they deserve some respect, 
and they deserve some opportunity for being involved in the 
justice system. 
 
We’re also encouraged that this Bill recognizes that offenders 
shouldn’t automatically have their sentence reduced by 
one-third for time served. We think that’s good because I just 
talked about this concern that victims too often have the feeling 
that the offenders are actually being coddled. But instead they’ll 
have to earn their release by good behaviour and participating in 
appropriate programs. 
 
That’s good, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 3 addresses that. So that 
finally if the behaviour isn’t adequate, if they haven’t made 
some effort to sort of rehabilitate themselves by getting 
involved in programs that are out there, there will be no early 
release for them. We recommend that. We think that’s a good 
move and that’s one of those things in this particular Bill that 
we’re in support of. 
 
We’re concerned with the provisions that recognize conditional 
sentences. Conditional sentences usually mean that the sentence 
is served in the community and the offender must comply with 
certain conditions. Now this can most certainly be applied to the 
province’s large number of young offenders who are often in an 
open custody situation. 
 
However, based on experience and particularly statistics — and 
that’s where we as a province have fallen so far short, Mr. 
Speaker — when we look at the stats and where we’re at in this 
province with crime rates, we find out that StatsCanada reports 
indicate that Saskatchewan has the highest rate of youth crime 
in the country. 
 
The Youth Court caseload is more than double the national 
average, not just somewhat higher — because we could say 
well, it’s a glitch in the economy, our economy has done a 
downturn and therefore some people have had to turn to a life 
of crime to maintain a livelihood — but that we’re the highest 
in the country. And that our Youth Court caseload is more than 
double the national average — a little over 900 cases for every 
10,000 youths, where the average is around 400 for every 



804 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

10,000 in the rest of Canada. 
 
In fact, Mr. Speaker, the province’s youth caseload has 
increased a whopping 7 per cent in the last five years — 7 per 
cent in the last five years. And we hear around Saskatchewan 
the statement, crime’s going up. And when we leave this 
province and we ask that same question, we sometimes get a bit 
of a blank look from people in other provinces. 
 
Nationally, Mr. Speaker, there has been a decline, a decline of 7 
per cent in youth caseloads. In Saskatchewan it has gone up 7 
per cent. 
 
That is one of those things that when we talked a little earlier on 
about seniors being concerned about the security that they 
experience, it’s one of those things that affects that feeling very 
much when they understand what’s happening with the stats 
that is there. 
 
When you put all these reports together, you see Saskatchewan 
has a very high youth crime rate. At the same time, the justice 
system is incarcerating a disproportionately high number of 
young offenders. The system just isn’t working, just isn’t 
working. And the fact is the workers are overworked but the 
system itself isn’t working. 
 
One of the biggest problems we have with this Bill, Mr. 
Speaker, is that it limits the age of a young offender as someone 
who is between the ages of 12 and 16. Now it’s always an 
interesting issue when this is being debated. Where should that 
particular line be, line be drawn — where you’re into adult 
court, where you’re into youth court, or where you’re just 
considered that you don’t even fit into any of those two 
categories. 
 
This particular Bill defines a young person between the ages of 
12 and 16, between the ages of 12 and 16. Now what happens to 
someone who is then the age of 11 years and 10 months, 9 
months, 8 months, whatever else, may be just as adept at 
committing crimes as someone who’s 12 years of age. And yet 
those people, those young people then can’t be addressed in any 
way. They’re basically taken off to the police station and then 
they’re taken home and that’s about where it all ends. 
 
I think there needs to be some situation that’s set up where the 
courts can look at a young person even under the age of 12, and 
since we really have . . . what we have here is sort of a hard 
core 10-year-old, or hard core 11-year-old, and maybe move 
them into that kind of a situation where they can be dealt with 
as a young person would be dealt with committing that crime 
between the ages of 12 and 16. Just as we can sometimes move 
people from, from a youth crime into an adult court, I think we 
have to be able to do this with a few people — the children. 
 
Now that’s a frightening situation, and I don’t think we have to 
. . . we need to walk into this and say, okay, we’re going to take 
off the number system, the age limit, and everyone just gets 
shuffled through because we need to deal with them according 
to their age. But sometimes you have some hard-core 
individuals that just need to be dealt with differently. This 
doesn’t give the courts the opportunity for making that 
judgment call. 
 

And I think we will, as we progress through this Bill, we will be 
dealing with that and presenting to this legislature some of the 
ideas that are out there that we have, how to deal with them. We 
can’t tolerate those sorts of things going on. It’s as I said, one of 
the ways in which the NDP has failed the youth in this 
particular province. 
 
This Bill also makes some changes to reflect the wording that 
will be consistent with the new federal Youth Criminal Justice 
Act. And I know that’s been a long time coming. All the 
provinces together, together with our Justice department and 
our Justice minister, has met with the federal wings over the 
years to try and change the Youth Criminal Justice Act. 
 
Well that has sort of taken place and so we need to streamline 
our justice system with where the federal system’s going, and to 
the extent that this Bill, Bill No. 3, does that, we’re satisfied 
with where it’s going. 
 
Yet it was only agreed to a short time ago. We’re wondering if 
the Justice minister’s had sufficient time to make sure that 
we’re exactly streamlined with what the federal system is and 
where it happens to be going. 
 
Bill No. 3 also gives increased powers to probation officers who 
can now arrest an offender on probation who has committed an 
offence, something previously not provided for. And if we stop 
to look at where we were at one time, this is an excellent move 
because previously if you had a young offender on probation 
and he committed an offence, he couldn’t really be arrested. 
And that would probably raise eyebrows all over this province, 
as it should — as it should. This Bill goes some direction 
toward doing that. 
 
Since the NDP have been cutting funding and resources for 
policing in the past decade, it only makes sense that others will 
be forced to make up the difference. And what we’ve had is that 
the police, the corrections administration, social services, all are 
being asked to carry an extra load because the NDP government 
has not dealt with their justice issues, with youth crime, with the 
causes of youth crime. We haven’t dealt with those adequately, 
as I’ve said, over the past 10 years and maybe even longer. 
 
Given the large number of inmates . . . or with substance abuse, 
and we’ve heard those kinds of things mentioned in the past 
while, particularly in our media, had a few of those mentioned 
that were pretty frightening, Mr. Speaker. We’re encouraged to 
see some amendments in this Bill that deals with searches in 
correctional facilities expanding to include urinalysis. And I 
think that’s a good move. 
 
There is absolutely no excuse, Mr. Speaker, for our prisons to 
become centres of drug abuse. It’s the last place that that should 
happen. When we have the security that’s there, and then to say 
that drugs seem to be able to have such easy access into our 
penal institutions, is unconscionable. And to the extent that this 
deals with that, I think we need to support it. 
 
Overall we’re encouraged by some parts of this Bill. There are 
others that we are seriously concerned with. And as I said 
earlier on, Mr. Speaker, there are a few areas where we will be 
recommending some changes in the future. 
 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 805 

 

And at that point, I think there’s a number of other people from 
this side of the House who very definitely want to deal with this 
particular Bill because it’s important to all aspects of our life in 
this province, to make it a secure life, a safe place to live. It’s a 
great place to live but it very often isn’t as safe as it should be. 
 
And in order to give opportunity for other people to address this 
Bill and to make some of those changes, at this time I would 
like to adjourn debate, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 7 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 7 — The 
Electronic Information and Documents Amendment Act, 
2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you. Bill No. 7, Mr. Speaker, dealing 
with The Electronic Information and Documents Act. And 
people on my side of the House may sort of smile at the fact 
that I’m the one that’s dealing with this one. 
 
But there is some interesting concerns that everyone has as 
we’re moving into this electronic age, and that is how do you 
deal with the sending back and forth of legal documents? 
 
I mean no one has any concerns with access to a lot of the other 
things we do with it. We send letters, we send notes to our 
friends, we buy things on eBay, we do all sorts of things. But 
what happens when we get into very much the legal aspect of 
sending legal documents? 
 
And we’re looking at this particular Bill closely, Bill No. 7, and 
there are a few things there that are worthwhile noting. It 
changes some of the definitions and it changes some of the 
directions that we were at in Saskatchewan. 
 
We know that the government processes are not exactly the 
most adaptable to new technology and new ways of doing 
things. So we do find it positive the government is obviously 
continuing to put in place various rules and regulations so that 
as we send documents back and forth — legal documents, 
documents going from individuals to government, from 
government back to individuals — to make sure that first of all 
no one else can get into that particular system and sort of mess 
with the correspondence that’s going on between the 
government and the citizens of Saskatchewan. 
 
And also to make sure that when we do sorts of things, like how 
do you sign your name on electronics? We’re all used to taking 
out our, you know, ballpoint pens, signing our name. Somebody 
else says later on, is that your signature? And you look at it and 
you say yes, that’s my signature. 
 
Well when you do that through an electronic system, how do 
you guarantee the security of that signature? How do you 
guarantee all those sorts of things in the new technology? 
 
Dusty piles of paper and books, Mr. Speaker, have given way to 
the Internet. The era of instant communication is good because 
it’s fast, it’s quick, it’s efficient, it should go ahead and cut 

costs. 
 
Now on a sort of on a sidebar to that, Mr. Speaker, it only does 
cut costs and it only is more efficient if the people who create 
the system and put it in place know what they are doing. And as 
you just recall from question period not long ago, Mr. Speaker, 
we had the question asked of the Justice minister: would this 
create an extra cost dealing with things electronically? ISC, 
would this create extra costs for municipalities with the work 
that they have to do with land titles? 
 
The answer was no, and then the answer was I don’t know, and 
then the answer was just a lot of time-filling that took place. 
 
So we’ve had things that have gone awry seriously. You, 
yourself, Mr. Speaker, will very well recall the other day when 
we were discussing the efficiency of the system. With the old 
paper system that we’ve had in Saskatchewan since just shortly 
after the turn of the century — maybe even before that —where 
there was some titles that were recorded had one piece of paper. 
One piece of paper and would have on there the owner and then 
it would list what town or RM (rural municipality) this property 
was in, it would list the plan, it would list the lots, it would list 
whether the minerals were included, and all that information. 
And everyone in Saskatchewan has been able to figure that out 
for generations. 
 
And turned it over on the other side, there would be listed all 
the liens and mortgages and those things that were against that 
piece of property. Everyone in Saskatchewan could understand 
that. 
 
And you, yourself, will recall very well the other day, Mr. 
Speaker, when we were looking at the new system, how I 
unrolled one sheet of paper, a long brown sheet on which were 
. . . on which were taped 20 sheets of paper — 20 sheets of 
paper — that had replaced the one that we used to have, the one 
that we used to have. 
 
So things are efficient and things are fast only if the people that 
are setting them in place know what they’re doing. This NDP 
government does not know what they are doing. That’s why 
they’ve traded one sheet of paper for 20 sheets of paper. 
 
And the members opposite who are . . . (inaudible) . . . know 
what I’m talking about, know very well, they just saw that roll 
unfold before them. They could very well count to 20 all by 
themselves, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The cost, in fact, the cost had gone from $2 to $60, from $2 to 
$60. So it’s not efficient when this government sets it up. When 
the NDP do it, it’s not effective and it’s, cost-wise, more 
expensive. 
 
(15:00) 
 
So when we look at Bill No. 7, Bill No. 7, we’re definitely 
interested in new technologies. However, when it comes to an 
issue like this one, we have to go ahead and raise a few areas of 
concern. And as I did that already with ISC, we looked some 
time ago when we went through SHIN (Saskatchewan Health 
Information Network). And the members opposite over there 
remember SHIN when we went through that and some of the 



806 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

concerns that were there. This government does not have a good 
record of moving us into the electronic age. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, when we look at Bill No. 7, it does take care 
of some of the concerns that are out there. It does move us 
further into the electronic age. And hopefully this government 
will continue moving in that direction, making some of the 
corrections that are needed. 
 
And so at this time, Mr. Speaker, we are prepared to move Bill 
No. 7 into Committee of the Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 8 
 
The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 8, The Family 
Maintenance Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant 
la Loi de 1997 sur les prestations alimentaires familiales be 
now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Bill No. 8, Family 
Maintenance Act, I think those of us in this House as MLAs has 
probably been one of the things that we get a lot of phone calls 
from — maybe even the most, depending on the various areas 
that people represent. But family maintenance is always one of 
those that gets a lot of people calling up their MLA and say, can 
you help me in this situation? 
 
And it’s probably one of the most difficult ones that I think we 
as MLAs deal with, because there’s always two sides to the 
story. And on the first phone call we tend to only get one. And 
sometimes we don’t always get the second story, and then it 
requires a certain amount of experience and a certain amount of 
wisdom to be able to listen to the situation as is explained to us, 
and to decide exactly where the truth lies with family 
maintenance. 
 
Because these are very emotional issues. These are issues that 
are very near the heart of all the people that are involved in 
them because it’s their children that usually come into play in 
this situation. And so anything that deals with family 
maintenance involves some of those things, as I’ve stated, that 
are fairly critical. 
 
This particular Bill, Bill No. 8, is not a long document but it 
basically deals with an amendment to The Family Maintenance 
Act from 1997 and deals with an obligation to provide child 
maintenance. 
 
Now this particular Bill is sort of an item that combines the 
federal Divorce Act and The Family Maintenance Act that 
we’ve had on the provincial scene, Mr. Speaker. We are 
encouraged to see the NDP taking some steps to streamline the 
provincial legislation with the federal legislation on this one. 
 
And the previous Bill that we discussed dealing with youth 
crime, there was also a streamlining of the provincial legislation 
with the federal legislation. It’s important that that happens, 
especially when, as we’re all aware, our court systems in this 
province are very overloaded and overstressed. 

One of the concerns that people always say is why does it take 
so long to get through the courts. A crime has been committed. 
In some cases, someone’s been caught and then it seems forever 
till, finally, there’s a judgment made. Our courts, Mr. Speaker, 
are way overloaded and that’s where one of those concerns 
come from. 
 
For years we’ve been talking about — members on this side of 
the House — for a need to review the court system. For years 
we’ve been saying too many families are spending too much 
time fighting it out in front of a judge and, as you know, Mr. 
Speaker, there are some other ways of doing this. 
 
There are some number of lawyers in our province and other 
provinces and in the States as well that are moving toward a 
system where they try and get some of the marital disputes dealt 
through a system that is a whole lot more friendly, where they 
sit around a table and say yes, there’s a difficulty with this 
marriage, this marriage is coming to an end but we don’t want it 
ending with a whole lot of hatred and vitriolic statements being 
made in a court of law. And so they will sit around face to face 
and say how can we . . . how can we break up this marriage, 
because that’s what’s happening unfortunately, and do it in as 
amiable a way and especially as concerns the family and the 
children so that their interests and their emotional stability are 
served best in what’s taking place. 
 
And so, there’s a new thinking that’s out there. And to the 
extent that we can deal with that, this Bill goes some direction 
in going down that road. What this does, Mr. Speaker — and 
unfortunately this doesn’t quite fit with the collaborative family 
law situation I was talking about — but it changes the onus and 
I think this is fairly important. 
 
The onus traditionally was that when someone turned the age of 
18 and was still involved in education and the parent that was 
providing support, who would then decide that the support 
should be ongoing? It was assumed under the old system, Mr. 
Speaker, that support just quit at age 18, and then the son or 
daughter who was continuing with some further education 
would have to make application to say I need this support to 
continue because I am continuing with my education. 
 
Now that creates a couple of problems because it necessitates 
that that person is familiar with the law and knows that now I’m 
18, support’s going to cease unless I make application for it to 
continue. 
 
So the system itself had a gap in there. It was a legislated gap in 
the support. And that’s unfortunate. This particular Bill, Bill 
No. 8, changes the direction of this, Mr. Speaker, where the 
support continues unless the supporting parent makes 
application not to have it continue. 
 
So this is a whole lot more smooth. And I think that any parent 
who’s providing the support until age 18, and isn’t one of those 
parents that’s trying to abrogate their responsibility will be quite 
prepared to say, well, if it’s valid to provide that support at age 
18, I think it’s valid to support at age 19 and 20. So this Bill 
changes the direction of that, and to that extent, it is a good 
idea, Mr. Speaker. 
 
It also addresses some of the other issues that came up that we 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 807 

 

had, as soon as we heard that government was going in this 
particular direction. And that was does this now mean you can 
have sort of a professional student? Does it mean that this 
student then can be supported for the next 30 years as they’re 
just off at university and the supporting parent just has to keep 
putting the money into place? That’s not how it works, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Basically with this particular Bill, the support continues after 
age 18 in a smooth way, as it ought, but basically only covers 
one degree. So after the first degree has been accomplished by 
that student, then the support is off there, and they have to sort 
of look after their own funding. I think that makes eminent 
sense, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And because it makes that much sense, we are quite prepared to 
support Bill No. 8 and have it move on to Committee of the 
Whole. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a second time and referred to a 
Committee of the Whole at the next sitting. 
 

Bill No. 9 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Axworthy that Bill No. 9 — The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a second time. 
 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This Bill, Bill No. 
9, The Real Estate Act, is an important Bill, not overly lengthy 
but has a lot of information in it and we have many questions on 
it. And I believe we may want to look to make some changes on 
it as well. 
 
The Speaker: — Why is the member from Regina Qu’Appelle 
on his feet? 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — With leave to introduce guests, please. 
 
Leave granted. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m very 
happy to introduce to the House today a new resident in our 
city, one who I think will bring many wonderful gifts and 
abilities into developing the city of Regina — Tim Feduniw, 
who is up in your gallery. 
 
Tim is with the Regina REDA (regional economic development 
authority), heading it up now. And he comes to us from 
Medicine Hat where I’m told by relatives in the area that he’s 
done a tremendous job and we know that Tim will do well for 
the city here as well. 
 
I’d like the members to welcome him to this House, please. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ADJOURNED DEBATES 
 

SECOND READINGS 
 

Bill No. 9 — The Real Estate Amendment Act, 2002 
(continued) 

 
Mr. Heppner: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Real estate is 
always a good barometer, Mr. Speaker, on how the economy is 
going. We hear from time to time on how well the realtors are 
doing and it’s always based on what’s being sold. Things, Mr. 
Speaker . . . Property is not sold when things are dead. No one 
wants to buy a house in a town where no one else lives. No one 
wants to buy a business in a community where it’s guaranteed 
that business is going to fail. 
 
So when things are moving, when things are being bought and 
sold, it usually is a sign of a vibrant economy. So The Real 
Estate Amendment Act, Mr. Speaker, brings to mind how well 
this province is doing. And we need to look at that when we’re 
going to discuss this particular Bill, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This Bill deals with some of the amendments that the 
government is seeing fit to put forward and talks about different 
clauses — the number of days that certain things stay in place, 
agreements with other jurisdictions, restrictions and access to 
information, all sorts of things. 
 
Now it’s very critical to determine how this is going to affect 
real estate in Saskatchewan, how it’s going to affect business in 
Saskatchewan. Because if we’re putting in place more red tape, 
more impediments to things progressing, to moving around this 
province, our economy is just going to do a whole lot worse. 
 
We just have in front of me, Mr. Speaker, a copy of the NDP’s 
election platform. You probably, Mr. Speaker, very well 
remember that little folder that was handed out around the 
province. And the heading right on top — there was a little line 
right at the very top which just repeats, “more jobs, more jobs, 
more jobs,” and then fades off into infinity. Which is very much 
what happened with those promises — they just faded off out of 
sight. 
 
We’ll help create 30,000 more jobs. Those jobs haven’t been 
created, Mr. Speaker. They haven’t been created anywheres. 
 
They talk about how they’re going to do that — keeping 
business taxes competitive, public service, lower public debt. 
Oh, lower public debt. This is interesting because when there’s 
debt in place, Mr. Speaker, you know that we aren’t going to 
have much selling of property. Where we’re busy paying off 
debt, there is absolutely no way, Mr. Speaker, that when there’s 
debt in the system that you can afford to go ahead and buy real 
estate — very, very critical. 
 
Thirty thousand more jobs didn’t happen. Now is the reason it 
didn’t happen is because we have real estate Acts and red tape 
in this province that hinders the movement of money, the 
movement of private business from one place to another, 
private enterprise, private enthusiasm? Yes. It’s the way this 
government works; it’s the way this government thinks. Every 
chance they get, Mr. Speaker, they’ll put up some more red tape 
to hinder business. 
 
What’s the record, Mr. Speaker? What’s the record? Well let’s 
just look at one particular example. One of the things that 
affects real estate very definitely is Information Services 



808 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

Corporation. Nothing in real estate moves, Mr. Speaker, 
nothing in real estate moves without going through our 
Information Services system because we need the titles, we 
need the information of who owns what on it, what liens are 
against a piece of property — we need all that. 
 
(15:15) 
 
The Real Estate Amendment Act is critical to the freedom that 
business feels in this particular province. And yet, Mr. Speaker 
. . . And yet, Mr. Speaker, it’s been a disaster. Eighty million 
dollars spent and we present letters on a daily basis to this 
House — to this House — where the system created by the 
NDP government creates nothing but problems and difficulty. 
The expenses go up; the paperwork goes up; cost to RMs goes 
up; cost to towns go up. All of those deal with real estates and 
those sorts of things. This particular Bill, Mr. Speaker, is one of 
those Bills that I believe is going to slow down business and 
business movement in Saskatchewan in a major sort of way. 
 
We lost, for example, $28 million on a potato farm. And this 
government said, it’s a success. So we have to question when 
they come up with another plan. Is this going to be another one 
of those success sorts of things like potatoes happen to be? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we need to stop out-migration. I look at the 
Leader-Post, Wednesday, March 13, 2002 — not very long ago 
— “SARM wants to stop Sask. out-migration.” 
 

Business, labour and government must rally together to 
stop the exodus of . . . young people from the province, 
says the president of the Saskatchewan Association of 
Rural Municipalities. 

 
Mr. Speaker, if we don’t streamline the red tape in this 
particular province, if we don’t ensure that business can be done 
effectively, quickly, securely, and that business is going to feel 
secure doing business in this province, all we’re going to do is 
chase more opportunity out of Saskatchewan. 
 
We’ve done that since 1944, Mr. Speaker. We’ve done it in the 
last 10 years in a major way — in a major way. In the last 10 
years, we have lost more people than ever before from this 
particular province. And that’s been the NDP that has brought 
that to this province. And no one else can take responsibility for 
it and no one else should take responsibility for it; but this NDP 
government has been a total failure. A total failure for 10 years, 
Mr. Province . . . Mr. Speaker. Okay. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as we look through this particular Bill, we’re 
going to be dealing with restrictions on information. And we 
have some serious concerns in what new ways this government 
is going to want to restrict information. 
 
We asked the question earlier during question period — we 
asked numerous questions — with the exception of the last set 
of questions, there were no answers. So restricting information 
and access to information is something this government is good 
at. We will want to see exactly who they allow to access their 
new system. Who’s going to be able to access real estate 
information and who won’t be able to access it? 
 
Agreements with other jurisdictions, exactly how is this going 

to be dovetailed with other provinces in case we need to work 
between the two jurisdictions in this province and in other 
provinces? 
 
We have some very serious concerns about Bill No. 9, Mr. 
Speaker, and for that particular reason we’ll need to look at it 
much more closely than we have up to this particular point. 
We’ll need to contact many more people from the real estate 
because this is one Bill that will affect absolutely everyone in 
the real estate business. It’s going to affect absolutely everyone 
who is selling something in this province and who is buying 
real estate in this province. 
 
It’s too important an issue to move on at this particular point. 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I move to adjourn debate on Bill No. 9. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 6 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 6 — The Horned 
Cattle Purchases Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — Mr. Speaker, I’m pleased to have the 
opportunity today to speak to the horned cattle purchase 
amendment Act. Now this Act addresses the issue of horned 
cattle in Saskatchewan as to ensure against injury of cattle in 
the province. And I believe it is important that we maintain a 
process to encourage dehorn . . . to encourage dehorning of 
cattle here in Saskatchewan. 
 
But it’s a process that I’m a little worried about with the NDP 
bring about. One of the things that they’ve brought in is 
jumping it, Mr. Speaker, from $2 to $10, which is a 500 per 
cent increase, Mr. Speaker. Now that’s quite an increase — 
from $2 to $10. I would just use the example of you, if you had 
a parking space and you used it a number of years and paid $2 
and now one day you went there and you had to pay $10. It’s 
quite a jump. 
 
And, you know, over the number of years and even in my time 
— and I imagine more in your time — you can remember that 
there was more horned cattle . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, order. The member knows full well 
that the Speaker, no matter what good example he can set, 
should not be used in debate. 
 
Mr. Brkich: — I’m sorry, Mr. Speaker, on that. I’ll talk in my 
last 20 years, going through the markets, I’ve seen a lot less 
horned cattle than there was 20 years. So my kind of a question 
to the minister would be, is why is it going up? It should be . . . 
honestly, it should be going down because there has been 
significantly less horned cattle going through the markets over a 
number of years, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The process has been working. Now why is it going from $2 to 
10, which a lot of producers have asked me. They say, you 
know, we know that there has to . . . there’s always been a 
charge of $2. At one time it started, I think, at 50 cents, Mr. 
Speaker. From there it went to $1 and then to $2, and it went up 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 809 

 

slowly over a number of years. 
 
But why are they jumping from 2 to $10, especially now as the 
market . . . I would say, talking to some producers, there is 
probably less than 5 per cent of cattle are going to the market 
right now with horns. So that fund now that they’re collecting 
is, I understand is . . . what the minister calls it is a support 
research design fund. 
 
A producer asked me, now what exactly are . . . do they do with 
that money they’re collecting? I would guess maybe they were 
collecting, he had said, $100,000. It was just a guess. Now 
they’re going to be collecting $500,000. Now that’s quite a 
significant increase over . . . you know, in one year. 
 
What is a design, and that money going to be used for over a 
number of years, in the next few years? To eliminate horned 
cattle in this province totally? Or is it going to research of 
polled cattle? Who is doing the research? 
 
There’s a lot of, with this Bill kind of, some unanswered 
questions which I’ve had producers ask me about the Bill. And 
frankly up to this point I haven’t been able to answer them at 
that. So I’m hoping further on, by other members coming up in 
this debate, and that we will get some answers maybe from the 
minister. 
 
Another point that was made to me today when the producer did 
phone me, he said, with this fund, is it going to be like that Fish 
and Wildlife Fund that they pilled up? Are they going to take, 
take it after a couple of years? And frankly, Mr. Speaker, 
honestly, I couldn’t answer him. Because I don’t know who 
controls that fund. Is it, when it goes in there, is it a cattle 
producer association or is it the government that’s controlling it, 
or is it an agriculture research that is controlling that fund? 
 
And once if . . . when it’s going to be climbing up to possibly a 
half a million to $1 million a year, it’s — or over a number of 
years it could climb that high — it’s some questions I think that 
should be asked, Mr. Speaker. 
 
You know and it’s just another thing that basically puts more 
emphasis on the producer to . . . more costs on the producer at 
the end of it. You know, it’s like you say, most cattle are going 
through . . . at it. 
 
Another question that was asked to me is, at $2 a lot of guys 
didn’t mind. Because I can . . . one guy said he had a, you 
know, a steer went through, he said, he didn’t think it even had 
any horns. Maybe it had little nubs. He was charged $2. He kind 
of just wrote it off. He said, you know, I really didn’t . . . that 
animal isn’t going to cause anybody any damage, but they 
charged me $2. Now with $10, he says, I’m going to be starting 
to look at that. 
 
What is the criteria — and the minister has yet to answer that; 
I’ve asked him — what is the criteria for the horns now? What 
is the length of them? How many . . . Basically how big are they 
before they’re going to start charging the $10 on it? 
 
When the member was talking about $5 . . . I’ll use an example. 
I have two cattle that, that I dehorned when they were younger, 
and one horn grew back. And he said, it happens sometimes 

over a number of years. Does he only going to charge me $5 
now? Instead of the $10, I wonder if I should only pay 5. 
 
But talking about dehorning though — and it also is stressful on 
cattle. It’s going to put more emphasis on guys to basically 
dehorn cattle. You dehorn; a lot of guys dehorn when they’re at 
the heifer/steer age, and then . . . but it comes back. An odd 
time there’s horns that come back. 
 
So now when that cow, when it’s . . . they’re going to ship it a 
number of years later, it maybe has part of a horn growing back. 
Are they going to . . . you know, a guy’s going to say 10 bucks, 
maybe I should dehorn it again. And it is very stressful to cattle, 
especially older cattle, to dehorn them, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Another thing going through this Bill is it doesn’t specify but 
talks about when cattle are brought to the auction market here. 
You’re charged $10, Mr. Speaker. And then if a buyer, out of 
province, moves him to another auction mart, they’re charged 
there. Now does that mean that on that same animal they’re 
going to be charged twice on the same sale? 
 
And the minister talks a little bit about it but he doesn’t say 
where that money comes. If that cow is moved to Manitoba and 
there’s a fee collected there, is that fee then come back again to 
Saskatchewan on that same animal that was collected the day 
before as it went through the auction mart just because a buyer 
out of province bought it? That’s a few questions . . . another 
question that has to be answered on this Bill. 
 
Another, like say the accounting end of it was raised in 
numerous means to me. 
 
With that, Mr. Speaker, I was just looking at a couple of 
comments that the minister did. He said he talked to a lot of the 
associations, the Stockgrowers Association, the Cattle Breeders 
Association, different organizations. 
 
But I don’t know how many producers he actually talked to 
because I think the elimination of the horned cattle in 
Saskatchewan is basically a good thing, but again it’s falling on 
the actual producer again. It’s not falling onto the feeder 
associations, it’s not falling even on the people that are buying 
the cattle after they’ve been processed. You know, it’s back 
again, just back to the farmer again that’s growing the raw 
product, that cost is passed back again to the producer. And it’s 
$10 or a $500 increase, it’s a significant charge added. 
 
But with that, Mr. Speaker, I’m just wondering: it’s interesting 
to see if it’s a goal of this NDP government to basically 
eliminate all the horned cattle in Saskatchewan. But with that, 
I’d like to adjourn debate because I think there’s some more 
members that would like to talk to it, and I would like to find 
out some more questions on this Bill. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Minister. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 

Bill No. 12 
 

The Assembly resumed the adjourned debate on the proposed 
motion by the Hon. Mr. Serby that Bill No. 12 — The Farm 



810 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

Financial Stability Amendment Act, 2002 be now read a 
second time. 
 
Mr. Elhard: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. This particular piece 
of legislation has a very important element to it; one that will 
affect many constituents in the Cypress Hills and one that I 
have just recently become, unfortunately, quite aware of. 
 
The issues that this Bill address were brought to the attention of 
the Sask Party caucus by members of the Saskatchewan Feeder 
Co-op Association. They came and saw us and laid out some of 
the complications that, that were affecting their industry and 
said that some suggested changes that were going to be put 
forward by the government would address the complications 
and they saw some urgency associated with that particular issue 
and this particular piece of legislation. 
 
In the interim, Mr. Speaker, I have had the unfortunate 
opportunity to address the consequences of the legalities that 
have affected some of these feeder associations in a very 
negative way, frankly. 
 
The feeder associations have been in this province for a number 
of years. And that program of financial support has been very 
effective, I would gather, for about the last 15 or 20 years. And 
it’s grown in popularity to where many producers in this 
province have come to depend almost entirely on the feeder 
association financial program to stock their summer herds or to 
buy breeding herds, whatever the situation might be. This has 
become a very effective tool for cattle owners in this province 
and . . . as part of the attempt to build the herd in this province. 
 
But what has happened, Mr. Speaker, in several instances — I 
believe the numbers run up in the half-dozen range or so — 
what has happened is that court orders have intervened in the 
affairs, frankly, of the loan associations, these feeder 
associations, to the point where it’s thrown several of these 
organizations into financial limbo. And maybe a better way to 
describe it would be financial chaos. 
 
What we’ve had in the past and in the recent past is a situation 
where a court has handed down a ruling that has allowed 
creditors to seize the assets of individuals — in this case, 
usually cattle — to pay off personal debts. But the cattle 
themselves have not been owned by the producers directly. 
Those are cattle that have carried the brand of the various feeder 
associations. 
 
(15:30) 
 
And the impact, Mr. Speaker, has been that the other members 
of the feeder associations have been penalized financially or 
have had a great deal of money tied up in legality and in court 
proceedings through no fault of their own because of the 
financial difficulties of one member. 
 
Now I think, in our understanding of the way the cattle industry 
has operated over the last 100 or more years in this province, 
the brand on an animal has determined the ownership of that 
animal. And with the court actions most recently, we have seen 
the integrity of the brand — which has stood the test of time in 
this province — we have seen the integrity of the brand affected 
where the courts have actually overruled the right of ownership 

that’s indicated by a brand. 
 
Having had that kind of a situation develop, this particular piece 
of legislation will attempt to correct that type of situation 
developing in the future. And so the brand from now on will be 
dedicated to, and the ownership of the animals, will be 
dedicated to the feeder co-op and not in any way the members 
of the co-op. 
 
What will happen as a consequence, to restore the integrity of 
the brand and the ownership by the feeder co-ops? This 
particular legislation is being changed in a way that will now 
impact cattle owners and buyers in kind of a perverse sort of 
way because, with the removal of ownership from the 
individual specifically now taken by the feeder co-op, when a 
producer borrows money from the feeder association co-op to 
get cattle, those cattle will no longer be a tax deductible item for 
the individual buying them. 
 
Now historically, we’ve had the integrity of the brand as part of 
the ownership of cattle. But one of the other very important 
preserves, financial preserves for cattle owners and ranchers in 
particular, has been the tax deductibility of cattle. So we have 
an unintended consequence in this particular piece of legislation 
that will negatively affect ranchers and cattle buyers as a result 
of these changes. 
 
So I think there needs to be some weighing off of the benefit of 
tax deductibility versus the ownership issue that we are seeing 
here. But I’m not so sure that in the long run, that kind of a 
trade-off will ultimately benefit the people who are most 
negatively affected. 
 
There are some issues that I’d like to refer to in the introduction 
of this particular piece of legislation brought to us by the 
Minister of Agriculture, in which he said the amendments are 
considered essential in order to clarify within the Act that 
livestock purchased by the association are now the property of 
the association, rather than the individual. And, as I mentioned, 
the urgency of this, of this particular issue brings to a forefront 
some complications that were unintended but may actually be 
fairly deleterious to the ranchers and farmers in the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other changes that are going to be incorporated as 
part of this legislation would allow for regulations to prescribe 
the various commodities that would be covered by the livestock 
loan guarantee program. For the most part, this loan program 
has benefited people who wanted to buy feeder cattle. Maybe 
they were buying cattle for summer grazing. Maybe they were 
buying breeding herd cattle. Whatever the implications of this 
change are, it seems to me that the minister is talking about 
expanding that loan guarantee program to include other 
commodities, but it hasn’t . . . the minister has not addressed 
and neither have the explanatory notes exactly, what those 
intended commodities might be. 
 
There is a further repeal, that affecting section no. 60, and it is 
going to be substituting the existing section to clarify that the 
association is the owner of the commodity purchased and the 
association does not act as a trustee for the member producer. I 
think the courts have clouded that particular issue in some of 
their previous considerations and rulings based on this 
particular piece of legislation. And this Act, I understand, will 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 811 

 

confirm that the association in no way acts as the trustee for the 
member — the individual whose financial state is being 
scrutinized by the courts. 
 
There are some questions from the association that is based in 
the community of Eastend. When that particular association was 
affected by a court ruling, it tied up the assets of all of the 
members. And I understand that through some legal provisions 
in effect, the brand inspectors were able to seize the money that 
was generated by the sale of cattle that had the brand of the 
feeder association on it. The money was taken by the brand 
inspectors and ultimately brought to the provincial treasury. I 
understand the Department of Agriculture is holding that money 
right now. 
 
But while the department holds that money, there are 150 
members of that feeder association who are in limbo. They have 
a great deal of money tied up there, through what they call an 
insurance program, which is unavailable to them. All of their 
assets basically are frozen. All activity of that co-op has ceased 
pending the court action. 
 
And we now have 150 potential cattle buyers, who have most of 
the revenue they would use to make those purchases, tied up. 
And they’re wondering how are they going to . . . how are they 
going to stock their grassland this spring? How are they going 
to pay for any increases to their cattle herd they would like to 
make? 
 
And those are decisions that need to be made right now, in the 
next few weeks as a matter of fact. And there’s a great deal of 
concern by cattle producers and those particularly associated 
with feeder co-ops, as to the resolution of this particular issue. 
 
Now while this particular change, this piece of legislation, is 
not going to benefit those producers in the short-term, I 
certainly hope it will benefit them in the long-term. But because 
of the kinds of complications I have seen develop through the 
court rulings recently, I think it’s important that some of these 
issues be addressed as quickly as possible. And I think this 
legislation will do, for the most part, what producers are hoping. 
 
There are some questions though that I would pose to the 
minister in view of this piece of legislation, that he might want 
to consider for future opportunities when we get into committee 
and discuss this Bill more specifically. 
 
One of the questions that producers are going to want to know 
is, will this particular piece of legislation increase the protection 
of registered owners of brands? I think that’s a legitimate 
question and I think it’s one that the minister needs to address. 
 
The question I guess underlying that is, who really is the owner 
of the cattle? And as we’ve pointed out, this particular Act 
seems to address that but we want that absolutely clarified. 
 
Is there a possibility of amendments to contracts, a schedule A 
or B form, to protect producers? Now the reason this question is 
important I suppose is because producers feel that they have 
been let down rather severely by the failure of the previous 
piece of legislation. 
 
The question that the producers are asking is, how did we get 

into this mess? You know, what happened? Why were 
circumstances allowed to develop where the courts could move 
in and make these kind of decisions and have these serious 
consequences as a result, for producers? 
 
And one of the most specific questions that is being asked here 
is: why didn’t the lawyers who were working for the 
Department of Agriculture when those forms were originally 
put together for the purchase of cattle, why didn’t they foresee 
the possibility of this current situation arising? 
 
Were they caught flat-footed? Was it just an oversight, an 
unintentional oversight? Or was there something less diligent 
about the work the department did in establishing those forms 
when the legislation was first put into effect and when the cattle 
feeder associations were first developed and the provincial 
government first undertook to finance them? 
 
Frankly, producers are bewildered by this situation. And they 
want to know, why were the contracts that they signed, putting 
these cattle into their hands and their control, why were they not 
honoured ultimately, and why were the brands on the cattle not 
honoured? 
 
If those kinds of questions can be addressed by this legislation, 
if producers can be assured of security with changes to the 
legislation, if they are going to be allowed the privilege of 
continuing their activities as cattle owners and ranchers, I think 
that these questions are going to have to be answered in a very 
clear and specific way. 
 
Having made these comments, and without going further into a 
lot of detail, I think that it’s necessary for us, as the official 
opposition, to get some of these questions answered on and off 
the record, and to talk to some of our producers and just see if 
the changes being recommended here are satisfactory to the 
individuals most affected, the ones who have their money tied 
up right now in court action and are facing financial hardship 
this spring with relationship to the expansion of their cattle 
operations. 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, on that note, I would move that we adjourn 
debate. 
 
Debate adjourned. 
 
(15:45) 
 

COMMITTEE OF FINANCE 
 

General Revenue Fund 
Learning 

Vote 5 
 
Subvote (LR01) 
 
The Chair: — I would invite the Minister of Learning to 
introduce his officials and make any brief statements if he 
wishes. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Thank you very much, Mr. Chair. To 
my immediate right is Dr. Craig Dotson, the deputy minister of 
Learning. And to my immediate left is Ms. Lily Stonehouse, 



812 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

assistant deputy minister of Learning. Right behind me is Ken 
Horsman, the associate deputy minister; as well as Wayne 
McElree, the assistant deputy minister. 
 
Dr. Michael Littlewood is behind the bar, executive director, 
legislation and school administration. Dr. John Biss is also 
behind the bar, executive director, university services; and Mr. 
John McLaughlin, who’s also behind the bar, executive 
director, Teachers’ Superannuation Commission. Mr. Brady 
Salloum is also behind the bar, executive director, student 
financial assistance; as well as Mr. Don Sangster, who is 
executive director of school finance. Ms. Joy Campbell, also 
behind the bar, Provincial Librarian in our Provincial Library; 
and Mr. Cal Kirby, who’s also behind the bar, director of 
facilities planning. 
 
Ms. Frances Bast, who’s just behind me to my right, director of 
corporate services, and Mr. Gord Sisson, director of corporate 
services just to my immediate left as well. Those are the 
officials. 
 
And before we get into talking about the estimates for the 
Department of Learning, I just wanted to talk about some of the 
new mandate that has been given to this department as a new 
Department of Learning and my opportunity to appear before 
estimates as the first minister in the new Department of 
Learning. 
 
Now, Mr. Chair, by bringing together the former Department of 
Education and most of the former Department of 
Post-Secondary Education and Skills Training, along with the 
Provincial Library, our public library system, and our early 
childhood development initiatives, the government really has 
created a flagship department that will help steer the course for 
Saskatchewan’s future. 
 
As such, the mandate of Saskatchewan Learning is to advance 
the social, economic, and personal well-being of Saskatchewan 
people, Mr. Chair. This shall be accomplished through 
leadership and support programs from early childhood 
development, through pre-kindergarten, through grade 12, to 
technical training and post-secondary education, as well as our 
public library services. So, Mr. Chair, we have a broad mandate 
from which to chart our course. 
 
By remaining true to the principle of responsive leadership and 
with a keen eye to the future, I am confident this new 
department will satisfy the learning and development needs of 
Saskatchewan’s children, youth, and adults. We will also be 
supporting the learning needs of our citizens by providing a 
high quality public library system where children, young 
people, and adults have access to tools that promote and 
encourage dynamic and transactional resource-based learning. 
 
Now in order to build on our province’s future, we must 
continue to support and nurture our most precious resource, 
Saskatchewan’s youth. Our department’s vision includes 
healthy and school ready children who are prepared to take full 
advantage of learning opportunities available to them. 
 
The Kids First program will help prepare our youngest children 
to take that very important first step toward a life of learning. 
This spring, communities in northern Saskatchewan, and 17 

communities throughout the remainder of the province, will 
begin to experience the benefits from the services brought to 
them through Kids First. 
 
As the children and youth of our province continue their 
journey through the education system, they will be helped along 
by a department that is determined to provide a supportive, 
welcoming, and resource-rich learning environment. 
 
Now our past successes, Mr. Chair, in meeting the diverse 
needs of students can be measured in part by the number of 
community schools which doubled last year and expanded to 
rural communities and high schools. 
 
The SchoolPLUS model builds on the success of community 
schools by developing further the connection between human 
services, schools, and their communities. Being responsive to 
the needs of Saskatchewan’s diverse population of young 
learners has advanced programs such as distance education 
opportunities and CommunityNet, which is bringing high-speed 
Internet to schools throughout the province, Mr. Chair; 
resource-based learning which allows curriculum to be more 
responsive to the learning needs of students; and agreements 
between school divisions and First Nations that gives the 
Aboriginal communities more meaningful participation in the 
administration and management of schools. 
 
These are just a few examples, Mr. Chair, of the innovative 
ideas and approaches that have been undertaken by the former 
Department of Education that will continue to help steer our 
course into the future. 
 
For the young people who choose to continue a path of learning 
after high school, we have a high quality post-secondary 
education and skills training sector, which supports a variety of 
learning needs. 
 
To enhance this sector over the coming years, Saskatchewan 
Learning is committed to working in partnership with our 
universities and federated colleges, introducing important 
programs such as Campus Saskatchewan, and supporting 
technology-enhanced learning; expanding learning 
opportunities in health professions, including the northern 
nursing access program in P.A. (Prince Albert) and increased 
enrolments at the College of Medicine in Saskatoon; providing 
support to the new and independent apprenticeship commission; 
and working with Aboriginal people to ensure that they access 
and are successful in the post-secondary system throughout the 
. . . through the Aboriginal Education and Training Action Plan. 
 
And for all Saskatchewan learners, this year budget saw a 
significant increase for the improvement of education facilities. 
Post-secondary institutions will have access to almost $50 
million — up from the 30 million last year to upgrade and 
enhance facilities. 
 
Capital funding for K to 12 schools will increase from over 24 
million last year to 40 million this year and . . . plus an 
additional 10 million will come from the province’s Centenary 
Capital Fund. 
 
In all, the province of Saskatchewan has demonstrated its 
commitment to education with these marked increases for 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 813 

 

facilities as well as the overall $1.2 billion investment in 
education and skills training. 
 
Saskatchewan Learning has a broad mandate, but a direction 
that could not be more clear, Mr. Chair — following the needs 
of the province’s young people as they follow a path of lifelong 
learning. 
 
I note four thematic threads that bring together our new 
department. Saskatchewan Learning must (1) meet the learning 
needs of our Aboriginal population; (2) fully exploit the 
opportunities of learning technologies; (3) strengthen 
communities; and, (4) serve the needs of a sparse and disparate 
population. 
 
We must build an education system where the knowledge and 
learning acquired by young minds provides them with valuable 
tools that help them to succeed to the best of their ability as 
productive, responsible, and socially conscious citizens. 
 
We must provide our young people with the promise of a future 
rich in opportunities and expansive in scope here in their home 
province, Mr. Chair. The future of Saskatchewan depends on 
our ability to secure the hearts and minds of our youth by 
continuing to build a vibrant, healthy, prosperous, free, and 
democratic society. 
 
Premier Calvert and our government have assigned to the new 
Department of Learning a broad vision, a broad mandate, and a 
broad scope of responsibilities. However we have a clearly 
delineated path, Mr. Chair, that follows the learning needs of 
Saskatchewan’s young people from conception through 
adulthood. 
 
Undaunted by the scope of our responsibilities that lie ahead, 
we must build on past successes and future opportunities that 
will support the future of Saskatchewan’s youth, because we are 
indeed building on the future of our fine province. 
 
It is my privilege and honour to be a participant on this most 
important and worthwhile journey. And I thank all of the 
members of the Assembly for their time and attention in my 
description of the broad mandate and challenges that face our 
new Department of Learning, and I look forward to the 
questions from the members opposite. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. And welcome, Mr. 
Minister, and welcome to your officials. 
 
I’m very pleased to be here today to discuss probably what I 
consider — and I believe what the minister considers as well — 
to be one of the most important or if not the most important 
department of government. 
 
I’ve listened to the . . . for the second year in a row to a 
prepared speech about your department and the number of great 
initiatives that you have, and I agree that it is a flagship 
department. But what the minister failed to talk about was the 
fact that the government has not put the money in it’s going to 
really require to fund this department. 
 
I know I’m not standing alone when I talk about that. The 
school divisions, the SSTA (Saskatchewan School Trustees 

Association) and the STF (Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation) 
have talked about it. 
 
The idea of an umbrella for learning is a good idea. The idea of 
bringing municipal government in is also a good idea — 
municipal libraries, pardon me — is a good idea in my 
estimation; and also the idea of early childhood development 
because if we’re going to have cradle-to-grave learning, we 
have to have all these departments working together. It also 
implies that we’re really going to be looking at the role of the 
SchoolPLUS and the fact that we have to integrate services. 
 
So many of these ideas are great ideas, Mr. Minister, but the 
problem is the same thing that we’ve been looking at since 1991 
is that this department is not funded. 
 
In your Throne Speech, the Finance minister indicated that: 
 

Quality education is a third pillar in the government’s 
action plan to expand Saskatchewan’s economy. 

 
That was in the Throne Speech. And in the budget speech, the 
day . . . we have the remarks from a number of people that are 
involved on a day-to-day basis with education, starting with the 
School Trustees Association. The first line in their newsletter 
says: 
 

The provincial government’s 2002 budget sent a clear 
message to school boards — that it didn’t have a message 
for school boards. 

 
SSTA was asking for $25 million to cover the known increases 
such as existing teachers contracts that expire at the end of 
August. Instead they were given $14 million which doesn’t 
even provide for the status quo. 
 
Mr. Minister, Mr. Nikolejsin also indicated that on budget day 
the government had boasted providing $1.2 billion in education 
— an increase of $78.6 million. The $1.2 billion combined the 
two previous departments of Education and early childhood 
development. The budget provided $477.6 million to school 
boards, which was an increase of 10.8 million over last year’s 
fiscal year, or 14.2 million over the calendar year. 
 
Out of that 14.2 million, over 6.5 million of that was for new 
programs. So there is only $8 million actually allocated for cost 
increases. Remembering, Mr. Minister, we needed 25 million 
and we were only given $8 million for the cost increases. 
 
And the 2002 cost increases for teachers’ salaries has also not 
been looked at in this budget. 
 
Mr. Minister, it’s not just the SSTA. The STF also had a 
comment about your budget. They’ve said that: 
 

“This budget . . . (would) not allow the school system to 
meet all the expectations,” (said) . . . President Wayne 
Clements . . . 
 

And: 
 
“. . . (the) budget may jeopardize the ability to meet . . . 
(expenditures) or support initiatives.” 



814 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

Mr. Minister, the biggest disappointment with this . . . your idea 
of the Learning department was the money that was put into it. 
And if it’s truly, truly an important issue for your government, 
the funding should have been there. 
 
Mr. Minister, how can you . . . what are you going to say to the 
school divisions when they come to you and say, are we going 
to cut programs, are we going to fire teachers, are we going to 
close schools, or are we going to raise taxes? Are you going to 
say, do all four? What’s your answer going to be? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. Certainly 
when we look at the history of funding for the Department of 
Education and the Department of Post-Secondary Education 
and Skills Training, and even our early childhood development 
and public libraries now which are all included within the 
Department of Learning, we look at last year’s budget for K to 
12 education — and most of her comments were related to K to 
12 — when we talk about the increases last year and we factor 
in the increases the year before and we factor in this year’s 
increases, you know, we’re looking at over 20 per cent, in that 
short time frame, increase in our foundation operating grant. 
 
When we talk about the reality of the circumstances with this 
particular budget and the overall expenditures of government 
really flat, that means that some other departments suffered cuts 
in this budget. The Department of Learning is one of the 
departments that received increases, that received increases 
pretty much across the board, and that we are able to fulfill our 
mandate. 
 
But I need to remind the member opposite that the funding for a 
K to 12 system is a shared responsibility, that the provincial 
government which — and this has been confirmed by the recent 
Supreme Court ruling in Alberta — is the . . . has the 
responsibility for education in the province of Saskatchewan. 
They have the responsibility for overseeing the funding of 
education. 
 
And what the provincial government in Saskatchewan has done, 
and has done since the existence of this province, is they have 
delegated the authority for decision making to local school 
divisions and school boards and have also allowed those school 
boards to access the property tax base. This is not the case in 
many other jurisdictions in Canada, Mr. Chair. 
 
So we have a situation where we strongly believe in local 
autonomy. But we also recognize that there’s a shared 
responsibility for the funding for our K to 12 system. And we 
can talk about the pressures on the property tax base, and we 
can talk about what other jurisdictions have done in terms of 
having social services or health care or other human services 
that would come off the property tax base. But in this province 
we really have education and municipal that have really 
unfettered access to that property tax base. 
 
When we talk about the increases that we’ve done, the 20 . . . 
over 20 per cent on the foundation operating grant in the last 
three budgets — that far exceeds the rate of inflation. 
 
When we talk about services that are being provided to students 
in the province of Saskatchewan, we find that the per student 
expenditure is above provincial averages. We find that we have 

equitable opportunity throughout the province of Saskatchewan 
because we have a foundation operating grant that is endorsed 
by all of the stakeholders, including the School Trustees 
Association, including the Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, 
LEADS (League of Educational Administrators, Directors and 
Superintendents), and SASBO (Saskatchewan Association of 
School Business Officials). 
 
And what they have said is that they believe that the principles 
of the foundation operating grant and the fact that it is an 
equalization formula is the right way to go. And the External 
Reference Committee constantly reviews our parameters within 
our grant and have agreed with those parameters. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, when we talk about our shared responsibility and 
we talk about the support that this government has provided to 
the K to 12 education sector, it has been impressive. 
 
We also recognize that we provide that grant on an equalization 
basis so that the local school board has an opportunity to look at 
its revenues and expenditures, to look at their own budgets, to 
priorize within their own budgets; and then it’s our 
responsibility to make sure that school divisions who have less 
ability to raise local revenue are given more grant dollars, and 
school divisions that have a large opportunity to raise dollars 
are given less grant dollars. And that’s why it is an equalization 
formula. 
 
But if we look at the basic principle, that the foundation 
operating grant is fair and transparent and that we are providing 
equitable opportunities for students no matter where they live in 
the province of Saskatchewan, I believe that we have a very 
good system. 
 
Now I remind the member opposite as well that in the ’99 
campaign for the Saskatchewan Party, and I’ll remind the 
people who may be listening or viewing today, that they 
pledged to freeze spending on education. And when you freeze 
spending on education and you freeze it at 1999 dollars or you 
freeze it to the rate of inflation, then what you have done is you 
have either cut services or you have off-loaded to the local 
property tax base because the components come from two 
separate sources. 
 
It’s a shared responsibility, and this government has done a lot 
in terms of the competing priorities to make sure that education 
is one of the priorities, one of the most significant priorities of 
government. 
 
And the member asks, well what should I tell school boards? I 
would tell school boards what we tell them every year — that 
they are given the mandate, that they have the responsibility to 
provide quality education, but they also have the independence 
to make those decisions based on what’s best for the children 
and students in their communities. So we accept that reality. We 
do what we can as a provincial government and I think we have 
done a very good job in providing funds to school divisions in 
the last three years, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, and Mr. Minister, the people that 
have done a very good job in providing services to the children 
of this province is not the Department of Education, it’s the 
school boards and the school trustees and the teachers that are 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 815 

 

working hours and hours and hours to, not only trying to 
provide the services, but find the dollars. 
 
Mr. Minister, you talked about this not sharing responsibility. 
No, you don’t share the responsibility. You’ve been 
downloading your responsibility and you did it again this year. 
 
The equalization factor went from 16.25 per cent to 17 per cent, 
which means you believe that there is more money out there in 
the hands of property tax owners to pay for more of the cost of 
education in this province. That’s exactly what it means. Every 
time you increase that assessment or that rate it means that 
property tax owners are going to pay more. 
 
Mr. Minister, we have . . . I guess if you don’t pay more, what it 
means is that they’re going to cut programs, they’re going to cut 
teachers, or they’re going to close schools. Something has to 
happen. You cannot provide the same services with less money 
than they got last year. 
 
Mr. Minister, does that mean that you believe property tax 
owners in this province can bear more of the cost of education 
than they could last year? And that’s exactly what’s happening 
because of your budget. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well thank you, Mr. Chair. When we 
talk about shared responsibility and we talk about local 
autonomy, obviously in this province we respect school 
divisions and their ability to access the local tax base and also 
to make decisions on service delivery. 
 
But we can look to our neighbour to the immediate west, 
Alberta, and what have they done? They no longer allow their 
school divisions to access the property tax base. They basically 
provide a provincial levy. They collect the dollars from the 
property tax base, and then they provide it on a grant basis to 
their school divisions. 
 
Now I’m not saying that that’s what we should be doing in the 
province of Saskatchewan; in fact, I don’t think we should be 
doing that. 
 
But when you have a shared responsibility that means a shared 
responsibility. And that means that school divisions as well as 
the Department of Learning look at the overall system in terms 
of providing equitable experiences for students throughout this 
province. 
 
School divisions have challenges, school divisions make 
decisions based on the parameters that are before them. And 
whether that’s consolidation or whether it’s looking at their mill 
rate, or whether it looks at the types of services they would like 
to provide, well we can say they’re allowed to make those 
decisions and we support them in their decision-making 
capacity. 
 
But I must remind the member opposite that when she referred 
to the 16.5 to 17 per cent, I think what she was referring to was 
our equalization factor . . . which the provincial equalization 
factor has gone up from 16.5 to 17 mills. 
 
And what this is is indeed an equalization factor. What it does is 
it provides for distribution of the grant dollars preferentially to 

boards of education who have less ability to garner revenue 
from their local property tax base. 
 
Now the provincial average, the provincial average in terms of 
mill rates, is 18.1. And we have been advised by our 
stakeholders on the External Reference Committee, including 
the School Trustees Association, including the Saskatchewan 
Teachers’ Federation and LEADS and SASBO, that our 
equalization factor should be as close as possible to the 
provincial average mill rate. So we have done that because it 
improves the equity of the grant. 
 
And if they dispute that, then I would ask them to take up their 
challenge with the members of the External Reference 
Committee, including the School Trustees Association, and the 
Saskatchewan Teachers’ Federation, and our League of 
Education Administrators and Directors, as well as our school 
business officials. Because we do support our relationships with 
our stakeholders and we listen to our stakeholders in 
determining how we apply our grant each year, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. I’d like you to clarify 
that the actual change in the mill rate was from 16 to 17 per 
cent. I’d indicated 16.25, you just said 16.5, so maybe for any 
of our viewing audience who are really interested in this 
number, maybe you could clarify that? 
 
And please tell the people in the Assembly and any of those that 
are interested, what that change of that 1 mill will actually mean 
to the taxpayers of this province. How many dollars does that 
mean that property tax owners will now be picking up because 
of that 1 per cent change in equalization factor? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, with regard to the 
increase of the provincial mill rate or equalization factor within 
the foundation operating grant, this is a formula-driven grant 
structure. 
 
And it doesn’t mean that there is any change in the dollars 
available to the system. What it says is that, of those global 
dollars, when you increase that particular factor to 17 mills — 
which is one one-thousandth — that that then applies the grant 
preferentially to boards who are . . . would be considered poorer 
boards of education — in other words, their ability to access 
dollars from their property tax base. 
 
If you are a board of education who has an assessment per 
student that is very high, well above the provincial average, 
then by changing that equalization factor doesn’t mean that 
there’s more or less dollars available. The dollars available 
would . . . will be available, but what it means is that a high 
assessment school division would get less grant dollars and a 
low assessment school division would get more grant dollars. 
 
So it improves the equity and the equalization of the grant. And 
the perfect scenario would be if this equalization factor applied 
on the foundation operating grant was exactly the same as the 
provincial average mill rate because then the equalization and 
equity index would be 100 per cent. 
 
And we have been told by our External Reference Committee 
and our School Trustees Association that we should try and 
keep that equalization factor as close as possible to the 



816 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

provincial average mill rate, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, I have asked two questions — 
direct questions — and I haven’t received an answer to either 
one of them. 
 
The first one was the . . . your question on do you believe the 
property tax owners should be picking up more of this . . . of the 
cost of education? 
 
And the last one, the last question I asked you, is the increase in 
equalization factor of 1 mill — what kind . . . what is the local 
revenues? What kind of a difference is that going to make, 
downloading your responsibility? How much money is 1 mill 
change make in the dollar figures for local school boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I know that the 
foundation operating grant is sometimes referred to as FOG. 
And we recognize that when you’re dealing with a grant 
structure that has multiple parameters built into it and you can 
talk about the equalization factor . . . But I think the member 
opposite does not realize or recognize that this mill rate, this 
so-called equalization factor, is not a provincially levied mill 
rate. There’s no dollars that come into the provincial 
government because of that change. 
 
What it does is it’s . . . it allows the grant structure to be such 
that a poor school division will get more dollars than a rich 
school division. And that is the reality of Saskatchewan today 
and that was the reality of Alberta some time ago when the . . . 
Well the member opposite when he asks a question and then he 
yells at me when I’m trying to give the answer . . . well I’ll give 
him the answer. I’ll give him the answer, and I’ve given him the 
answer already, Mr. Chair. 
 
And what the answer, what the answer is, is that by increasing 
the equalization factor does . . . has no effect on boards of 
education to independently determine their own mill rates. 
What at . . . the effect that it has, Mr. Chair, is that a school 
division like Kamsack, which is a low assessment board, will 
get less . . . will get more dollars and will have to access their 
property tax less. So when we increase the equalization factor to 
17, that means that a school division like Kamsack will get 
more dollar . . . 
 
The Chair: — Order. Order. I’m having a . . . Order. I’m 
having difficulty hearing the minister. We have much time 
today, we . . . Each member will have their chance. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — You know, it’s amazing to me that 
the member who used to be a president of the School Trustees 
Association from Canora-Pelly can yell from his chair when he 
knows full well the explanation — when he knows full well, 
because he has dealt with these issues over and over again. 
 
So, Mr. Chair, I have told . . . I have said, and I’m sure there are 
people out there who understand that what the equalization 
factor means on a provincial basis is that a school division like 
Kamsack or Ile-a-la-Crosse that does not have a lot of 
assessment gets more dollars. And a school division like 
Weyburn Central, which has close to $1 million of assessment 
per student and more oil wells than students, does not get any 
grant dollars, because guess what? They already have access to 

revenue streams that are far in excess of other school divisions. 
 
And that’s why the foundation operating grant is an 
equalization formula, Mr. Chair. 
 
(16:15) 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, 
transferring . . . you transfer 1 mill to the local tax base. It’s 
going to mean $37 million more that’s going to have to be 
picked up by local property tax owners. 
 
I’m going to give you two examples. Rosetown School Division 
says an increase in equalization factor does indicate that this 
provincial government believes the ratepayers can afford to pay 
more. 
 
Tisdale School Division says the equalization factor increasing 
to 17 mills means the government assumes we can increase our 
local revenues by $50,000 this year. 
 
Mr. Minister, will you please indicate that if the amount that’s 
transferred by 1 mill change is not $37 million, please tell me 
what that amount is? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, there is no dollar number 
assigned to a 1 mill or a 2 mill, or whatever. If the provincial 
formula was . . . had its equalization mill rate dropped by three 
points, it wouldn’t make any difference to the global number of 
dollars available in the grant. The global number of dollars in 
the grant are what we see before us in these estimates. 
 
But what it does do is it says that school divisions who have 
less capacity to raise revenue will get more grant dollars by 
increasing the equalization factor. And that is considered the 
ideal and is endorsed by all of the stakeholders within the 
education system in K to 12. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister. Last year, I believe 
there was 11 zero-grant boards in this province, and this year I 
believe that the number is going to be 17. I can . . . I’ll ask you 
to verify that before I ask you the further question. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, there were 14 zero-grant 
boards last year, and there will be 17 zero-grant boards this 
year. And this is an issue, and I’m glad that the member from 
Kelvington-Wadena has brought this issue up again. 
 
This is an issue that was highlighted approximately a 
year-and-a-half ago when I went to the School Trustees 
Association, and again, in the most recent annual meeting. We 
are concerned about the equity of the grant because of the 
earning capacity that we’re seeing now between areas of 
development and areas where development hasn’t occurred as 
quickly. 
 
The ideal scenario, in terms of grant structure, would be if all 
boards of education received some grant dollars. To reverse the 
trend to allow for all boards of education to receive grant 
dollars would require a significant change in how the funding of 
K to 12 education occurs. And we’re looking at probably in the 
neighbour of 2 to $300 million to increase the ratio from that 
60/40 to . . . or the 40/60 to 60/40. 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 817 

 

The question arises is, and what the question we had given to 
the School Trustees Association and others is, the challenge is: 
how can we design a system that is . . . that deals with this 
equity issue in capacity on revenue streams? And proposals 
have gone out and they’ve asked for feedback. We haven’t 
come up with any solutions. 
 
But the concern that I have is that we have 17 boards of 
education that access 100 per cent of their tax base because they 
have more assessment than their neighbouring school divisions. 
And the question arises is, when other provinces were faced 
with this, like in Alberta where there was a significant 
difference between assessment on the east side of the province 
and the west side of the province, they said what we will do is 
take away the taxing authority of school divisions and we will 
levy a provincial mill rate and then we can provide an equitable 
distribution as 100 per cent of the grant. 
 
I don’t think that’s a good way of dealing with local autonomy 
and decision making, Mr. Chair, but we still have not come up 
with a solution. But we do have the challenge out there and we 
are looking at solutions. But the current circumstance is that we 
had 14 zero-grant boards last year, and we’ll have 
approximately 17 zero-grant boards this year, Mr. Chair. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chair, Mr. Minister, the minister on a 
couple of occasions in the last 20 minutes has been very 
political about why he’s . . . what’s his concerns are. I would 
think the political reality is that now that your government has 
20 per cent of their boards that don’t get any money from the 
government, they’re wondering why they should even be 
listening to the Minister of Learning anymore. 
 
Mr. Minister, the assessment . . . assessment rich, means that 
you have . . . assessment rich does not mean, Mr. Minister, that 
people like farmers have cash in their pocket. As soon as you 
raise the assessment that means that their land or their 
property’s got a higher value. But it does not mean that there’s 
money in the pocket. We know that from a few years ago when 
there was tax revolt meetings rallied around this province. 
 
And the zero-grant boards that I’m talking to right now are 
saying, you know, just because the assessment is high in my 
area, does not mean that my ratepayers have cash in their 
pocket. So expecting them to pay for the full cost of education 
is not equalization of . . . or equal opportunity right across this 
province. 
 
Mr. Minister, you indicated that there’s 17 boards will receive 
no money from the government this year. Tell me, how many 
boards will receive less money than they did last year from the 
government with this new budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, with regard to zero-grant 
boards, I think that anyone who might be listening or viewing 
should recognize that these zero-grant boards that don’t get any 
dollars from the foundation operating grants are having 
assessments per student that are very high, and they are able to 
run mill rates that are considerably lower than their neighbours. 
 
So the question of having a competitive advantage or even — 
on the mill rate side — but also the opportunity to run average 
mill rates and have additional dollars to put into services is also 

there, Mr. Chair. 
 
With regard to the . . . this current year, as in past years, I would 
suspect that with the increases we have provided to the 
foundation operating grant on the calendar year basis — which 
I think is just a little bit above 3 per cent — that we’ll see about 
half of the boards have increases in their grant and about half of 
the boards will see decreases in their grant. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Minister, then are the . . . there’s, I 
believe, 99 school divisions in the province at this time. We’ll 
get into the . . . your . . . the discussion about amalgamation at 
another day. But 20 . . . or 17 school divisions get no money; 
half of them are going to get more . . . less money than last year. 
So that means that a considerable number of these school 
divisions are going to be getting a lot more money from your 
government this year. 
 
Have you got letters . . . Can you give me some indication of 
which school divisions are going to be getting this increase in 
revenues from your government because of this budget? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — I can actually provide the complete 
list to the member opposite if she wants that. 
 
But what I could do is, if we talk about particular boards of 
education that received additional dollars, some of them were 
significant. Any board of education that saw an enrolment 
increase is likely to have gotten increased grant dollars as well. 
 
But if we look, for example, Saskatoon Public, Meadow Lake, 
Moose Jaw, these are boards of education that received 
additional grant dollars this year. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Deputy Chair, and Minister. Since, Mr. 
Minister, you mentioned my name in discussions today, I would 
like you to clarify a couple of things even though I was not 
going to be involved in debate today. 
 
Mr. Minister, I’ve received a number of grant estimate forms 
from school divisions that have been sent right across the 
province, and I want to ask this question, Mr. Minister. When 
we look at the recognized expenditures, which basically make 
up the left column — and I’m sure your officials are very . . . 
will assist you in explaining what the left column is referred to 
— and then we look at the right column, Mr. Minister, the right 
column is where you’d, as a government, determine what the 
local taxpayer will contribute. 
 
And, Mr. Minister, I have in my hands a number of copies of 
school board grant formulas that say that the local revenue that 
is expected to be contributed by the school division in question 
is now changed from 16 to 17 mills. You’ve agreed with that. 
 
In this case, Mr. Minister, the assessment is identical from this 
year to last year. By the changes that are identified here, Mr. 
Minister, could you explain why this school division now is 
expected to contribute from the local revenue $280,000 more as 
a result of the mill rate change from 16 to 17? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I don’t know which 
particular school division he’s referring to but in terms of the 
left column/right column, this is information that is provided to 



818 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

each school division on budget day and shortly thereafter. 
 
And what the . . . what it does is it explains in terms of the grant 
distribution the formula in terms of how those dollars are 
applied. So the recognized expenditures on one side is a 
formula-driven item. The anticipated revenues on the right side 
are not actual revenues — they are formula revenues as well. So 
when you look at what the anticipated revenues would be, the 
equalization factor is sensitive to that as, indeed, the enrolment 
would be as well. 
 
When you look at the recognized expenditures on the left 
column — and this is a lot of detail — but what the reality is, 
that no matter what those formula-driven items are before those 
boards of education, it doesn’t change the impact of the global 
dollars that we are talking about in the estimates here today. 
And if that equalization factor, that provincial mill rate, that 
equalization factor would go down three or up two or whatever, 
it wouldn’t make any difference to the global dollars that we’re 
talking about in the estimates today. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, obviously you would know 
then that the school division I’m talking about has an 
assessment of 280 million since it produces 1 mill of $280,000. 
And I have another one that has 200 million and I have a larger 
one. 
 
So, Mr. Minister, if I was to take all school divisions, every one 
of the grant forms from all school divisions, and if I was to add 
the numbers up, where you have indicated that the local revenue 
that has to be now raised at the local level is determined by 
assessment and equalization factor — and you’re right, it’s not 
all of the cost, it’s only part of the cost — if I was to take every 
one of those school divisions and add that up, back to the 
question that my colleague asked you, that number total of this 
year assessment times 17 mills versus last year’s assessment 
times 16 mills, what is the difference in those two numbers for 
all the school divisions of the province? 
 
(16:30) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I’m sure the member 
opposite has heard the explanation with regard to the grant in 
terms of A minus B equals C. We have recognized revenues; 
we have recognized expenditures — both formula driven. And 
if you change the numbers on one side, you almost . . . you have 
to make the corresponding change on the other side. Otherwise 
you throw out all of the principals of the foundation operating 
grant. 
 
But the reality is that you can talk about the detail; you can talk 
about urban transportation, sparsity factors, special education 
— all of the factors that go into the foundation operating grant 
— but guess what? Guess what? The reality of the day is that it 
doesn’t have any difference in terms of the dollars. 
 
And the reality is that when you increase the recognized 
expenditure and you adjust the 17, then what you are doing is 
you are providing more grant dollars to boards of education 
who are poor, and boards of education who are richer, get less 
tax dollars. And it’s formula driven and the adjustments can be 
made. 
 

But every single one of the stakeholders, including the School 
Trustees Association, including the Saskatchewan Teachers’ 
Federation agree with this foundation operating grant formula. 
And they’ve agreed with it for some time. And the most recent 
external reference committee said, this is the best way of 
providing dollars on the grant basis. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Chairman, to the minister. Mr. Minister, 
I’ll simplify the question. Could you tell me what the 
assessment of the province of Saskatchewan is, and thus tell me 
what 1 mill of taxation will produce if it is applied to that 
assessment? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, I will try and give a 
simple answer to a very complicated foundation operating 
grant. 
 
The overall assessment of the province of Saskatchewan is 37 
billion. And using their simplistic logic, that would mean 1 mill 
would be 37 million. But if that’s the case, if that’s the case, 
this is all formula driven and it has nothing to do with the $1.2 
billion that are being provided in this estimates. All it does is 
talk about what is the equalization factor. That’s all it means. 
That’s all it means. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. We have now 
determined that, approximately, based on, I believe, your 
comment that it was one one-thousandth, therefore $37 billion 
worth of assessment produces on average $37 million worth of 
tax revenue. We’ve already . . . We thank you for that 
assurance. 
 
Mr. Minister, you mentioned A plus B equals C. And in 
deriving how the amount of money is allocated, is it not true 
that really you start with C and work backwards and thus 
determine A and B. Could you clarify that? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well the member opposite would 
know full well the answer because he was involved with the 
School Trustees Association. That is exactly the way it works. 
The amount of grant dollars available is C. And then the 
recognized revenues and recognized expenditures provide the A 
to B. 
 
But the school divisions can determine their mill rates in real 
dollars, and they can determine their assessment in real dollars, 
and all this is, is to provide a formula which, I remind the 
members opposite, everyone agrees with except them, it seems. 
And if they have a dispute with regard to the foundation 
operating grant, perhaps they would like to clarify what they 
think should be done differently with the foundation operating 
grant. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Mr. Minister, we’re 
just trying to get an explanation so that people in Saskatchewan 
better understand the formula. And while I understand that you 
understand the formula and your officials who are assisting you 
understand, there are people in the province who I’m sure today 
are watching this questioning and are wondering what is the 
foundation grant formula, first of all. They don’t know, okay. 
And I’m sure that you can respect that, Mr. Minister. 
 
So let’s try to clarify for the people of Saskatchewan what you 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 819 

 

just said. You said that we will start with the grant, which in 
this case you have explained in the budget, I believe, that there 
is an $11 million increase this year for that component that 
we’ll call C in our equation — it’s about $11 million higher. 
 
Could you tell us for the purposes of better understanding, you 
referred to A and B — A being the recognized expenditures 
which we know full well are not at the actual expenditures, and 
then you talk about revenue. Could you indicate how the 
recognized expenditures this year versus last year have 
changed? What are the actual dollar figures for the entire 
province? I’m not just dealing with one single school division 
— all school divisions. What was the amount of recognized 
expenditure last year versus the recognized expenditure that you 
have just distributed through the formula? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well, Mr. Chair, it’s obvious that the 
member opposite does understand the foundation operating 
grant. The total recognized operating expenditures for ’01-02 
was $1.082 billion, and the ’02-03 estimated operating . . . or 
recognized expenditures is 1.107. So a difference of 
approximately — what would that be — 25 million? Yes. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. Yes, that is a 
difference of 25 million. Could you now indicate the ’01-02 
revenues that were used in the distribution of the grant formula, 
and the ’02-03 revenue numbers. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Yes. Mr. Chair, when we look at the 
recognized revenue side, that has increased 32 million. But the 
reason that there’s a difference is because there is no calculation 
for negative grant. They’re considered zero grant; there’s no 
calculation for negative-grant boards. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Mr. Minister, could you give me the numbers 
for the revenue side for last year and this year, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the recognized revenue 
for ’01-02 was 597,637 and the recognized revenue for ’02-03 
is 629,137,015. So 597 million versus 629 million, with the 
revenue equalization factor in ’01-02 at 16, and the revenue 
equalization factor in ’02-03 at 17. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — So, Mr. Minister, if we go back to your 
number that said . . . I think you used the number of $32 
million. You’ve indicated that that is the amount of revenue that 
is now that much higher this year over last year, recognized 
revenue. 
 
If indeed you are indicating that C, the actual grant, has grown 
by 11 million, how do you expect that the difference of actual 
recognized revenue increase of 32 million and the fact that the 
government has only contributed $11 million to the final grant 
total . . . Who will make up that difference? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, this is kind of like 
splitting hairs and it is a complicated topic. But the keyword 
here is recognized expenditures, recognized revenues, and the 
fact that the grant is distributional. It’s an equalization formula 
— it’s a formula. 
 
And if you adjust the equalization factor . . . And I think that the 
member opposite would recognize that that particular 

revenue-equalization factor which is 17 mills is called the 
equalization factor. And when you increase that number closer 
to the provincial average, which is in the 18-point-something 
range, that you actually improve the equity of the distribution of 
the grant. 
 
And the reality is that these are factors that have been debated 
by stakeholders for some time and they all agree with the grant 
formula. And if he wants to . . . or the members opposite 
disagree with the formula, then I would ask them to mount their 
arguments, because we haven’t heard any arguments in terms of 
whether the foundation operating grant is the best way to 
distribute provincial dollars to school boards or whether there’s 
a better way. 
 
Mr. Krawetz: — Thank you, Mr. Minister. One more question, 
Mr. Minister. If I would look at a school division whose 
enrolment from the previous year, that was used to determine 
last year’s grant allocation, remained exactly the same as this 
year’s — let’s pick a number of 2,400 students; 2,400 students 
last year, 2,400 students this year — would the foundation grant 
that is now being allocated to that school division, would that 
be identical to last year? Would it be more than last year or 
would it be less, since the enrolment has absolutely remained 
the same number? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — That’s . . . enrolment is one piece, 
that’s the . . . with regard to the sensitivity of the grant. If the 
enrolment was the same and the assessment was the same, then 
they would get more dollars this year. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Thank you, Mr. Chairman, to the minister. The 
other question that we had and the Minister of Finance 
discussed it with our critic of Finance earlier during interim 
supply and the . . . one of the pillars of your Learning 
department’s discussion and budget was the education 
infrastructure corporation and the spending that was, that was 
brought forward. 
 
The Minister of Finance said that he was not opposed to going 
into debt to finance education, to build university buildings, and 
to build schools. In fact, I’m going to quote the Minister of 
Finance. He said: 
 

. . . it’s okay to borrow some money to build schools and to 
build university buildings when you don’t have the money 
to finance it on a cash basis. 

 
Then he says the Saskatchewan Party is opposed to borrowing 
money to build these schools; we are simply opposed to 
building schools and providing quality education. 
 
Well, Mr. Chair, I think the Minister of Finance has the issue 
confused. We’re not opposed to providing quality education for 
the children of Saskatchewan. What we’re opposed to is this 
government mismanaging the money of this province. 
 
We’re opposed to them spending precious taxpayers’ dollars on 
things like SPUDCO and the automated land transfer system 
and a software system that could have been purchased on a 
shelf. 
 
Mr. Minister, the government throws away million of 



820 Saskatchewan Hansard April 17, 2002 

 

taxpayers’ dollars. On the other hand, they are saying that we’re 
going to incur $90 million of debt because basically what this 
government is doing is wasting taxpayers’ dollars. 
 
But we all know, the people of this province know, that this 
budget means that we’re going to be borrowing money for 
capital expenditures for education. 
 
I’m going to ask the Minister of Education: how does this 
government plan to pay back the $90 million loan for education 
infrastructure? How . . . (inaudible) . . . you plan to pay back the 
capital funding, the capital expenditures? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, as the member will know, 
in the estimates there is an appropriated amount within the 
General Revenue Fund that covers the principal and interest 
with regard to the dollars that will be borrowed by the 
Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, are the school divisions going 
to end up paying for 100 per cent of the capital costs? 
 
(16:45) 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair, the current rules with 
regard to how capital is allocated will not change and whatever 
the proportion that a school division would have been 
responsible for last year or the year before will be the same. 
That doesn’t change. 
 
The dollars that will be provided through the Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation will be covering whatever 
the provincial component would have been for that capital 
project. 
 
Ms. Draude: — Mr. Chairman, the Minister of Finance said, 
and I quote: 
 

(School divisions) . . . will be financing the portion that 
they have been doing up until now as they always have, 
(been) . . . and they also will be financing the other portion, 
but they’ll be doing that with the support of the Education 
Infrastructure Corporation. 

 
Can the Minister of Learning tell the members of this Assembly 
specifically what kind of support the Education Infrastructure 
Corporation will be giving school divisions? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — What it means, Mr. Chair, is that 
through the Education Infrastructure Financing Corporation, the 
principal and interest will be covered by the provincial 
government. And of course, as the member indicated earlier, 
that also the debt incurred is a liability of the province. It’s not a 
liability of school divisions. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Chair. I find the minister’s 
answer to the last question rather interesting in light of some of 
the answers we received the other evening from the Minister of 
Finance. I’d like to just go back and review the process and ask 
the minister to clarify the process for me. 
 
I understand in the past, Mr. Minister, that school boards when 
they had a capital project, they were required to come up with a 

certain percentage of the financing of that project through their 
own resources, their own revenues, and then the remainder was 
funded by the Department of Education. 
 
Now according to what the Minister of Finance told us the other 
evening is that the process will be changed somewhat. The 
school divisions will still . . . if they’ve got a capital project 
now under the new structure, they’ll still have to come up with 
a percentage of the total cost through their own resources. Then 
the monies that they would have received in the past under the 
Department of Education, under your new structure, they now 
have to go and borrow from this new Crown corporation that 
they’ve set up. Is that how it’s going to work, Mr. Minister? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well basically, that’s correct. What 
happens under the new structure is that the proportion for a 
capital project, Mr. Chair . . . for example, if the provincial 
government’s component was 62 per cent and the school 
division would have required 38 per cent on last year’s project, 
well those numbers are the same. But what the provincial 
government will do is, with the 62 per cent, is guarantee the 
debt, will accept the liability, and will provide the principal and 
interest to manage that debt through the general appropriation. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, what you’re saying is that . . . 
or is this what you’re saying, is that the boards of education will 
be borrowing the additional 62 per cent that you indicated, or 
whatever that percentage is, from this new corporation and they 
will be required to make those payments back to that 
corporation? Is that what you’re saying? That it would be the 
school boards that will accept the liability for repayment of 
these new loans that they’ll be asked to acquire under your new 
structure? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Basically what happens is that the 
school boards will borrow the dollars from the Education 
Infrastructure Financing Corporation. They will pay the 
principal and interest to the Education Infrastructure Financing 
Corporation, and the Department of Learning will pay the 
school board the exact amount of principal and interest to pay 
for the loan that they received. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Minister, for the explanation. So 
what you’re saying is that the school boards will be responsible 
for making the payments back to this new corporation, correct? 
 
Now, and you’ve also said that the Department of Learning will 
be giving them the money to make those payments. Okay. Now 
are you prepared to enter into a written agreement guaranteeing 
that those school boards will have those additional funds over 
and above their operating grants to make those capital 
payments? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Well I think the answer is that it’s in 
the budget. That’s why we have that as a line item in terms of 
our appropriation within the Department of Learning. So the 
numbers are there. 
 
And if they look at last year’s capital allocation at 24.7 million, 
they’ll notice that there’s been a significant decrease on that line 
item this year. Well that line item now applies to the principal 
and interest requirements to support the debt for those capital 
projects. 



April 17, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 821 

 

So what it means, Mr. Chair, is that the provincial government 
is responsible for the liability. It is debt incurred by the 
provincial government, but we’re also providing the dollars to 
meet the needs of supporting that debt through principal and 
interest payments. 
 
Mr. Hart: — So, Mr. Minister, you may have a line item in 
your budget but you . . . are you going to enter into a written 
agreement with the various boards of education that will be 
responsible now, will be taking on additional debt? 
 
I mean your government has in the past has had line items for 
. . . to pay for certain services to other local governments and 
the following year that line item disappeared. 
 
So what I’m asking you today is, are you prepared to enter into 
a written agreement, a binding legal document, that those 
additional dollars will be there for those . . . for the school 
boards? 
 
Hon. Mr. Melenchuk: — Mr. Chair. Every time there’s a 
project between the provincial government and a school 
division on a capital project there is a written agreement. 
 
And I can categorically say that the commitment of this 
government is 100 per cent to financing their proportion of that 
capital allocation and that they will be entering into writing 
each one these agreements because this is a process that we 
follow. So the process isn’t going to change. 
 
And guess what? We’ve got $40 million as opposed to 24 
million from last year. We’ve got $50 million on the 
post-secondary as opposed to 30 million last year. And those 
dollars will be building schools. And they’re real dollars. And 
our commitment is real. And they will be building facilities all 
across this province including, including rural Saskatchewan, 
including northern Saskatchewan, including our university 
campuses, and including the fine cities of Saskatoon and 
Regina, Mr. Chair. 
 
The committee reported progress. 
 
The Assembly adjourned at 16:55. 
 
 


	Bill No. 8

