















































Hansard: April 16, 2002


 LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF SASKATCHEWAN 737 
 April 16, 2002 
 

 

The Assembly met at 13:30. 
 
Prayers 

ROUTINE PROCEEDINGS 
 

PRESENTING PETITIONS 
 

Mr. Kwiatkowski: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise to present 
a petition on behalf of residents of Saskatchewan concerned 
about the premium hikes and coverage reductions with crop 
insurance. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
As in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
This petition is signed by the good citizens of Bjorkdale and 
Mistatim, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — . . . today on behalf of citizens concerned 
about the proposed long-term care fees. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
Mr. Speaker, today on this petition I have signatures from the 
communities of Melfort, Star City, Beatty, Yellow Creek. In 
addition to that, signatures that have come in from the Internet 
that I’ve included with this petition, Mr. Speaker. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a 
petition. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to work 
with the federal government, First Nations representatives, 
and with other provincial governments to bring about a 
resolution in the Lake of the Prairies situation and to ensure 
that our natural resources as a whole are used in a 
responsible manner by all people in the future. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, are from the communities of 
Esterhazy, Langenburg, Spy Hill, Togo, and Yorkton. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
have a petition to present on behalf of citizens of the province 
regarding the condition of our highways. This particular 

highway would happen to be 35 Highway. The prayer reads as 
follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to make 
the necessary repairs to Highway 35 in the Indian 
Head-Milestone constituency in order to prevent injury and 
loss of life and to prevent the loss of economic opportunity 
in the area. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by people from Balcarres, 
Regina, Osage, Francis, Tyvan, and White Bear. 
 
I so present. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I rise today to present a petition 
on behalf of residents of the constituency of Weyburn-Big 
Muddy who are concerned about the increase to long-term care 
fees. And the prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reconsider the exorbitant fee increases for 
long-term care services in Saskatchewan. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petition is signed by residents of Weyburn, Benson, 
and Bienfait. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I rise on behalf of 
people in the southwest corner of our province, Mr. Speaker, 
concerned about changes to the prescription drug plan. The 
prayer of the petition reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately reinstate a reasonable annual deductible 
amount for prescription drugs in Saskatchewan. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the petitioners today are from the city of Swift 
Current and the southwest communities of Vanguard, Kincaid, 
and Hazenmore. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Wiberg: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I have a petition this 
afternoon to present to the Assembly in regards to crop 
insurance premium hikes and coverage reductions. And the 
prayer reads as follows, Mr. Speaker: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 



738 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

And, Mr. Speaker, this petition is signed by the people from 
Meath Park and Prince Albert. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Weekes: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I also have a petition 
from citizens concerned about crop insurance premium hikes 
and coverage reductions. The prayer reads: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage, in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 
 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
Signed by the good citizens of Shellbrook and Biggar. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a 
petition concerning the deplorable state of Highway No. 15. 
And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to use a 
portion of its highway budget to address the concerns of the 
serious conditions of Highway 15 for Saskatchewan 
residents. 
 
And as is duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
And the petitioners who signed this are from a variety of places 
which shows how well this highway is travelled. They’re from 
Watrous, Saskatoon, Pike Lake, Balgonie, Imperial, Simpson, 
Stalwart, and Orangeville, Ontario. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I too have a petition to 
present today on behalf of citizens. The prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 
Assembly may be pleased to cause the provincial 
government to halt its plan to take money out of the crop 
insurance program and hike farmers’ crop insurance 
premium rates while reducing coverage in order to pay off 
the provincial government’s debt to the federal 
government. 

 
The signatures to this petition, Mr. Speaker, come from the 
communities of Bulyea and Southey. 
 
I so present. 
 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
in the Assembly today to bring forth a petition regarding the 
tobacco legislation. And the prayer reads as follows: 
 

Wherefore your petitioners humbly pray that your Hon. 

Assembly may be pleased to cause the government to 
immediately amend tobacco legislation that will make it 
illegal for anyone under the age of 18 to be in possession of 
any tobacco products; and furthermore, anyone found 
guilty of such an offence would be subject to a fine of not 
more than $100. 

 
And as in duty bound, your petitioners will ever pray. 

 
The signatures, Mr. Speaker, on this petition are from 
Saskatoon, Spiritwood, Rabbit Lake, Leoville. 
 
I so present. 
 

READING AND RECEIVING PETITIONS 
 
Deputy Clerk: — According to order the following petitions 
have been reviewed and hereby received as addendums to 
previously tabled petitions being sessional papers no. 7, 8, 11, 
17, 18, 23, 24, and 31. 
 

NOTICES OF MOTIONS AND QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I 
shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister in charge of Corporations branch: in view 
of the lesser staff time involved, is the government 
considering following the lead of the federal government in 
offering a reduced filing fee for corporations that file by 
e-mail and e-filing? 

 
Mr. Allchurch: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I 
give notice that I shall on day no. 27 ask the government the 
following question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: is your department 
responsible in whole or in part for management of forest 
fringe lands, commercial activity on said lands or taxation 
of any form of commercial activity on said lands; if so, in 
what capacity? 
 
And while I’m on my feet, Mr. Speaker, I have a question 
for the Minister Responsible for Government Relations, 
also one for the Minister of Agriculture, and one for 
Minister of Industry and Resources. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice that I shall 
on day no. 28 ask the government the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: is SaskPower currently involved in any 
lawsuits brought by any insurance business or insurance 
co-operative? 

 
And I give notice that I shall on day no. 28 ask the government 
the following question: 
 

To the minister responsible for Crown Investments 
Corporation: has SaskPower ever violated its own policies 
and procedures dealing with the revenue metering 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 739 

 

requirements? 
 
Mr. D’Autremont: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I give notice 
that I shall on day no. 27 ask the government the following 
question: 
 

To the Minister of Environment: in 2001, with regard to 
each wildlife management zone in Saskatchewan: (1) what 
was the number of big game permits issued by species to 
outfitters in each zone; (2) what was the number of those 
permits that were allocated to hunters by outfitters in each 
zone; (3) by species, how many outfitters in each zone did 
not utilize their full allocation of big-game permits; (4) by 
species, how many outfitters failed to allocate any of their 
big-game permits to hunters? 

 
I so submit, Mr. Speaker. 
 

As well as questions for 1999 and 2000. 
 

INTRODUCTION OF GUESTS 
 
The Speaker: — Members, I would first of all like to, on 
behalf of the legislature, extend a special welcome to nine 
people who are seated in the Speaker’s gallery. These are the 
voting members of the Canadian Ombudsman Association and 
they’ve come here from across Canada to attend meetings. And 
they are hosted by our own Provincial Ombudsman, Barbara 
Tomkins. 
 
And I would ask them to rise individually when I mention their 
names, starting with Barbara Tomkins, from Saskatchewan; 
Scott Sutton, from Alberta; Howard Kushner, from British 
Columbia; Pauline Champoux-Lesage, from Quebec; Fraser 
March, from Newfoundland; Hank Moorlag, from Yukon; Eva 
Aariak, from Nunavut; Barry Tuckett, from Manitoba; Patrick 
Robardet, from Laval University; and I think that’s all of them. 
 
And I extend, on behalf of all of the legislature, a warm 
welcome to all of our representatives of the Canadian 
Ombudsman Association. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it is my 
pleasure to introduce to you and through you to the Legislative 
Assembly, a number of students seated in the east gallery. 
 
We have with us today from Bruno School, 27 grade 8 students, 
and as well from Cudworth School we have 12 grade 8 
students. 
 
And these students are accompanied by their teacher, from 
Bruno, Mr. Jeff Marshak, and from Cudworth, Mr. Glen 
Ukrainetz and Ms. Nancy Kirtzinger. We also have, 
accompanying these students, some chaperones, parents from 
Bruno, Wendy Hoppe and Connie Basset. 
 
And these students are in Regina today to take in a number of 
different activities. And I do hope that you enjoy your time here 
in the legislature, and I ask all members of the Assembly to 
behave yourselves very well today to set a good example to 
these students sitting in the gallery. 

And I do look forward to meeting with you after question 
period. So welcome. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. In the east gallery is 
Mr. Grant Karwacki. He and his brother David are in Regina 
this afternoon to view proceedings and after proceedings they 
will be meeting with all of the members of the Liberal caucus. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, it’s my pleasure to introduce 
to you and to all members of the legislature, seated in the west 
gallery, one of my constituents, Eric August. Eric’s a U of R 
(University of Regina) student and a person who’s very 
interested in politics and in how society works. And we 
welcome him here today. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Osika: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I want to beg 
your indulgence and my colleagues here in the House to allow 
me to recognize, with a group of members from the 
Ombudsman’s office, a long-time friend, a colleague, a former 
colleague, Mr. Hank Moorlag, with whom I served in Manitoba. 
I’d like you to once again welcome him here. 
 
Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

STATEMENTS BY MEMBERS 
 

Bruno T-Birds Senior Hockey League Champions 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the Bruno 
T-Birds are now the Wheatland Senior Hockey League 
Champions. The team defeated Perdue in the semifinal round in 
three games straight, advancing to the final round against the 
Annaheim Knights. 
 
The Bruno T-Birds won the first game against the Annaheim 
Knights seven to nothing. Because of time constraints the series 
was changed to the best of three instead of the best of five. 
 
At the final game in Annaheim there was a 1/1 tie until the start 
of the third period. The T-Birds came out strong, scoring three 
quick goals in less than a minute of each other. The goals were 
scored by Cory Pavelich, Russel Julé, and Jeff Bassett. 
Annaheim came back and scored several goals with the final 
score of 5 to 4 for Bruno. 
 
(13:45) 
 
Bruno’s captain, which happens to be my son, Mr. Speaker, 
Russel Julé, accepted the trophy on behalf of the team. Justin 
Dauvin and Brian Prefontaine were both named the most 
valuable players of the playoffs. 
 
The Bruno T-Birds had a great season, winning first place in 
regular season play with a record of 37 wins and 7 losses. 
 
Team awards for regular season play went to Jeff Bassett for 
rookie of the year, Dustin Miller and Rob Usher for top team 



740 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

goaltenders, and Rob Usher for top goaltender. 
 
Congratulations to the Bruno T-Birds. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Petitions to the Legislative Assembly 
 
Mr. Van Mulligen: — Mr. Speaker, just when we thought the 
midnight show of the Sask Party circus could not get any more 
bizarre, they find a way to top themselves, or in this case, Mr. 
Speaker, to bottom themselves. Just when we think their 
repertoire of grubby tricks is exhausted, they come up with a 
new one. 
 
The one constant is that each of these acts follows the pattern 
begun with that party’s birth in the dark of night. In this month 
alone we have witnessed a secret nomination, the instant poll, 
and the special edition e-mail. 
 
I would think that’s enough for any gang, Mr. Speaker. But 
once you get a taste of chicanery, I suppose it’s hard to stop, 
like that old country song about the egg-sucking dog. 
 
Now we have petitions by members of the Legislative 
Assembly addressed to members of the Legislative Assembly to 
act on behalf of the public who are not asked to sign the 
petitions presented on their behalf, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Did I mention the word bizarre? How about contemptible? 
Disrespectful goes without saying. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we are very mindful of and even reverential to the 
traditions which guide us — the dress code, our formal 
deference to the mace, our adherence to the rules. All are part of 
our democracy, not to be manipulated, mocked, or belittled. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Swift Current Achievements 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’d like to take this 
opportunity to inform the members of the Assembly of some 
recent happenings back in Swift Current. 
 
Mr. Speaker, on April 8, I was fortunate to have the opportunity 
to attend the annual meeting of the Dr. Noble Irwin Healthcare 
Foundation. In just three years the foundation has raised over $4 
million, Mr. Speaker, through various donations and 
fundraising activities. The money is used to purchase medical 
equipment. And the organization is also heavily involved in 
lobbying for a new regional hospital for Swift Current and area. 
 
Congratulations to the many volunteers of the Dr. Noble Irwin 
Healthcare Foundation who have put . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I’m sorry. Order, please. I would ask for order 
so that the member . . . be able to make himself heard to all who 
are here in the Assembly today. 
 
Mr. Wall: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Congratulations to the 

many volunteers of the Dr. Noble Irwin Health Care Foundation 
who have put in countless hours of volunteer work for such a 
worthwhile cause. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d also like to highlight the accomplishments of a 
local theatre group back in my hometown. The Swift Current 
Little Theatre produces two plays each year. Their second 
performance this year called The Melville Boys garnered the 
Little Theatre . . . the award for runner-up . . . the best play at a 
recent provincial festival. Randolph Wall directed the play and 
Bruce Rayner was the stage manager. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I would also like to mention, make special 
mention of Wendy Kane’s performance. She received the 
trophy for best actress in a supporting role at the festival. 
Congratulations to all the actors and the people working behind 
the scenes who make the Swift Current Little Theatre a success 
year after year. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Saskatoon Agricultural Genomics Awards 
 
Mr. Addley: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Saskatoon shines in 
agricultural genomics. The Saskatoon agricultural biotech 
research community won a huge vote of confidence by 
receiving awards that reconfirm Saskatoon as Canada’s leading 
centre in agricultural genomics. 
 
Two agricultural genomics projects worth $17 million are led 
by highly respected Saskatoon scientists Dr. Lorne Babiuk and 
Dr. Wilf Keller. 
 
Dr. Babiuk is the director of the Veterinary Infectious Disease 
Organization, VIDO, at the University of Saskatchewan and 
will lead a $26.9 million genomics research project to gain new 
knowledge about how immunity to infectious diseases works, 
and to develop prevention strategies for both human and animal 
infections. 
 
This announcement complements the previous $14.2 million 
expansion of the VIDO facility. While Genome Canada 
announced it is providing half of the money for the project — 
$13 million — two private sector companies, AniGenics Inc. of 
Chicago, and Inimex of Vancouver, along with the province of 
Saskatchewan, will provide the other half of the funding. 
 
Mr. Speaker, a second agricultural genomics project, directed 
toward developing improved canola, will be led by Dr. Keller, 
the director of the National Research Council Plant 
Biotechnology Institute of Saskatoon. Genome Canada will 
contribute $3.75 million, or one-half of the total project cost. 
 
To conclude, Mr. Speaker, the powerhouse of expertise in 
agricultural genomics that has been built up over the last few 
years will contribute to this research effort, improving research 
and improving Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 741 

 

National Medical Laboratory Week 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I am 
very pleased today to rise and ask all members of the House to 
recognize National Medical Laboratory Week. 
 
Mr. Speaker, medical laboratory technologists, or MLTs as 
they’re often referred to, work in five main areas including 
chemistry, hematology, transfusion science, microbiology, and 
histotechnology. Now these medical terms, Mr. Speaker, may 
not mean much to the average person, but they’re very 
important for the doctors. In fact, Mr. Speaker, up to 85 per cent 
of patient diagnosis and treatment decisions made by doctors 
are influenced by the information generated by the MLT. 
 
As a former MLT myself, Mr. Speaker, I can tell you that at 
various points in our lives we will . . . all required the trained 
eye and special skills of medical laboratory technologists. And 
in some incidences, Mr. Speaker, it might mean the difference 
between life and death. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I may be a bit biased here, but I truly believe that 
MLTs are the unsung heroes that work behind the scenes in the 
medical field — in labs, hospitals, clinics, and even in training 
and research environments. 
 
That’s why, Mr. Speaker, during National Medical Laboratory 
Technologists Week, I’m troubled to see that here in 
Saskatchewan, as with other health care sectors, MLTs are 
working hard to have their voices heard. The issues that they 
want addressed are important and they deserve the attention and 
the respect from all of us. 
 
On behalf of the members of the House, a heartfelt thank you to 
all of Saskatchewan MLTs not only during National Medical 
Laboratory Technologists Week but for every day of the year. 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Riffel Student Places in Top 3 Per Cent of Math Test 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
in February each year, 70,000 of Canada’s top high school and 
math students write the University of Waterloo’s math contest. 
 
This year a constituent of mine, Justin Hoffman, placed in the 
top 3 per cent of all students in Canada. Justin is a grade 10 
student at Riffel High School and his outstanding placement 
earned him an invitation by the University of Waterloo to write 
their Invitational Math Challenge. Only 250 students in the 
country are invited to participate in this international 
competition that also invites students from South Africa, New 
Zealand, and Great Britain. 
 
Mr. Speaker, tomorrow, on Wednesday, April 17, Justin will 
participate in this challenge. I am sure all members of this 
House wish Justin all the very best of luck as a representative of 
our community and our province. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Keystone Cup 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the town of Assiniboia and its hockey team, the Assiniboia 
Southern Rebels, hosted the Keystone Cup April 11 to 14. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the Keystone Cup is emblematic of the Junior B 
hockey championship for Western Canada. There are teams 
from BC (British Columbia), Alberta, Manitoba, Northwestern 
Ontario, Team Saskatchewan from Saskatoon, and of course the 
host team, the Southern Rebels who are the provincial 
champions and won the Keystone Cup last year. 
 
The hockey throughout the weekend was of an excellent calibre, 
Mr. Speaker. Round-robin play saw the team from Alberta 
emerge the winner by defeating Assiniboia in a hard-fought 
battle. The gold medal game was played between the team from 
Alberta — Spruce Grove — and BC, the team from Sicamous, 
with BC emerging as the victor in a close 2 to 1 game. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’m very pleased to say that Assiniboia won the 
bronze medal. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to congratulate the town of Assiniboia 
and, in particular, Mr. Bob Himbeault and his Keystone Cup 
Committee for the excellent job they did in organizing this 
event. Another congratulations should also be extended to Mr. 
Dale Lessmeister, the president of the Assiniboia Southern 
Rebels and his coaches, staff, and players on providing us with 
another exciting hockey season. 
 
Way to go, Assiniboia, on winning your medal and we’ll see 
you next year. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

ORAL QUESTIONS 
 

Condition of Equipment at Prince Albert Hospital 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, my 
question is for the Minister of Health. 
 
Nurses at Victoria Hospital in Prince Albert are warning about a 
crisis in the obstetrics unit. They have filed more than 30 
complaints saying that equipment in that unit is outdated and 
broken down. And more importantly, it is compromising the 
health and safety of mothers and their babies. Officials with the 
health district have refused to answer, saying this letter should 
never have been . . . come to the public light. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to ask the minister, what does his 
government plan to do to address the crisis in obstetrics in 
Prince Albert? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. The letter 
referred to by the member opposite is dated March 6, 2002. In 
that time they were operating without a nursing manager in that 
particular unit. Since that time they’ve hired a nursing 
management person to cover that area and they are working on 
a number of these issues. 



742 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

What I would say, Mr. Speaker, is that we work together with 
the districts to provide the funding for what they need to do. 
They are looking at the various equipment concerns that are 
there. They’re also trying to deal with the human resource and 
management issues that are there. What we like to do is work 
together with the people who are running the system and we 
will continue to work with them and make sure that all of these 
kinds of problems are solved. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, once 
again the minister blames someone else, in this case health care 
professionals, instead of taking responsibility for its lack of 
commitment. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a question of priorities. 
The NDP (New Democratic Party) has $20 million for a 
dot-com in Atlanta, Georgia. It has $80 million for a land titles 
system that doesn’t work. But there is no money to ensure the 
safety of mothers and babies in the Prince Albert hospital. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re not the ones raising the concerns. They’re 
being raised by health care providers — people who work in the 
obstetrics unit every day. They are saying it’s a crisis; they are 
saying that patients’ safety is at jeopardy; and they are saying 
it’s going to get worse under this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, other than placing blame where it doesn’t belong, 
what is this government going to do about this issue? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, this is the government that 
continually looks carefully at health care and puts more money 
into health care each year. This year we’ve added $129 million 
when we’ve had many challenges. Previous year we ended up 
with much more money. 
 
The members opposite had a plan that would freeze the kinds of 
costs and money that they were going to put into health care 
and then try to sort out what was going on. That doesn’t work. 
We have to work together with the people, work on our action 
plan. 
 
In Prince Albert we have provided money for equipment 
through a number of different ways. They are setting priorities 
in that area; they are addressing issues. We will continue to 
work with the people in the districts because that’s where the 
job gets done and we have to do it together with them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
minister points to the $129 million increase to the allocation of 
health care in the province this year. But, Mr. Speaker, what 
he’s not saying, that in that very own budget that he has, he has 
decreased the spending for equipment capital by $13 million. 
He’s cut it — cut it, Mr. Speaker, from last year when there 
wasn’t enough money to go around. He’s cut it from $23 
million down to $10 million. 

Mr. Speaker, if the P.A. (Prince Albert) Health District couldn’t 
provide the adequate equipment budget for the obstetrics unit in 
last year’s budget, how in the world are they going to do it in 
this year’s budget when that minister cut the funding for 
equipment by $13 million? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I would remind the member 
opposite that over the last two years we were very pleased to 
receive money from the federal government in the amount of 
just over $16 million and that that funding ended for this year. 
So we then ended up putting money in for equipment when it 
was a challenge — the $10 million. 
 
What we will continue to do is work with the communities to 
make sure that they have some special equipment money, but 
that they also have the ongoing kind of funding they need in 
their particular areas. What we do is we work together with all 
the people in the province to try to design a system that will 
provide good service for everybody. 
 
But the only way we can do that is together. And I would ask 
that member to get on board and work with us as we build a 
good health system. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
(14:00) 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, that minister is living in 
never-never land if he thinks we’re going to get on board with a 
failed plan that his government has delivered. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it’s a question of priorities that 
this government has absolutely wrong. They have no problem 
standing up in this House and bragging about the fact that 
they’ve got $20 million for a dot-com in Georgia. They have no 
problem about standing up in this House and saying that it’s a 
success when they lose $28 million on the potato business in 
Saskatchewan. And yet, Mr. Speaker, they complain about the 
fact that there’s no money for critical and essential medical 
equipment in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, where are the priorities of this government? In 
these ventures that they’re willing to write off millions of 
dollars on, or in the safety of lives of mothers and babies in this 
province? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I invite that member to come 
and work with us on our plan because there is no plan over 
there. There is no plan at all. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — What we did, with their assistance, last 
year is listen carefully to the people of the province. We had 
hearings right in this room with the Standing Committee on 
Health, led by my colleague here who listened very carefully to 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 743 

 

the people of Saskatchewan. After also receiving advice from 
Mr. Fyke and other specialists, we put together a plan which we 
presented to the people. And we’re now working with the 
citizens of this province to build a good system. 
 
And I invite you, and I invite all the members opposite, let’s 
work together to build a good plan. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Saskatoon Crisis Shelter 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, my question is for the Minister of 
Social Services. Mr. Speaker, the YWCA (Young Women’s 
Christian Association) Crisis Shelter in Saskatoon is facing 
some very difficult circumstances and they are sounding the 
alarm bells that without assistance they may be forced to close 
their doors next month. 
 
This is a 34-bed, 24-hour unit which serves abused women and 
children. It provides a vital service for the safety and security of 
women and children who may find themselves needing help and 
a place to turn in order to escape a violent situation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the YWCA shelter says that by May they will be 
out of operating money and that they are attempting to 
renegotiate the flat fee per occupied bed that the province 
currently provides them. Will the minister tell us what stages 
these negotiations are at, and if a new agreement might be 
reached before the shelter is forced to close its doors. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, I thank the hon. member for 
the question. The hon. member will be aware that currently 
Department of Social Services has a fee-for-service 
arrangement with the YWCA and is currently now in the 
process, Mr. Speaker, of negotiating a long-term arrangement, a 
framework for an arrangement for future funding. 
 
Therefore, Mr. Speaker, I think that there’s no reason to be 
anything other than optimistic that the federal government will 
honour its commitment and provide the funds to the YWCA to 
continue to provide this important service. 
 
But I ask the hon. member, Mr. Speaker, when we talk about 
funding to services in Saskatchewan, whether she stands with 
her leader when he says that his vision for the future of Social 
Services in this province is to rip $50 million out of the budget 
of Social Services. That’s what he said in October of last year, 
Mr. Speaker. And I ask the hon. member, does she stand with 
his . . . with her leader? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
Minister of Social Services is a master at diverting the attention 
that should be focused on this issue. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, the people of this province and 
women and children that have been violated and are hurting 

deserve more from that minister than for him to divert the 
attention to some other issue when in fact this is the issue of the 
day. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very unfortunate, it’s unfortunate . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. 
 
Ms. Julé: — Mr. Speaker, it is very, very unfortunate that 
emergency shelters for victims of violence are necessary in this 
day and age, but we all know they are. And we know how these 
shelters and the services they provide are often the lifeline that 
is needed to help women remove themselves and their children 
from abusive situations. 
 
The loss of this shelter, Mr. Speaker, to Saskatoon would leave 
a huge void for services of this nature in the city, not only 
because it is the largest shelter, but also because of the quality 
of counselling and service it has provided for countless numbers 
of women and children. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the NDP government commit to doing 
everything possible to help the YWCA shelter remain open and 
continue their work in providing counselling services to women 
and children in need? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Hagel: — Mr. Speaker, simply put, the answer is yes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when I listened to the hon. member’s reference, 
clearly she didn’t listen very carefully to the first answer. I said 
that the officials from the Department of Social Services are 
working together with the YW to ensure a funding framework 
for the future, and I remain optimistic that the federal 
government will provide its funding in order to continue the 
operation of this very good work which we value. 
 
But I also note with interest that the hon. member says . . . 
refers to diverting the issue, and I wonder whether she’s going 
to send a petition to that effect to the House, Mr. Speaker. But I 
would ask her once again, I would ask her once again if she will 
join with her leader who says that his vision about the future of 
Social Services in this province is to take $50 million out of the 
budget of Social Services to reduce the services to those who 
are vulnerable in our society. 
 
Does she stand with her leader? Yes or no, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Funding for Saskatoon Detox Facility 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s very 
interesting to hear the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
the hon. member it seems like every day wishes to ask 
questions in the House. I would suggest if they called an 
election he will have ample opportunity after the election to ask 
questions. 



744 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, the YWCA Crisis Shelter in Saskatoon also 
houses one of the city’s detox centres. If this centre closes, the 
service for people who need help with alcohol and drug abuse 
addictions will also be lost. There is already demand for more 
detox services in the city, not less, and the potential loss of the 
YMCA detox facility would significantly increase the pressure 
on the system. 
 
In fact, both the city of Saskatoon and the federal government 
have said they will commit funding for a short-term detox 
facility and they are looking to the provincial government to 
fund the project as well. 
 
So far the NDP have indicated this is not a priority for them by 
remaining silent on the issue. Mr. Speaker, will the Minister of 
Health explain why the NDP have not supported Saskatoon’s 
request for a short-term detox facility when the federal 
government and the city have come to the table? 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, I know it’s a long ways back 
over there but I think he may have just woken up. Because this 
issue was dealt with a week ago in The StarPhoenix when the 
Saskatoon District Health said we have money allocated from 
the Department of Health to our district and we are going to be 
working closely with the people in the detox centre project to 
provide money that comes from Health. 
 
That’s how we deal with it in Department of Health, is to work 
with the local health districts and make sure that they identify 
the needs that are there, and that’s what we’re doing. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Well thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. 
Speaker, the need for treatment centres to deal with drug and 
alcohol conditions in Saskatchewan is a very, very large issue 
and it’s a great concern that so many young people are ending 
up with drug and alcohol addictions. 
 
In fact the NDP is on record as having shared these concerns. A 
government press release launching Drug Awareness Week in 
November of 2000 quotes the former associate Health minister 
as saying, “Substance abuse isn’t going away.” 

 
Another government news release from November 2001 quotes 
the Health minister as saying, “Substance abuse isn’t going 
away.” Déjà vu. In fact the same press release, Mr. Speaker, 
says that last year about 3,300 people under 20 years of age 
were admitted to in-patient, outpatient, and detoxification 
programs in Saskatchewan. So is the NDP’s concern real or just 
rhetoric? 
 
So, Mr. Speaker, to the minister: how much money is going into 
the program? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Nilson: — Mr. Speaker, as I explained before, and I 
know as explained by the CEO (chief executive officer) of the 
Saskatoon District Health Monday, a week ago, they are 
working with these people and setting it in the priorities for 

Saskatoon District Health as it relates to that specific detox 
centre. 
 
We know that throughout the province there are issues around 
drug and alcohol abuse and that’s why we do have a system 
that’s spread right across the province with addictions 
counsellors and many of the resources that are needed. We’ll 
continue to support those things and we’ll continue to work 
with the people of Saskatchewan who are working in this area 
to make sure that the services are provided. 
 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Legal Services for Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance Corporation 

 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, my question is to the minister 
responsible for the Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. Mr. Speaker, 
Crop Insurance spends hundreds of thousands of dollars each 
year on legal bills. It’s obviously a very lucrative contract to the 
firm that’s going to . . . that receives the contract to do this 
work. 
 
How much does crop insurance . . . How does crop insurance 
decide which law firm to give this work to and is it through an 
open competition or a tendering process, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Crop Insurance has a board, and the Crop 
Insurance board is responsible, Mr. Speaker, to oversee the 
kinds of contracts and projects that in fact . . . that are let by the 
crop insurance agency. 
 
So if the member opposite is interested in knowing how that 
process works, I can provide for him in detail the Crop 
Insurance structure in terms of the way in which information is 
provided. 
 
I say to the member opposite that we have a board, and that’s 
. . . through the board in which those decisions are made, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Wil Olive is one of the directors of Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance. Last year, Mr. Olive’s law firm, Olive Waller 
Zinkhan & Waller, received about $200,000 worth of legal 
work from Saskatchewan Crop Insurance. That represents 
nearly 90 per cent of all the legal work done for Crop Insurance 
that year. 
 
What role did the board of directors play in deciding that Olive 
Waller Zinkhan & Waller should receive all this legal work and 
money from Crop Insurance? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Across the province of Saskatchewan 
today you have a number of people who provide a variety of 
different services, Mr. Speaker, to a variety of different 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 745 

 

corporations and companies. 
 
You have auditors who provide particular services, Mr. 
Speaker, to corporations and companies. You have legal firms 
that provide services. You have accountants who provide 
services to a variety of different agencies and companies across 
the province. And on occasion, you’ll find people who serve on 
the board of directors who are also people who work within 
various different companies. 
 
And so it’s not unusual, Mr. Speaker, to find somebody who’s 
sitting as a lawyer in a particular law firm, and you might . . . or 
an accountant who serves in a particular accounting firm, to 
find them sitting on a particular board or agency within the 
department, or within the government, Mr. Speaker, or on a 
commission. 
 
So this isn’t an unusual practice in this province or for that 
matter anywhere in North America, Mr. Speaker — not an 
unusual practice to see people on those boards or commissions. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, the minister says that this isn’t an 
unusual practice, but it seems somewhat unusual when one firm 
receives 90 per cent of the work and that firm has a member 
sitting on the board of directors, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, will the minister table the document showing that 
there was a fair and open competition to determine who will 
receive Saskatchewan Crop Insurance legal work. Is the 
minister willing to table all disclosure documents that Mr. Olive 
is required to submit under the conflict of interest section of 
The Crown Corporations Act? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is an extremely 
interesting question that the member asks. 
 
And I would say to the member opposite, because he’s . . . 
(inaudible) . . . by making the implication here, Mr. Speaker, is 
what he’s doing. What he’s saying, Mr. Speaker, here, what 
he’s saying here, Mr. Speaker, is that Mr. Wil Olive is in fact 
influencing the work that’s getting done in the law firm of 
which he works in, Mr. Speaker, is exactly what the member’s 
saying here. 
 
And I want the member to take that statement and to go outside 
and tell the public of Saskatchewan that Mr. Wil Olive is in 
fact, as a member of the Crop Insurance board, is influencing 
any kinds of contracts that it gets. And that’s what I’d like the 
member opposite to say, Mr. Speaker. Because that’s exactly 
what the member from . . . what the member is implying, Mr. 
Speaker. That’s what he’s implying. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the only 
person that’s implying that there was something wrong here is 
the minister, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 

Mr. Hart: — Mr. Speaker, all that we’re asking on that side of 
the House is if the minister will table the document so that 
everyone, all citizens of this province, know that there wasn’t 
anything wrong with this tendering process. Will he table those 
documents, Mr. Speaker? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, this is exactly the same 
question that the member stood in his place and asked me doing 
the estimates. And I said to the member opposite then, and I say 
to the member now, Mr. Speaker, that we have somebody today 
who’s serving into . . . in the capacity today, Mr. Speaker, 
somebody who sits on the Crop Insurance board. 
 
And we have a firm today of which the crop insurance agency 
gets legal services from. 
 
And I say to the member opposite, if you have a concern about 
the . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Speak to the . . . 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — . . . should be alleging some wrongdoings 
outside of the legislature, Mr. Speaker. You should get out of 
this room and you should make those implications to the people 
of Saskatchewan, to the media, and to the public. Because, Mr. 
Speaker, this individual and this practice, Mr. Speaker, fits 
within the regulations and the policies of Sask . . . of the crop 
insurance company. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Financial Effect on Agriculture of Government Policies 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, when 
Saskatchewan farm families are being forced to pay thousands 
of dollars more for crop insurance coverage this year, I’m sure 
that you can understand why they want to make sure that every 
dollar is accounted for and being spent wisely by the 
corporation. 
 
Mr. Speaker, last week we read a letter from a Langenburg area 
farmer whose crop insurance and property tax bills are going to 
cost him 22,000 more dollars this year than last year. And the 
minister’s response was to dismiss his concerns as the 
worst-case scenario. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I have an e-mail from Lyle Brons of Lake 
Lenore who takes issue with the minister’s comments. He farms 
1,200 acres and he says he will pay $4,300 more for the same 
crop and hail coverage as last year. Add that to the loss of his 
$1,200 property tax rebate and he will add over $5,500 more. 
And he says his costs will actually be more per acre than the 
farmer from Langenburg. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP has promised in the past to reduce input 
costs for farmers. Why are they now increasing input costs by 
thousands of dollars? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, I have, on a number of 



746 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

occasions, indicated the rationale for why it is that we have in 
fact taken out the spot loss hail. I’ve indicated that on a number 
of occasions. 
 
But I have here, Mr. Speaker, that I want to quote for the 
record, a letter from the Canadian Crop Hail Association here in 
our province, and this is what they say. They say this: 
 

The removal of the Spot Loss Hail subsidy from the 
government Crop Insurance Program puts business 
(business — private sector) on a level playing field . . . 
(which that opposition agrees with, to sell the best product 
at a very competitive price). 

 
And then, Mr. Speaker, they go on to say this, Mr. Speaker. 
Then they go on to say this: 
 

This is also good news (is what Mr. McQueen said, this is 
good news) for farmers . . . 
 
The subsidy of more than $20 million annually to the 
government Spot Loss Hail program in recent years has 
seriously undermined the private Crop Hail Industry . . . (in 
this province, Mr. Speaker). 

 
And so what we’ve done, Mr. Speaker, is we’ve listened to the 
private sector. We’ve listened to the private sector and this is 
what the private sector goes on to say: 

 
It puts scarce government dollars to the best use possible 
. . . 

 
. . . alleviating risk and if no grass . . . and to provide funding 
for the grass and cattle program and yield coverage of this 
program. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we support the . . . 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, the 
producers of this province are also private business owners who 
have been harmed by the new crop insurance program and there 
are more of them than there are private crop insurance 
companies. Where is the consideration for the producers of this 
province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, Lyle Brons says the situation on his 1,200-acre 
farm is no different than that of the farmer in Langenburg and 
that even . . . every farm family in Saskatchewan will face the 
same huge costs to purchase crop insurance. Mr. Brons goes on 
to say, and I quote: 
 

I also would remind you (and this is a quote), Mr. Serby, 
that your government cancelled the GRIP program 10 years 
ago with a promise to replace it. Instead you’ve only 
increased our costs with tax increases and spending 
cutbacks. I urge you, Mr. Serby, to reconsider the decisions 
that you and your government have made. Give us the 
protection from disasters and taxes that we need. 

 
Mr. Speaker, why is the NDP not only ignoring their promise to 
replace the GRIP (gross revenue insurance program) but also 
saddling farm families with thousands of dollars in increased 
crop insurance this year? 

Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Serby: — Mr. Speaker, in this province what we’ve 
done is we’ve travelled across the province along with the Farm 
Support Review Committee, Mr. Speaker. The Farm Support 
Review Committee has travelled the province, Mr. Speaker, and 
talked with farmers and farm organizations and groups about 
what we should be doing in Saskatchewan in terms of the farm 
support, Mr. Speaker. 
 
And you know what? Everybody in this province made a 
submission to the Farm Support Review Committee except the 
Saskatchewan Party, Mr. Speaker. Here we are a document of 
all the people who talk about what we should be doing in 
Saskatchewan and nowhere near, Mr. Speaker, does there 
appear a word from the Saskatchewan Party — not a word. And 
at that time the deputy critic of Agriculture had an opportunity 
to make a submission — not a word, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So what’s happened here, Mr. Speaker, is that the member 
opposite quotes, and I want to say what the member opposite 
quotes when she was asked about what we should be doing to 
help Saskatchewan farmers. And we were all talking about 
getting additional federal help. And this is what the member 
from Watrous said: 

 
(Hartberger suggests, Hartberger suggests there is no) . . . 
Harpauer suggests that there is no more federal dollars 
coming so it’s time to give up on asking the federal 
government for any support, Mr. Speaker. 

 
There’s only one party that’s given up on farmers; there’s only 
one group of people given up on farmers and it’s that party right 
over there, Mr. Speaker, who’ve given up on farmers across 
Canada. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

MINISTERIAL STATEMENTS 
 

Research Agreement signed with Pavement 
Scientific International 

 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
I’m pleased to announce today the Department of Highways 
and Transportation has signed a research agreement with 
Pavement Scientific International of Saskatoon. 
 
This research agreement involves exciting new technology that 
we are very confident will allow us to rebuild more roads for 
less money. It promises to be a cost-effective option to rebuild 
and strengthen Saskatchewan highways. 
 
Even though we are putting record amounts of money into our 
Highways and Transportation budget Saskatchewan still faces 
some challenging issues on our highway system. The 
department is responsible for thousands of kilometres of 
highways and roads across this province that are deteriorating 
under heavy volumes of traffic that they must carry. 
 
And with Saskatchewan being in the unique position of having 
the most kilometres of highway per capita in all of Canada, we 
are critically aware of the challenges we face, especially with 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 747 

 

very minimal federal funds to assist us. 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order, please. Order. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Let me just 
repeat the preceding paragraph. With Saskatchewan being in the 
unique position of having the most kilometres of highway per 
capita in all of Canada, we are critically aware of the challenges 
we face, especially with very minimal federal funds to assist us. 
 
That is why we are excited about this research partnership we 
have developed with Pavement Scientific International. This 
research shows much promise in helping to . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Order. Order, please. Order. 
Order, please. 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. We are very 
excited because this research shows much promise in helping to 
strengthen our rural roads using a blend of materials called 
TerraCem. 
 
In 1998, the department began phasing in the use of TerraCem 
on several highway improvement projects. The department has 
completed 17 different test projects across the province in the 
northern, central, and southern regions. In total we now have 
approximately 100 kilometres of highway completed over the 
past four years using this technology. 
 
After each section is completed, the department and PSI 
monitor the sections and evaluate their performance over a 
number of years. The results are very, very encouraging. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Hon. Mr. Wartman: — Mr. Speaker, I am encouraged that a 
state of the art technology is being developed here in this 
province. And I am pleased to inform you and the members of 
this House today of this new 5-year, 350-kilometre road 
research and strengthening agreement that will take the 
department in a new direction for rebuilding our TMS (thin 
membrane surface) roads. 
 
Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Huyghebaert: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, 
it’s nice to see some initiative from the Department of 
Highways and some new technology that is being introduced 
today, and I certainly applaud the idea of new technology. 
 
It’s very interesting, just recently I spoke about a new rubber 
asphalt technology and it kind of fell by deaf ears. We have a 
rubber plant in this province, as you’re probably aware of, and 
they have been doing a lot of research with another company in 
the United States and yet the Department of Highways here 
have seen fit not even to conduct a test section of highway with 
the rubber asphalt people. 
 
Now we’re entering into an agreement with Pavement Scientific 
International. And I don’t know enough about that organization 
yet, but it’s obvious to me again it’s the NDP methodology of 
picking winners and losers. 
 

Mr. Speaker, if this is an extremely cost-effective option to 
strengthen and rebuild highways, I would applaud that because 
we know under the last 10 years of the NDP government 
they’ve abandoned highways, they’ve abandoned roads in rural 
Saskatchewan. We’ve been living on extremely treacherous 
roads for the last number of years as witnessed two years ago 
by the town and community of Val Marie and Climax — they 
had to repair their own road. This would be an ideal section of 
road for a test section, at least fill in the potholes. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I find it always amazing when I listen to the 
government and here we have it again, quote: 

 
We are putting record amounts of money into our 
highways. 

 
And I’d like to emphasize this: 
 

We’re putting record amounts of money into our highways. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, from the Minister of Finance’s own budget, 
it’s $11 million less than last year and yet this year is a record. 
It just goes to show how their accounting practices really work 
on that side of the House. 
 
Another little item, Mr. Speaker, is the NDP have a propensity 
again of comparing things to per capita. We have the most 
kilometres of highway per capita. Well if we grew this province 
by 100,000 people would we have the most kilometres of 
highway per capita? We have continual out-migration and yet 
we still wish to use this on a per capita basis. 
 
(14:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, I applaud the fact if this . . . if this scientific 
international partnership, if it chose an awful lot of province, 
it’ll strengthen the roads in rural Saskatchewan. I am . . . I am 
just hoping that the savings that this is touted to be used as will 
bring a bunch of the highways in rural Saskatchewan up to a 
standard for heavy haul, up to a national standard and also to a 
standard that people can drive on them without fear of popping 
over a ridge and hitting a pothole or hitting a culvert that’s been 
washed out or something. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I do applaud . . . I do applaud any scientific 
research into the Highway department. We have had some as I 
. . . as I mention with the asphalt rubber. There’s been 30 years 
of experience with the asphalt rubber and yet we have elected 
not to even continue with a test program using the asphalt. So, 
Mr. Speaker, I applaud the government to go into contract 
negotiations with a company if it’s going to improve our 
highways in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

INTRODUCTION OF BILLS 
 

Bill No. 27 – The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 
Amendment Act, 2002/Loi de 2002 modifiant la Loi de 1997 

sur l’exécution des ordonnances alimentaires 
 
Hon. Mr. Axworthy: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I move that 
Bill No. 27, The Enforcement of Maintenance Orders 



748 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

Amendment Act, 2002 be now introduced and read the first 
time. 
 
Motion agreed to, the Bill read a first time and ordered to be 
read a second time at the next sitting. 
 

ORDERS OF THE DAY 
 

WRITTEN QUESTIONS 
 
Mr. Yates: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m extremely pleased 
today to stand on behalf of the government and table a response 
to written question 102 and a little surprised there’s only one 
today, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Speaker: — Question 102 has been responded to. 
 

SEVENTY-FIVE MINUTE DEBATE 
 

Financial Support for Agriculture 
 

Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, there 
can be no question that agriculture is extremely important to our 
province . . . to the province of Saskatchewan. And there could 
be no question that the producers in our province are facing 
particularly difficult challenges the last few years in our 
province. 
 
They have had to face a continuing decrease in commodity 
prices, an increase in their input costs, the absence of any type 
of safety net program in this province which has been sort of 
the luxury of many of their provincial counterparts, 
abandonment from the federal government for anything of any 
meaningful purpose, and the worst drought in the history of the 
province. 
 
And now, on top of all this, the producers of this province have 
to face the gutting of their crop insurance program by their own 
NDP government. This program has been available to them, 
Mr. Speaker, for a number of years. I actually myself can’t 
remember not having crop insurance available. It’s a program 
that basically has been their last remaining safety net, other than 
NISA (Net Income Stabilization Account), and the NDP 
government has blamed the producers of the province for most, 
if not all, of the difficulties of the province. 
 
They cite the drought and the downturn in agriculture as the 
major reason of why there are 11,300 fewer people working in 
the year 2001. They blame the producers of the province for the 
increased out-migration in our province. And during the third 
quarter budget, the Minister of Finance cited the downturn in 
agriculture as a reason for the $478 million deficit, and he 
warned the people of Saskatchewan that the budgetary problem 
will be bigger in 2002-2003 when the real impact of the 2001 
drought shows up by less income tax collected. 
 
So they have defined a definite problem and they’ve said that 
that problem is within the agriculture sector of our province. So 
how did they address that problem, Mr. Speaker? How did they 
. . . What did they do to attempt to reverse the negative trends 
that we’re seeing in the statistics on our province? And how did 
they help the farm families within our province, Mr. Speaker? 
 

Well they decided to increase the premiums of crop insurance 
while reducing the coverage. So that was very, very helpful. 
The Minister of Agriculture has told the producers of this 
province a number of times, in a number of forums, that his 
government is going to enhance the crop insurance. As recently 
as February 25, the Minister of Agriculture told the House of 
Commons Standing Committee on Agriculture that an enhanced 
crop insurance program is also on his list of improvements. And 
he also said, and I will quote . . . I’m quoting from the Review 
dated February 25. I quote: 
 

If we get into a drought situation this spring, crop insurance 
would mitigate some of the problems that in the past we’ve 
had to go to correct with emergency aid money. 

 
Well I think the producers of this province, Mr. Speaker, were 
more than mildly surprised when they opened their crop 
insurance application forms to see how it was enhanced. 
 
And I think it was best described by a farm reporter that many 
of us are familiar with, and that is Kevin Hursh, and he wrote in 
the Humboldt Journal on March 21: 
 

The provincial government made some interesting choices 
in the Crop Insurance Program which has finally been 
announced in 2002. 
 
For grain producers, the biggest change is that spot loss hail 
coverage has been dropped. This has been a popular option 
for many years. In fact, since hail coverage through Crop 
Insurance was cheaper than buying private hail insurance, 
this option helped retain farmers in the program. 
 
In previous years, spot loss hail coverage was available 
when buying 50, 60 or 70 per cent of yield coverage. It 
wasn’t available if you bought 80 per cent coverage. 
 
Ideally, that program should have been enhanced so that 
spot loss hail was . . . available at 80 per cent. Instead, spot 
loss hail coverage has been cut altogether. 
 
While the change is a step backwards for farmers, the move 
has a certain logic for a government looking for somewhere 
to save money on the program . . . 

 
And it’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, the members on the opposite 
side, on the NDP side are getting rather excited. They’re saying 
it’s just simply not so. And I’m sure Kevin Hursh will be more 
than interested to know that they don’t believe anything that he 
writes. 
 
Not surprising the Minister of Agriculture has given a reason to 
the . . . to ourselves and to the producers of this province, he’s 
given them a reason why the premiums have risen anywhere 
from 30 to 300 per cent and the spot loss hail coverage has been 
dropped completely. 
 
And the reason that he’s giving the producers of this province 
isn’t entirely surprising, Mr. Speaker, because the reason is one 
we’ve heard before. It’s simple, it’s the federal government’s 
fault . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . It’s always the federal 
government’s fault. So on March 2, Murray Mandryk wrote: 
 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 749 

 

Serby (was) . . . deputy premier, (sorry, this is a quote, Mr. 
Speaker.) Serby (was) . . . deputy premier for an NDP 
government that campaigned in 1999 on a promise to: 
“Continue fighting until Ottawa gets the message” about 
Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Right now, Saskatchewan farmers would be happy to see 
that the provincial government (got) . . . the message. 
 
The current crop insurance dilemma demonstrates a 
worrisome disconnection . . . 
 
(The coalition) . . . government . . . is either oblivious to the 
. . . root cause(s) of (Saskatchewan’s) . . . economic 
problems like agriculture or is simply so overwhelmed by 
(their severity) . . . that it . . . can’t come up with a single 
creative idea . . . to . . . address (them effectively.) . . . 

 
Given the NDP’s penchant to blame agriculture . . . (for) 
most problems, one . . . (would) assume it’s the latter. 
 
But . . . (to hear) a Department of Agriculture official 
suggest that crop insurance is just one of many government 
priorities . . . is . . . a little frightening. 
 
Maintaining a properly managed and funded crop insurance 
program in these economic and weather conditions isn’t 
just another (round or) one of the government’s many 
priorities. 

 
This is Saskatchewan. Agriculture accounts for 11 per cent 
of the jobs and nine per cent of the GDP. There is drought 
out there. 
 
Frankly, using . . . lack-of-money (as an) excuse isn’t just 
tiresome — it’s unacceptable. 
 
A reader (maybe) . . . made an interesting observation the 
other day that bears repeating: How . . . (can a province 
have a) rainy day fund (but no fund) . . . no (funding) to 
fight drought? 

 
Mr. Speaker, my colleagues and I have had the opportunity to 
question the Minister of Agriculture on . . . last Friday in the 
Committee of Finance in the estimates. And we asked him to 
explain to us the reason why he and his NDP government found 
the need to drop the spot loss hail insurance and to increase the 
premiums for the remaining coverage for anywhere between 30 
to 300 per cent. And quite frankly, I found his answers weak, to 
say the least, and his numbers simply do not wash. 
 
The minister told us, and he told the producers of this province, 
that the federal government did not ante up their share of the 
funding. Now we could debate that and, you know, discuss 
what Mr. Vanclief in Ottawa has told us — which basically he 
said, it’s a loan; the minister owed him the money. 
 
But let’s just take the minister, what he’s saying, at face value. 
Let’s just take it at face value and let’s do the math on all this. 
Last year the federal government transferred $195 million to the 
province to cover — and this is according to the Minister of 
Agriculture — cash advance crop insurance and NISA. Last 
year the provincial government put $130 million into those 

same programs and the producers put in their applicable 
premiums which, for the spot loss hail insurance coverage 
alone, was $23 million, Mr. Speaker. 
 
This year . . . now the minister is saying, no, it was only 17. 
Well when we asked a written question, the answer to the 
written question that we received was the producers put $23 
million towards spot loss crop insurance. This year the federal 
government is putting . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . Well I 
don’t know. The federal government, according to the minister, 
is putting in $195 million — the same as last year. 
 
The provincial government is putting in $130 million plus $14 
million which comes to an increase of up to $144 million. The 
producers will not be putting any money in for the spot loss 
hail, simply because it’s not available to them, not because 
they’re not willing to pay a premium. 
 
But they will be putting in 30 to 300 per cent more for their 
all-risk premiums. So it doesn’t matter how often I add this up, 
there’s more funding in crop insurance than last year, and yet 
the producers have had the spot loss hail ripped away from 
them. 
 
Now, the Minister of Agriculture has said that the coverage has 
been increased. But again, if you do the math, I mean 50 per 
cent coverage is still 50 per cent coverage, 70 per cent coverage 
is still 70 per cent coverage. So I don’t see how he can, you 
know, make it fly that the coverage has increased. 
 
And he’s also said that the commodity prices that they’re 
insuring has increased. And that is true. That is true. They have 
assigned higher prices to the commodities, but it poses another 
question, Mr. Speaker. Why did the premiums increase by 30 to 
300 per cent when the commodity prices only increased by 7 to 
the absolute maximum of 19 per cent. The math doesn’t add up 
again. 
 
And the minister has told us in the House that if the federal 
government would just listen. If they would just listen, and if 
they would allow the province to take the bonus portion of the 
interest in NISA and apply it to crop insurance then — and I’m 
quoting from Hansard is what he said: 
 

. . . had we been able to get a bit more, the answer might be 
that we’d (be) . . . able to offer a similar product (as last 
year). 

 
Now the provincial contribution to the bonus portion of the 
interest on NISA is $9 million, according to the minister. And 
the federal contribution is the same, which makes for a total of 
$18 million. So we only need $18 million more to retain the 
crop loss hail coverage. 
 
This year the federal government, in the words of the minister, 
contributed the same amount as last year for the cash advance, 
crop insurance, and NISA which is $195 million. 
 
The provincial government put in an additional $14 million 
which means there’s a shortfall of $4 million. 
 
I would bet that the producers of this province would be willing 
to pay $4 million more in premiums. And if they did, it would 



750 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

still mean that the premiums they pay would be less than what’s 
being required for them to pay this year. And they could retain 
spot loss hail coverage. 
 
I’m going to end what I have to say today, Mr. Speaker, with a 
press release from the Manitoba government dated January 17, 
2002. And I found it rather interesting, because my 
understanding — and I could be corrected by the Minister of 
Agriculture, and I’m sure he will be more than willing to 
correct me if I’m wrong — but I’ve been led to understand that 
Manitoba also got an additional $20 million from the federal 
government to help them pay for their programs last year. So 
they also have this debt load of $20 million and the federal 
government is treating them in the same manner that it’s 
treating the Saskatchewan government. 
 
(14:45) 
 
And yet the press release from Manitoba is saying: 
 

Higher coverage levels at no extra cost to producers, a pilot 
program for pasture insurance and an increase to the 
number of insurable crops are among the highlights 
included in the 2002 Manitoba Crop Insurance Corporation 
(MCIC) program. 

 
The reduction in premium rates over the last two years in 
combination with higher grain . . . (values), which are 
forecast to increase by 10 per cent, are encouraging 
developments for producers. 

 
It appears like the Manitoba government has been able to 
manage the difficulties with the $20 million from the federal 
government they’re supposed to repay. The Saskatchewan 
government maybe needs to know how to manage that as well. 
 
So with that I would like to move the motion, seconded by the 
member from Saltcoats: 
 

That this Assembly urges the provincial government to 
reverse its decision to pay off its own debt to the federal 
government at the cost of farmers through significantly 
higher crop insurance premiums and cancellation of the 
spot loss hail coverage. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I’m glad to have 
the opportunity to second the motion for the member from 
Watrous speaking to the fact that the provincial government has 
been once again downloading on every farmer in Saskatchewan. 
 
The other day, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we talked about a farmer in 
my area — Arden Roulston. And I’d like to read it into the 
record the letter that Arden sent me because we only stated 
some of the facts in that letter, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So I’m quoting now — and he’s talking about Saskatchewan 
Crop Insurance and property tax rebate — Arden says and I 
quote: 
 

I am writing to express my concern regarding the recent 
changes made to the Saskatchewan crop insurance program 
and the elimination of the property tax rebate. My father 
and I farm approximately 5,400 acres, which provides 
incomes for two families. 

 
That’s contrary to what the minister had said, that this is an 
exceptionally large farmer. Really, in today’s reality, a 2,500 
acre farmer is becoming more the norm than the exception. 
 
Arden goes on to say: 
 

When comparing crop insurance rates from 2001 crop year, 
coverage is up 11 per cent. However, the premiums due 
have risen 35 per cent, even though our experience discount 
increased an additional 6 per cent. As well, the program no 
longer includes the high price option which allowed better 
coverage if grain prices were increased. The spot loss hail 
coverage has also been deleted, which will force us to buy 
solely from a private insurer, resulting in a 77 per cent 
increase. 

 
77 per cent increase, Mr. Speaker. Not 7, as the Minister of 
Agriculture has stated before. 77 per cent increase. 
 
At a time when there’s not a farmer, Mr. Deputy Speaker, in 
this province that could stand any more expenditures and any 
more costs for their farming operation, what do we see but this 
NDP government, who’s got so used to downloading on the 
farming sector in this province without even batting an eye, 
they do it again when they can’t balance their books. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, he goes on to say: 
 

As a result, the insurance changes alone will cost an 
additional $17,710. The elimination of the property tax 
rebate will cost approximately $4,150. 

 
And then he goes on to say, Mr. Speaker: 
 

The combined costs of these two program changes will 
result in a total increase of $21,860. This is simply not 
acceptable. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, the Agriculture minister can chirp across, 
but I would like that minister to go out and talk to that farmer 
and explain to him where he finds that $21,000 that he paid for 
. . . more than he paid in last year’s crop insurance, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

We are also concerned that the federal NISA program may 
be terminated. 

 
And maybe the minister could respond to that later on. Maybe 
he knows something that we don’t, Mr. Deputy Speaker. It 
wouldn’t surprise me if they pulled their money out of that also. 
 

We encourage you to lobby the provincial and federal 
governments to keep the NISA program. It is our opinion 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 751 

 

that this is an efficient program that works with a minimal 
cost of administration and that benefits all farmers as 
compared to some of the other recent farm programs. 

 
He goes on to say: 
 

As you are aware, the farm economy is in a precarious 
position, with very few young people starting to farming. 

 
And the Agriculture minister should know this. He says there 
are very few young people starting to farm. And with program 
cuts like he’s done to agriculture, there’s going to be even less 
young farmers starting in. 
 
He goes on to say: 
 

Other countries will continue to subsidize their farm 
economy. Unless our governments develop beneficial 
agriculture policies to compete with other countries, this 
industry will not survive. 

 
And many farmers across the province, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
are saying the exact same thing. Unless this government and the 
federal government gets in place a long-term safety net program 
— which, by the way, they promised after they cancelled GRIP 
10 years ago and never followed through with that promise — 
he says farmers will not survive in Saskatchewan. 
 

Farmers cannot afford any further program reductions, they 
need programs to be enhanced. (Arden Roulston, 
Langenburg, Saskatchewan). 

 
The Agriculture minister, Mr. Deputy Speaker, should take a 
drive out there this weekend and explain to Arden and his dad 
— and for that matter, if he’s out there and would spend more 
than eight minutes like they did when they got off the bus in 
rural Saskatchewan — take a half an hour, explain to the 
Langenburg area farmers how are they supposed to survive with 
this government in power, cutting, and depleting all the 
agriculture policy plans that we have in this province like crop 
insurance and sending money time over and time again back to 
Mr. Vanclief, while at the same time blaming Mr. Vanclief for 
all their woes in Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the member for Watrous in question period today 
talked about another farmer. And I think the Agriculture 
minister was trying to let the impression be out there with the 
media and the public that this is an isolated case, this is a large 
farmer. 
 
Well hello, Mr. Agriculture minister, we have a 1,200-acre 
farmer. Now this might just be an average farmer in the 
minister’s mind, but this member goes on to say that his crop 
insurance expenses are going to be up with the education tax 
rebate cut $5,500. Well that hurts this 1,200-acre farmer every 
bit as much as it does my farmer from Langenburg, even though 
he’s on a bigger scale, because this guy has less acres to pay the 
increased cost for crop insurance. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Bjornerud: — Mr. Speaker, this budget that this 
government brought in, once again, it resembles the ones they 

brought in in the early 90s when they dropped the GRIP 
program. And at that time — this minister can argue if he 
wants, but they did — they sent over $250 million back to the 
federal government; that same federal government that they use 
every day in this House as an excuse for all the problems that 
farmers in Saskatchewan have. 
 
Well yes, the farmers in Saskatchewan have a problem, because 
instead of matching those dollars that come to our farmers, they 
send it back to the same people that they’re blaming for our 
problems. 
 
Mr. Speaker, they also . . . Mr. Deputy Speaker, they also at the 
same time, come out two years ago with $25 million a year in 
education refunds to the farmers on their property tax. What do 
they do this year when it gets a little tougher, and they’ve 
already had one deficit budget, and heading into the second 
one? 
 
Well, number one, they download on the seniors of 
Saskatchewan by jacking the long-term care rates from 1,500 to 
3,800 and then they go to their favourite, favourite spot to dump 
on — the farmers of Saskatchewan. 
 
They cut the Agriculture budget, Mr. Deputy Speaker. From 
what they estimated in Agriculture to spend last year, to what 
they estimate this year, they’ve cut it $108 million — $108 
million, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, the Agriculture budget for this province is 
somewhere under $300 million. In 1990, when this government 
came to power, do you know what was spent on agriculture in 
the province of Saskatchewan by those bad Tories, and that bad 
Grant Devine — $1 billion-plus on agriculture for the farmers 
of Saskatchewan. 
 
So this government doesn’t need to point the finger at any 
previous governments when it comes to standing behind 
agriculture. They should instead take a look at what’s been done 
in the past by governments and premiers and Agriculture 
ministers that have stood behind our farmers and helped them 
through bad times, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
This year, Mr. Deputy Speaker, it’s not 250 million but it’s 
actually probably going to hurt as much considering the 
situation the farmers are in. 
 
This time last year the federal government sent Saskatchewan 
$17.4 million to be put into spot loss hail, the provincial 
government put in 17.4 million, and guess what? We cut spot 
loss hail. 
 
And the minister said, when I made the suggestion that he was 
sending it back to Ottawa, he said, oh, no, trust me. We invested 
it in our farmers. 
 
Well they haven’t seen anything yet, and I doubt, under that 
minister and that government, they’ll ever see a nickel of that 
money. If you have the nerve to download on the seniors of 
Saskatchewan, you’re not above hiding $34 million from the 
farmers in the province of Saskatchewan. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, it goes on, and on, and on. The minister 



752 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

talked the other day about how the changes to municipal hail 
insurance will better the farmers going from $100 coverage an 
acre to where they’ve upped it to 125, and he insinuated that 
that would make it cheaper. 
 
Well, I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I farmed for a number of 
years, and I don’t know how he can figure that made it cheaper. 
It’s a convenience — I think farmers will applaud it — but it 
certainly will not make it $1 cheaper for farmers of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Then to explain his position, he goes on to let the cat out of the 
bag and tell farmers they’ve been paying a 3 per cent premium 
tax on hail insurance. Well once again, hello, Mr. Agriculture 
Minister. Now farmers are very upset that this government is 
also taxing premiums on hail insurance. If that minister and that 
government wanted to help farmers, Mr. Deputy Speaker, they 
could drop that tax and really help farmers in Saskatchewan. 
 
Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — It’s a pleasure for me, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to 
enter into this debate on a very, on a very worthwhile topic. I 
think we all, Mr. Speaker . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. Would all hon. 
members please come to order. I’m having difficulty hearing 
the member from Regina Northeast. 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a very 
worthwhile topic to be discussing here in private members’ day, 
Mr. Speaker, as we all know that agriculture is a very important 
part of our Canadian economy and agriculture is also a very 
important part of our Saskatchewan economy. 
 
And I believe, Mr. Speaker, even the members opposite would 
agree with me when I say the Saskatchewan agricultural sector 
is world class. And Saskatchewan farmers can compete with 
anybody anywhere in the world if it’s given . . . if they’re given 
a level playing field. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, if we look back at the history of the 
development of agriculture in Saskatchewan here, we notice it 
has evolved over time. And I’m sure each and every one of us, 
whether we were born on the farm or born in town, had 
relatives on the farm; if we were born in town, we’ve probably, 
many of us, spent our summer months visiting our grandfathers 
or our uncles on the farm. And we spent some time on that 
farm. 
 
And we realize back in those days when many of us were 
youngsters, that the farm primarily consisted of a mixed farm 
operation — there was grain being produced; there was 
livestock on the farm; it was chickens — it was a mixed 
operation. And for the most part, farmers sort of used that 
mixed operation to self-insure themselves. Because if there was 
a crop disaster, the livestock end would pull them through, and 
it was a sort of a balancing act. 
 
But there was . . . there are in farming, there are conditions 
beyond the farmer’s control, of course that . . . primarily that of 

weather conditions, of moisture, whether the rains come at the 
right time, and so on and so forth. 
 
But as agriculture evolved somewhere around the early ’60s, 
and I think it was about 1961, to recognize there was a need to 
introduce a program, an insurance program — it was later 
called Saskatchewan Crop Insurance — but that program was 
designed to take the humps and the valleys out of, out of 
situations that were beyond farmers’ control — primarily the 
weather. And it would take out the humps of a disaster of a 
drought or a disaster in the fall, a wet fall, that downgraded the 
grain and in many cases it wasn’t harvested. I can remember 
one or two years when . . . in this province where much of the 
grain that was produced in this province sat out all winter. And 
that was . . . dramatic impacts upon farmers. 
 
(15:00) 
 
And as agriculture evolved it moved away from simply being a 
way of life into a major, major business as we’re experiencing 
today. And our farmers certainly recognized a need to have 
some type of an insurance that would take the humps and the 
valleys out of their farm income that would give them that 
protection. 
 
Now, Mr. Speaker, nobody, nobody in the agriculture field or 
anywhere else believes that crop insurance is a 
revenue-generating program. What it is, is exactly what it is. 
It’s insurance. It insures the farmers for the bare costs of 
investment. In a lot of cases, Mr. Speaker, the cost of farm input 
has — it’s dramatically increased over the last number of years 
— has brought it to a level where farmers realize that crop 
insurance is a must. It is a safety net that cushions them in the 
event of that disaster. 
 
But as cropping and as farming and agriculture in Saskatchewan 
evolved into many different facets, so has crop insurance. Crop 
insurance started out I think in the early ‘60s basically insuring 
two crops. I think it was basically wheat and barley. Then it 
expanded to oats and oil seeds and then expanded beyond that 
to where today crop insurance is a multi-facet program that 
covers not only the oil and the cereal grain sector but also 
covers livestock and forage production. 
 
And we see that as a need, as a result of the diversification of 
agriculture. And that diversification of course is led by our 
farmers in a very positive way. But in order to do these things, 
in order to develop programs that will meet the changing needs 
and the changing challenges in agriculture, crop insurance 
evolves that way. And they have programs that take into 
account new crops that do not have a history of production in 
this province. They have a program that will cause that level of 
protection to be there. 
 
They’re also working on expanding crop insurance into forage 
production, and not only for the hay production, but also for the 
pasture production. In order to do this, you just don’t go out and 
do it. You have to run test projects. And that’s exactly what’s 
going on. And they’re proven to be very, very acceptable to 
farmers. 
 
The interesting thing, Mr. Speaker, as crop insurance has 
evolved, so has the financing of it by all three participants — 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 753 

 

the federal government, the provincial government, and of 
course the producer. And at one time the federal government 
shared the costs of crop insurance on a percentage basis. That 
means if there was an increase in coverage because of an 
increase in sign-ups or an increase in the value of the 
commodity being insured, the federal government would pick 
up the same percentage. 
 
But in the 1980s — I believe it was in the 1980s, Mr. Speaker 
— the government of the day, the forerunner of the members 
opposite, decided to move away from that and to move to more 
of a fixed program where the province would be responsible for 
40 per cent of funding of agriculture programs and the federal 
government would be responsible for 60 per cent. 
 
That has now evolved into a fixed federal participation. And by 
fixed I mean, Mr. Speaker, it’s fixed at a dollar value. So as 
commodity prices increase and the value of the insured crop 
increases, the federal government’s participation does not 
increase. As participation in the programs increase, and 
therefore costs of delivering that program increase, the federal 
government’s portion of the cost of that program does not 
increase. 
 
So as a result of that, Mr. Speaker, Saskatchewan government is 
faced with an issue of: do you reduce the coverage which is 
already only at a bare minimum or do you step up to the plate 
and support Saskatchewan agriculture and Saskatchewan 
farms? Well, Mr. Speaker, I’m very proud to say our 
government stepped up to the plate and did the right thing by 
supporting Saskatchewan farmers. 
 
It’s interesting, Mr. Speaker, that the members opposite will 
suggest far and wide that they have a plan. They have even 
suggested that they have a plan for Saskatchewan agriculture. 
 
Well even the . . . interesting part, Mr. Speaker, is that not too 
long ago the former critic for the opposition, Mr. Billy Boyd, 
critic of Agriculture, suggested . . . back in about January 
someplace he made an announcement that he would soon be 
laying out the Sask Party’s plan for agriculture. And then in 
their busted tour of Saskatchewan, he announced then that he 
was still working on the plan. Well Mr. Boyd isn’t here 
anymore and quite frankly, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we don’t see 
any signs of their plan either. 
 
I’m afraid, Mr. Speaker, they might have a plan. They know 
how devastating that plan would be to Saskatchewan, to 
Saskatchewan agriculture, and they full well know that if they 
made their plan available to the public that their support level 
that they’re seeing wane in rural Saskatchewan would slide 
even further. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, I want to just wind up here by saying that I’m 
very proud of our government. Our government’s stepping to 
the plate and putting an extra $14 million into crop insurance — 
$14 million to ensure that we have an adequate, proper program 
to ensure the long-term agriculture as a thriving industry in this 
province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I want to move an amendment to the motion and it 
will read as follows. I move: 
 

That the words after “Assembly” be deleted and replaced 
with the following: 
 
support the provincial government’s efforts of protecting 
Saskatchewan farmers and farm families by increasing 
provincial funding to the crop insurance program despite 
the federal government’s decision to cut back their cost 
share. 

 
Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I very 
much appreciate the opportunity to join in this debate regarding 
crop insurance. As someone who’s very interested in the future 
of agriculture in our province, I think this debate is very critical. 
 
Unfortunately I will not be able to support the motion by the 
member from Watrous as it stands today, but I will be 
seconding the motion by my colleague here from Regina 
Northeast. 
 
Now I believe the crop insurance program it’s . . . as it’s 
announced in the . . . by the government is solid in its goal of 
supporting farmers, particularly in this tough time as all of us in 
Saskatchewan face difficult choices. But we need to stay the 
road to stability. 
 
And this debate is an important debate for Saskatchewan 
farmers. The crop insurance program is an extremely important 
program for our producers. Each spring Saskatchewan 
producers invest in excess of $3 billion in inputs as they seed 
over 35 million acres of dryland crop. In many cases producers 
are investing their life savings or borrowing against their future 
earnings to put that crop in the ground. 
 
Despite advances in technology and best management practices, 
every producer knows that this investment is still very much in 
the hands of mother nature. And that is why it’s essential that 
producers have access to an effective crop insurance program to 
ensure that producers are able to protect their investment. 
 
When Saskatchewan started to design this year’s crop insurance 
program, we were faced with a number of challenges and 
factors to consider. Crop insurance coverage levels were 
increasing as a result of an increase in crop insurance prices and 
an overall increase in average yields in this province. This 
resulted in increased premiums for all parties. 
 
Producers were asking for improved coverage options, 
particularly for grazing lands which province-wide coverage 
was not available in 2001. The 2001 crop insurance program 
had cost about $13 million more than projected as a result of 
increased participation and producers making better use of the 
program. 
 
As well, the federal government refused to put additional 
funding into the crop insurance program despite higher program 
costs. The federal government refused to make changes to other 
safety net programs to help free up additional funding for the 
crop insurance program. 
 



754 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

Mr. Deputy Speaker, I want to discuss these challenges in a 
little more detail so that the members of the legislature have 
even a greater understanding of the framework within the 
decisions to be made. 
 
First, the crop insurance prices in 2002 are an average 13 per 
cent higher than in 2001. As well, coverage levels are a result of 
good production experience up from the 2000 production year. 
This has resulted in an average yield increase of about 2 per 
cent across the province, while higher prices and higher 
coverage levels are obviously good news for farmers as they 
reflect stronger . . . (inaudible) . . . prices and improved 
production capability at the farm level. 
 
The higher overall coverage levels also mean increased 
insurance premiums costs for all parties. This crop insurance is 
like any other insurance product though, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
When you purchase insurance, you expect to pay higher 
premiums for higher dollar coverage. 
 
As a result of higher prices and coverage levels, in the absence 
of no changes to the program, all parties would have seen their 
premium costs increase about 15 per cent. 
 
The second factor facing the province is that producers were 
looking for improved coverage levels. In 2001 the province 
offered a rainfall pilot program for forage acres in two regions 
of the province. Livestock producers found this program very 
much to their liking and they asked for a rainfall option for 
grazing lands to be made available for a province-wide basis. 
 
This is an important enhancement for good crop insurance as 
the crop insurance program has always had difficulty providing 
an adequate and an administratively cost-effective option for 
livestock producers who wanted to purchase insurance on their 
grazing lands. 
 
And yes, there are a few wrinkles in this program, but producers 
are responding very favourably to this option. 
 
In 2002 the program will cover about three and a quarter 
million acres of grazing land in Saskatchewan. And we need to 
remember, Mr. Deputy Speaker, that this coverage was not 
previously available for most producers and extremely 
important for expanding cattle sector, particularly given the 
current dry conditions being experienced. 
 
In addition, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we thought it would be 
important to test the pilot rainfall program based on the same 
principles as the forage program. 
 
By testing this program on a small scale in 2002, as a 
supplemental program to the all-peril program, crop insurance 
can determine producers’ response to the product and assess 
where there would be useful addition to the program on a 
province-wide basis for future years. 
 
Now the third important point to recognize in settling this 
framework within this year’s crop insurance decisions, were 
made the fact that the 2001 crop insurance program was 
actually more than originally budgeted. These over-the-budget 
costs were a result of increased producer participation in the 
program, and producers purchasing higher coverage levels than 

previous years. 
 
These higher costs mean that the premiums for each of the 
province and the federal government were $13 million more 
than projected in 2001. 
 
In the case of the province we covered the over-budget 
expenses in the 2001-2002 fiscal year. However, in the case of 
the federal government, they paid their share of premiums all 
right, but they clawed back the over expenditure out of the 
2002-2003 federal safety net allocation for Saskatchewan. So 
not only do you have an increase in expected 2002 crop 
insurance costs, but you also have less federal dollars available 
for the 2002 program. 
 
And this shows, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the perverse effects of the 
federal safety net allocation where federal risk management 
funding is fixed at $95 million annually, regardless of what the 
producers’ needs are or what the program actually cost. 
 
The province asked for the federal government, on numerous 
occasions over the winter months, to make more federal money 
available for programs for Saskatchewan farmers. Did the 
federal government recognize the needs of the industry? No. 
They refused to find more money. The federal government said 
it would only make available $80 million of federal funding for 
the program in 2002. 
 
The province asked the federal government to adjust other 
programs to free up more federal money for the crop insurance 
program. Saskatchewan, along with most other provinces, 
requested that the 3 per cent interest bonus in the NISA 
program be eliminated so that money could be redirected to 
other programming. 
 
In Saskatchewan that would have meant an additional $9.5 
million of federal funding, and 9.5 million of provincial funding 
that would have been available for the crop insurance program. 
That extra $19 million of government funding, that could have 
been used to further enhance the crop insurance program, or to 
reduce producers’ share of the premiums cost in 2002. 
 
And did the federal government recognize the needs of the 
industry. No, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the federal government 
refused to make any changes to the NISA program to free up 
this extra additional funding. Again the federal government said 
that there would be no more than $80 million of federal funding 
available for the 2002 federal crop insurance program. 
 
(15:15) 
 
Well in light of these factors, the province had to make some 
very difficult decisions in designing the 2002 crop insurance 
program, but we made them in a strategic way to ensure that the 
2002 program will continue to be an effective program for 
Saskatchewan producers. 
 
Now, Mr. Deputy Speaker, clearly as producers examine the 
facts around the 2002 crop insurance program, they see that the 
program has increased its funding commitment to the program 
by $14 million and the province has maintained its share of the 
all-peril crop insurance premiums at the previous level. The 
province has made the program more effective for livestock 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 755 

 

producers through the addition of the forage rainfall program on 
a province-wide basis and by adding crop rainfall pilot 
program. 
 
Producers also see that the federal government has not been 
doing all that it should be in terms of providing an effective 
programming for the agriculture sector in this province. The 
federal government has reduced the funds available for the crop 
insurance in 2002 and they’ve reduced their overall cost for 
sharing on this program. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, I think the program is an excellent 
program and I call on the members opposite to come on board 
and see their plan for a better crop insurance program. I think 
this is fine, so I’ll be seconding the motion to amend the 
original. Thank you. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. It’s certainly a pleasure 
to enter into this debate, a debate dealing with this 
government’s crop insurance program and the way they’ve 
reduced coverage, increased costs, and gutted the spot loss hail 
option. 
 
I find it somewhat ironic, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to have that side 
of the House move an amendment to our motion saying that 
their government is increasing their support to crop insurance 
while the federal government has reduced theirs. It seems that 
we’re getting mixed messages from this minister and this 
government. 
 
When you initially . . . When the Minister of Agriculture 
initially announced the crop insurance program for 2002, he 
was somewhat . . . was apologetic to the farmers of this 
province. He said, well it’s a tough year, we’re in a tough 
financial situation and the feds have cut back on their 
contribution to crop insurance, and so therefore we’ve had to 
make some changes and this is as good a program as we can 
offer — blaming the federal government. 
 
Yet when the minister was pressed to come up with details as to 
the levels of funding by both levels of government, he says, 
well just a minute now. Just a minute, he said. He said, yes well 
I think the way the funding program works is that Mr. Vanclief 
and his government were supposed to put in $195 million each 
year over the three-year period and we’re supposed to put in 
130. 
 
And now it seems to me . . . We’re not sure exactly what the 
federal government put in but . . . oh yes just a minute. Now I 
remember. Now I remember that over the two years the federal 
government is putting their $195 million in each year. So we 
really . . . there seems to be a fair bit of confusion. 
 
When we talk to the federal Minister of Agriculture’s people in 
Ottawa, they tell us that this government and this Minister of 
Agriculture needed some help last year with C-SAP II 
(Canada-Saskatchewan Assistance Program II). So Mr. 
Vanclief says, well okay, listen. We realize that this is an 
additional strain on your budget and this year we’ll loan you 
some money, but remember you’ve got to pay it back in 2002. 
 

So now the minister . . . when the Minister of Agriculture is 
asked whether this is in fact the scenario, he seems to get quite 
confused. He doesn’t know whether he actually got the money 
last year and if he’s got to pay it back this year. But yet he will 
. . . he admitted in the House last Friday that the federal 
government did put in their $195 million in the last two years. 
 
And then he goes on to tell the farmers of Saskatchewan, 
because the federal government didn’t put in their money — 
and he admitted in the House on Friday that they in fact did put 
it in — therefore we’ve got to downscale crop insurance; we’ve 
got to cut the spot loss hail because that bad federal government 
isn’t living up to their obligations. 
 
Well it’s kind of interesting, he also said that we have to put in 
— the we referring to the provincial government — have to put 
in $14 million more this year. 
 
Well now if you stand back from his argument and look at it, 
well certainly if you’re repaying a loan and you have to 
maintain your commitment — you’ve signed an agreement to 
put in $130 million each year for three years — and you put in 
your $130 million last year and then . . . and you borrowed 
some money from the federal government and now this year 
you have to repay it, well naturally you’d have to put more 
money in, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think maybe that’s the 
explanation. 
 
I asked the minister to table documents in the House to show 
what the commitments were under this program, what payments 
were in the last two years. I mean if a minister of agriculture is 
using that type of an argument you’d think that he would have 
the figures right at his fingertips, but not this minister. He seems 
to get confused; he seems to not know his facts and to this day, 
to this time, I still don’t have those figures. He said oh I’ll get it 
to you right away, and we don’t have it. And I know why we 
won’t be getting it. 
 
I challenge the minister to table those figures, a copy of those 
agreements, and table the amount of dollars that each level of 
government has put into these programs to clarify the situation. 
But I don’t think we’re going to get it. 
 
Do you know why, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Because the facts 
won’t support his argument, Mr. Deputy Speaker. The facts 
won’t support his arguments. He’s trying to play the old money 
shell game — now we got it, now we don’t. And he’s extended 
that into this year’s crop insurance program — the loopy 
lottery, the member from Estevan refers to it, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker. 
 
So then to try and smooth over some of the additional . . . the 
hurt to Saskatchewan farmers that’s been outlined by myself 
and other members of this caucus in the House, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, the Minister of Agriculture issued a press release dated 
April 9 heralding the increased coverage of municipal hail and 
saying, and I quote: 
 

A move that should decrease insurance costs to farmers. 
 
Raising, raising the amount of insurance that a farmer can 
insure with municipal hail from $100 an acre to 125. And this 
minister is telling Saskatchewan farmers that this is going to 



756 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

decrease their costs. Well, I’m not sure where that minister got 
his information from. 
 
And I doubt whether he even looked into hail insurance 
programs. Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’ve been involved in this 
farming business for over 30 years and hail is the biggest risks 
to our crops in those 30 years and every year we have to, we 
have to carry a fairly significant level of hail insurance. It seems 
that in our area and in a large part of my constituency, and as a 
matter of fact across this province, there are areas that . . . 
where hail, as I said, is the most significant risk to crop loss and 
farmers insuring . . . have to insure at fairly significant levels to 
protect themselves against that loss. 
 
And I’ve been a customer of municipal hail for many years and 
I can’t see, Mr. Minister, where increasing the level of coverage 
from 100 to $125 an acre is going to decrease my costs. 
Municipal hail has always been competitive but they’ve never 
been the lowest insurer and they’ve never been the highest. But 
the things that are talked about in this press release, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, make no . . . absolutely no sense and the farmers of 
this province know that, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So what does . . . what else does the minister have to offer? 
He’s taken . . . $35 million is what . . . was the amount of 
dollars that both levels of government put into the hail . . . spot 
loss hail option. That money is not there now, but according to 
the minister it may be there — we’re not sure. And so . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . That’s a good question. Where is it? 
What has the minister done with it? 
 
We had the crop insurance program funded at $195 million 
from the federal government and 130 from the provincial 
government. We had that program last year. It funded the spot 
loss hail. The minister admitted that the federal government is 
putting in the same amount as they did the year before. The 
minister says his government is putting in $14 million more. 
Certainly crop insurance coverage on the multi-peril option 
have increased somewhat, but they haven’t increased to that 
level, Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
So we would like to know: where is that $35 million? What has 
the minister done with it? He’s taken it and put it into his 
rainfall roulette program. We’ve asked him on a number of 
occasions, what’s the cost of this little gaming option that he’s 
put into the program? He doesn’t know, as many things. We 
wonder really what this minister does know about crop 
insurance. 
 
It seems like this government is so hooked on gambling that 
they’ve incorporated this gaming option into their crop 
insurance program. 
 
We continually hear from that government, Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, that in agriculture, particularly in the grain and 
oilseeds sector, that it’s the federal government’s responsibility; 
that the problems in agriculture dealing with farm subsidies and 
those sorts of things, the provincial government can’t step up to 
the plate because they simply don’t have the financial resources. 
 
And we do agree with some of that, but not entirely everything. 
Because there are things that this government can do — this 
provincial government can do. They can help keep down 

farmers’ costs. And by removing spot loss hail and increasing 
the premium rates in crop insurance, they’re doing anything but. 
 
And why are they doing that, Mr. Deputy Speaker? Well I’ll tell 
you why they’re doing that. Because they found themselves, 
due to their mismanagement of this economy over the last 10, 
11 years, they found themselves in a difficult financial situation 
so they sat down and they said, look we’ve got to save some 
money somewhere. So where are we going to save it; well 
where are we going to pull the money out of? Well we may as 
well pull it out of rural Saskatchewan because those people 
didn’t vote for us in the last election; they’re not going to vote 
for them in the next election. And with these recent changes in 
crop insurance and education tax and some of these other 
things, they won’t be voting for them in the next five elections, 
Mr. Deputy Speaker. 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, the opposition members were heckling their 
own speaker so bad that it was very hard to follow the 
reasoning, but judging from the hand motions, I’m sure that 
actions may or may not speak louder than words. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, this debate is about more than just about 
the crop insurance program in Saskatchewan. And to 
understand the reasons for changes to crop insurance and the 
choices that were made in the design . . . in the program design, 
you must first understand the way in which safety net programs 
are funded and the policy direction of the federal government. 
 
Since the late 1980s, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and the early 1990s, 
the federal government have been very clear on two fronts. 
First, they’ve certainly gone down the road of reducing federal 
spending in support of the agricultural industry, and they have 
been asking the provinces and the producers to pick up a larger 
share of the costs. 
 
In the 1980s, the federal government took the major 
responsibility for protecting farmers against production risk and 
price risk. Crop insurance, Mr. Deputy Speaker, was funded 50 
per cent by the federal government, 50 per cent by producers, 
and the province paid for the administration. 
 
Under the Western Grain Stabilization Act, the federal 
government funded two-thirds of the costs, with producers 
funding one-third of the cost. The federal government also took 
the responsibility for addressing low grain prices across Canada 
in 1986 and in 1987 by providing over $1 billion each year for 
the special grains programs, one and number two. In addition, 
the farmers had the Crow benefit which was funded solely by 
the federal government. 
 
In the late 1980s and early 1990s, the federal government 
started to off-load the cost of safety net programs onto the 
provinces. They required provinces to pay 25 per cent of the 
cost of the 1988 drought program. Cost sharing in crop 
insurance was changed in 1991, requiring provinces to equally 
cost share the government’s portion of the program costs on a 
50/50 basis. 
 
Under safety net programs of the early 1990s, producers paid 
thirty-three and a third per cent of the costs; provinces paid 
twenty-five per cent of the costs; while the federal government 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 757 

 

continued to pay the majority of the cost, covering forty-two 
and two-thirds per cent. 
 
Under NISA, producers were required to pay 50 per cent of the 
cost, while the federal government and the provinces each paid 
25 per cent of the costs. The federal government continued to 
provide the Crow benefit and they provided additional 
assistance through the farm support and adjustment measures 
program which was again fully federally funded. 
 
So you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there’s been quite a shift in 
the onus of who pays for the programs and it certainly has gone 
from heavily federally funded to a great deal of the burden 
being borne by the provinces and, indeed, a portion being borne 
by the producers. 
 
(15:30) 
 
Now by the time the 1990s rolled around, the federal 
government, armed with the World Trade Organization 
agreement, went about reducing support for Canadian farmers, 
primarily the Western Canadian grains and oilseed producers. 
They did this under the naive assumption that the WTO (World 
Trade Organization) agreement would result in other countries 
reducing the amount of trade distorting support provided to 
their agricultural industry. 
 
But, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the federal government ended the 
Crow subsidy. And I can remember as a New Democrat in the 
’80s wearing a hat that said Keep the Crow, let Nelson . . . or 
what was his name? Let him go, anyway. And a lot of 
producers, I must say — a lot of producers, I must say, were 
quite happy to take the money and run. And the whole of the 
province is suffering from that decision to end the Crow 
subsidy. 
 
In addition, the federal government reduced the federal safety 
net envelope to $600 million across Canada and they required 
provinces to start paying 40 per cent of the overall safety net 
programming costs. Yes, the federal government decided to 
unilaterally disarm and, of course, it turns out that they were 
wrong in their assumption that other countries would follow 
suit. 
 
As we all know, the European Union and the United States 
continued to provide a large amount of trade distorting 
subsidies to their sector. So following the last WTO 
negotiations, Canada reduced its support to Canadian wheat 
producers by 62 per cent, while the EU (European Union) has 
reduced their historically very high levels by only 17 per cent 
and, Mr. Deputy Speaker, the US (United States) continues to 
provide the same level of support to their wheat producers as 
they did in the 1980s. 
 
So today in the US, 49 cents out of every dollar of a farmer’s 
wheat sale comes from government subsidies. In the EU that 
number is 43 cents and in Canada it’s only 17 cents. 
 
Clearly, Canada grains and oilseed producers and in particular 
Western Canadian grains and oilseed producers have felt the 
brunt of the federal government’s policy changes around the 
funding of agriculture support programs. As a result our 
producers, who as the member from Regina Northeast has said 

are some of the most competitive and efficient producers in the 
world, are forced to compete with the treasuries of the EU and 
the United States. 
 
The provincial government has been very active in trying to 
convince the federal government to reverse the harmful policy 
decisions and take actions to help our producers level the 
international playing field. 
 
Minister Serby made presentations to the House of Commons 
Standing Committee on Agriculture on this issue last summer 
and again this February when the committee was touring 
Saskatchewan. 
 
Last fall, Premier Calvert . . . I beg your pardon, the Minister of 
Agriculture. And last fall the Premier prepared a report to all the 
other premiers entitled A Fair Deal For Canadian Farmers. 
And that was discussed and they attempted to negotiate an end 
to the trade distorting subsidies. But to no avail as yet, and still 
we’re waiting for solutions through the WTO. 
 
At the January federal, provincial, and territorial agricultural 
meeting, the Minister of Agriculture put forward 
Saskatchewan’s proposal for future safety net programming in a 
paper entitled An Option For Future Agricultural Safety Net 
Programming Within the Agricultural Policy Framework — 
and that’s a dreadfully long title. 
 
But this paper builds on the background work prepared by the 
Premier, by our own provincial Farm Support Review 
Committee, which recently completed an extensive consultation 
and a review of safety net programs in this province. It was 
endorsed by a group of farm leaders who view it as a feasible 
option to address safety net needs. 
 
And I think that we may have been somewhat alone in our . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . no representation from the 
opposition on that . . . (inaudible interjection) . . . invisible 
indeed. 
 
So I believe that the Saskatchewan proposal is a three-pronged 
approach to responding to producers’ risk management. I 
believe that this proposal will go a long way in meeting the risk 
management needs, not only of Saskatchewan producers but of 
Canadian producers. We will continue to pursue this proposal 
very vigorously with the federal government and other 
provinces as we work towards a new federal/provincial safety 
net. 
 
But in order for any of these to work, we have to have . . . we 
have to have some changes. We have to address the so-called 
Fredericton formula which resulted in the funding being 
distributed to provinces based on the size of industry rather than 
the size of the province and the people involved in the industry 
and the ability of the province to pay based on the number of 
taxpayers that it has. 
 
So, Mr. Deputy Speaker, just getting back to the crop . . . I just 
wanted to make this point, that this is of interest to everybody in 
Saskatchewan because as a result of the federal requirement for 
funding, the 40 per cent portion, Saskatchewan taxpayers are 
providing support to the agricultural industry to the tune of 
$439 for every man, woman, and child in this province. 



758 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

Meanwhile in Ontario they put in about $37 per capita and the 
federal government is providing $88 in support. 
 
So you see, Mr. Deputy Speaker, there is much work to be 
done. Our Minister of Agriculture is doing very good work and 
I don’t know why the opposition won’t get on the bandwagon 
and endorse the work that the provincial government is doing. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. I think all of 
us regret the rural/urban split we see in this province. I think all 
of us understand that the prosperity and health of this province 
requires that both city and country move forward together. 
 
Unfortunately I think the commitment of this government to 
rural Saskatchewan has taken a significant downturn since the 
change in leadership in February of 1999. I remember when 
former Deputy Premier Dwain Lingenfelter fought for the 
inclusion of the 25 per cent rebate on education tax on 
farmland. And of course he faced some opposition but he got it 
through at that time. 
 
Now he’s gone and the MLA (Member of the Legislative 
Assembly) is still with us who thought that her back alley is 
more important than highways to the small communities of this 
province. So we now know that the commitment to rural 
Saskatchewan that used to be there has simply now completely 
gone and I think that’s shown in crop insurance rates here. 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. The member’s time has 
expired. There will now be a brief 10-minute period for 
question and comments. 
 
Mr. McMorris: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, it’s 
been interesting . . . Deputy Speaker . . . it’s been interesting 
over the last week or so as we meet in caucus and some of us 
are bringing our crop insurance program outlines to caucus and 
talking about the program and the lack of crop insurance or the 
lack of hail coverage. 
 
But we’re also talking a little bit about some of the variances 
that we see in our coverage, in particularly between 
summerfallow and stubble. And I’ve talked on it different times 
in the House here why there is such a discrepancy between 
summerfallow and stubble. I’d be very interested to ask the 
member from Idylwyld or the member from Meewasin, 
whichever would choose to answer, when your government 
promotes zero till, the Soil Conservation Association promotes 
zero tillage, I think most every member on this side of the 
House would promote zero tillage — but, Mr. Deputy Speaker, 
when we look at the coverages, crop insurance hasn’t taken that 
into consideration. 
 
One quick example is flax coverage on land that I happen to 
own — 18.5 bushel an acre on summerfallow, 14 bushel on 
stubble. Are you promoting zero till or . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. Order. The member’s time has 
expired. 
 
Mr. Forbes: — I really appreciate this question here because 
you know what used to drive me crazy when I was a teacher — 

just up until last October — was the odd teacher who thought 
only teachers know about education. Only teachers know about 
education. Parents don’t know anything about education; 
citizens on the street don’t know anything about education. But 
the vast majority of teachers would know that we’re all partners 
in making education work. 
 
And just like in this issue here, I don’t know an awful lot about 
zero tillage. My brother would. I know a little bit about 
summerfallow and stubble and I understood . . . I heard a heckle 
about picking stones — we used to call it picking rock. So I 
have a little bit of experience, but I understand in Saskatchewan 
how important this is and how important it is that we’re all 
together on this issue. 
 
And I’m really surprised at how the opposition just won’t get 
onside and talk to the federal people with us about this very, 
very important issue. And zero tillage is a detail. Let’s talk 
about the federal government and the big picture. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, I’d like to ask the member from Watrous the following 
question. And it’s clear and very evident that this government 
has for a long, long time been urging the federal government to 
step to the plate with a meaningful support mechanism that 
would cushion the impact that the unfair subsidies the United 
States and European Common Markets are having on our farm 
producers — in many cases as much as $1 a bushel. And most 
other provinces have supported this position. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, I’d like to ask the member, when will you 
stand up for Saskatchewan . . . 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order, order. All comments to the 
Chair and through the Chair. 
 
Mr. Harper: — I’m sorry, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. Deputy 
Speaker, through you to the member from Watrous, when will 
she stand up and support Saskatchewan farmers and 
Saskatchewan farm families and stop supporting the Americans 
and the European governments? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you very much, Mr. Speaker. I’m 
quite honoured to be able to answer that question. I don’t 
believe that any member on this side of the House has ever said 
that there isn’t a federal government responsibility for the 
producers of this province. But however we’ve also pointed out 
that in the past 10 years that this province has cut back on the 
support for absolutely every program that was available to the 
producers of this province. 
 
They have promised time and time and time again that they’re 
going to negotiate with the federal government until they bring 
money back to Saskatchewan, with absolutely no results. So it’s 
kind of interesting. If they’re not willing to support their own 
farmers, then how do they negotiate with the federal 
government to do the same? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 759 

 

Mr. Hillson: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question 
is for the hon. member from Saskatoon Meewasin. 
 
I want to know whether the increased crop insurance rates, the 
abolition of the 25 per cent education tax rebate on farmland, 
and the threatening to arrest the mayors of small communities 
who don’t have the funds to fix their water treatment plants, if 
this is part of a rural revenge strategy because they didn’t vote 
NDP; if this is a part of a strategy to make sure that public 
funds are only spent in those seats which might possibly return 
a New Democratic candidate. Is this a rural revenge strategy we 
are seeing unfolding here? 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you very much, Mr. Deputy Speaker. And 
thank you to the member for the question. 
 
I want to say that as a government we are investing all across 
Saskatchewan. There is absolutely no sense of rural revenge. 
And believe me, if there were, I’d be wreaking revenge on my 
own relatives who are involved in the farm community. And I 
myself am only one generation removed from the farm. 
 
And, Mr. Deputy Speaker, we are investing in highways, we are 
investing in water infrastructure, we are investing in agriculture, 
and we are investing in the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Forbes: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, this is a question for the 
member from Watrous. 
 
Last June the federal and provincial governments announced a 
plan for a national agriculture policy, the first time ever that all 
provinces and the federal government have moved in this 
direction. The Saskatchewan government initiated an extensive 
consultation process through the Farm Support Review 
Committee. This process resulted in our proposal to the national 
table, a proposal that meets the needs of our producers. 
 
Why didn’t the Saskatchewan Party feel the need to make a 
presentation to this group, the Farm Support Review 
Committee? Where were you? Where were the party? 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Order. That question is out of order 
because it’s not related to any member on this side’s speech. So 
that question is out of order. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Hart: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. My question is 
to the member from Saskatoon Meewasin. That member in her 
speech said that all the problems associated with Saskatchewan 
agriculture are the federal government’s fault. They did away 
with the Crow rate, they cut back on funding, and all those . . . 
that long list of sob stories. I wonder how she justifies 
increasing farmers’ input costs by up to 200 per cent, removing 
a education rebate . . . or tax rebate from the farm program. 
How is that supporting Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
(15:45) 
 

The Deputy Speaker: — Would the member please repeat the 
question. 
 
Mr. Hart: — My question is to the member from Saskatoon 
Meewasin. That member indicated in her speech that it seems 
all the problems associated with Saskatchewan agriculture are 
the federal government’s fault — they did away with the Crow 
rate; they supposedly cut back funding according to that 
member. 
 
Yet what does her provincial government do? They increase 
farmers’ input costs by the range of $200 . . . 200 per cent. 
They’ve removed a rebate on property tax. How is that 
supporting Saskatchewan farmers? 
 
Ms. Jones: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker, and I thank the 
member for his question. I’m getting more exposure in the 
agricultural community than he is. 
 
Mr. Deputy Speaker, we provide a lot . . . We provide 5 per cent 
of our provincial budget to support agriculture in this province. 
We are investing in agriculture all across this province. We lead 
the nation in investment in agriculture of any provincial . . . We 
lead the nation in investment in agriculture of any province in 
this country. 
 
As I said in my remarks, we invest $439 per capita for every 
man, woman, and child in this province. No other province 
does. We’re proud of our investment in agriculture. We’re 
proud of the industry. And I’m proud of our government’s 
record. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Harper: — Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the member from 
Watrous. Last year the federal and provincial governments did 
an extensive development of a program, a national program, 
that would include in crop insurance and other safety net 
programs for agriculture. And the Saskatchewan government 
did an extensive consultation process through the Farm Support 
Review Committee. 
 
My question, Mr. Deputy Speaker, to the member from 
Watrous is: why didn’t the Sask Party feel the need to make a 
presentation to the Farm Support Review Committee on the 
need to enhance our safety net programs such as crop 
insurance? 
 
Ms. Harpauer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker . . . (inaudible 
interjection) . . . It’s okay. Thank you, Mr. Speaker, and thank 
the member for the question. 
 
It’s amazing how they keep on saying what would you do, what 
would you do. And then the member across the floor says, why 
did you present what you’re going to do, why did you . . . why 
did you make a presentation of what you’re going to do? 
 
I’ll tell you what. If he wants to know everything we’re going to 
do, call an election. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Deputy Speaker: — Seventy-five minute debate has 



760 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

expired. 
 

PRIVATE MEMBERS’ MOTIONS 
 

Motion No. 3 — Long-Term Care Home Fees 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Deputy Speaker. Mr. 
Deputy Speaker, and members, it’s a great pleasure to rise 
today to talk about an issue that I think is of fundamental 
importance to the people of this province and indicates very 
clearly the lack of direction and the desperateness of this NDP 
government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what we are going to propose today in our motion 
is the following: 
 

That this Assembly call on the provincial government to 
reconsider its decision to address its own fiscal problems 
on the backs of the sick and the elderly by significantly 
increasing long-term care home fees. 

 
Mr. Speaker, when I first got word of the fact that this might be 
being considered by the government by a bit of information that 
came prior to the budget, I actually had to question the fact that 
this might indeed be real or not because it seemed to me 
absolutely unbelievable that this government, or any 
government in this province, would attempt to download its 
fiscal mess on the backs of people who can be least able to 
afford it. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we heard that the government was 
considering this, we asked the minister some questions and said, 
is it true that you’re going to consider downloading your fiscal 
mess on the backs of the ill and the elderly by dramatically 
increasing long-term care rates? And the minister said, well 
you’re going to have to wait for the budget. 
 
Well we waited for the budget and our worse suspicions came 
true. The government not only proposed significant increases, 
they proposed increases to long-term care fees in a dramatic 
fashion, in a much greater amount than what anybody would 
have comprehended that any government would have done 
anywhere in this country. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it speaks to the desperation of this government to 
try to milk any source that they possibly can for additional 
revenues and in doing so, they lose track of the fundamental 
principles and the fundamental values that this province was 
founded on by turning against the very people that were the 
pioneers and built this country for all of us to enjoy. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it was almost beyond belief when you saw what 
the magnitude of the difficulties were going to be. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Mr. Speaker, and then the government sort of says 
that this is okay, don’t worry about it because all we’re doing is 
we’re affecting the fees for 120 rich people in this province. 
Well most people are surprised to understand that after 10 years 
of this government there are even 120 rich people left in this 
province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — And they certainly, and they certainly have 
no incentive in this province to be able to get yourself in a 
position of some financial security when you reach your old age 
because now the members opposite are quite gleeful about 
reaching into your savings and reaching into the rewards of 
your lifetime of toil and say, now that we’ve got you in the 
most vulnerable time of your whole life, we’re going to take 
advantage of that in order to raise a grand total of $7.4 million 
in a $2.3 billion health care budget. 
 
Mr. Speaker, how can this be possibly even considered, never 
mind believed that it’s being considered? Well, they did. And 
then they go around gleefully saying, well what are you 
complaining about; we’re only talking about rich people after 
all. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I don’t know about anybody in this 
Assembly or anybody in this province that are potentially 
listening to the debate this afternoon that realize who we’re 
talking about — that the very people that built our province and 
our country are the people that we’re talking about. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I want to certainly say that all of us have 
very, very clear memories of grandparents, and of mothers and 
dads, and people that went before us — uncles and aunts — and 
there’s a lot of anecdotal stories about how important they were 
and how importantly they believed that they should prepare 
themselves as best as possible for the future. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re in the year 2002 and people that generally 
require long-term care probably are at least of retirement age or 
older. So these people are the people that have come to this 
country or were born somewhere before the First World War. 
And when they came to this country they might have been there 
before with their parents before them as pioneers, and they grew 
up in very, by and large, very austere surroundings. 
 
They were the pioneers in the country. They were born to 
families who either came here for the first time as immigrants 
or they were born to families who established here early. 
 
But they were difficult times for Saskatchewan and 
Saskatchewan people. They were the times of the ’30s when 
agriculture was very difficult, when we had year after year of 
drought and winds and dust storms similar to what we have 
now. And instead of turning against the people that needed the 
help the most at that time as this government is doing now in 
the face of the drought and the face of the needs of our 
long-term care and our senior citizens, people back then banded 
together and made the best of their circumstances and made 
sure that what was going on was going to be sustainable for 
them and for their families into the future. 
 
And Saskatchewan people and our pioneers and our forefathers 
and mothers built a very strong family ethic. They believed if 
you stuck together and you helped each other and you looked 
after your family and you were responsible about the resources 
and opportunities you had, that one day when you got older you 
were not going to be as dependent upon your family, as many 
people of that generation had their parents dependent on them 
because of the circumstance of the time. 
 
People understood that there was a fundamental family societal 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 761 

 

value that needed to be maintained in order to build a proper 
society — is that we looked after the generation that went 
before us. We had not only a personal and family but a social 
and societal obligation to make sure that we were going to 
provide for the pioneers that have gone before us. 
 
And over the generations things changed as to how that was 
happening. I remember when my grandparents — and when I 
was a young fellow and went to my grandparents’ house — 
they had very often their own parents living with them because 
there were no long-term care facilities, there were no 
institutions whereby people could be looked after. I remember 
my grandmother and grandfather also had an invalid son, who 
was my uncle, who was crippled because of a medical incident 
that happened at his birth. And they didn’t put Uncle Alvin in 
an institution, they looked after him at home. 
 
They had that fundamental value and belief that there was a 
responsibility for people to look after each other. And, Mr. 
Speaker, I think everyone in this Assembly and everyone 
listening today potentially, can recount stories of how our 
grandparents and the people that went before us took for 
granted the fundamental responsibility that we had to each other 
in terms of caring for the generation that went before, or for 
brothers or sisters that had difficulties that needed special care. 
 
People gathered together and they provided the support that was 
needed. And there was no organized institutions that did this, by 
and large. It was simply out of the goodwill and the good 
intentions of people working together. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is the kind of fundamental attitude about 
caring for each other, and caring for the generation that went 
before us, that I think Canada, and Saskatchewan in particular 
as a prairie province, can be particularly proud of. 
 
It’s a history that something is cared about and protected and 
held to be precious that sets us in many ways apart from a lot of 
other societies and civilizations that have gone before. And as 
we become a modern society, that fundamental underpinning of 
the way we built our communities certainly was something that 
we all thought about and cared about. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, certainly I would like to believe that those 
fundamental values are values that we carry forward in the 21st 
century, and somehow we haven’t forgot about and left 
somewhere behind in the archives of history. Because I don’t 
think it’s appropriate, and I don’t think that Saskatchewan 
people are like that fundamentally. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, that’s why I was so fundamentally 
shocked and surprised when I heard that this government was 
considering moving up long-term care fees in such a dramatic 
and significant way that was going to be a problem, not only for 
some people, but for an awful lot of people in circumstances 
other than the . . . what the NDP idealized as saying oh, it’s 
only going to affect 120 rich people, and implying that it really 
doesn’t matter anyway. Because one of the fundamental things 
about the NDP is if they look at anybody that’s worked hard 
and achieved anything in their life, they want to make sure they 
do everything to bring him down to the lowest common 
denominator, rather than bringing other people up to aspire to 
doing the best they can. 

Mr. Speaker, the thing that I want to point to particularly in this 
whole issue is there’s a fundamental attitudinal problem by this 
government. Because that they think that it’s okay just to look 
around and say, who can we sock it to today in terms of finding 
the money, finding the resources to overcome some of the very, 
very bad decisions we’ve made in the past? 
 
There’s no question, Mr. Speaker, that this province is facing a 
real crisis, and a crossroads. And why would you not face that 
kind of a crisis after 10 years of NDP government? 
 
The NDP can sit over there and chirp from their seats; the 
member for Moose Jaw sits there quite gleefully, with a big 
smile on his face, talking about all the significant, wonderful 
accomplishments of this government. He talks with pride about 
the fact that they don’t mind blowing $28 million on SPUDCO 
(Saskatchewan Potato Utility Development Company), and he 
will stand up and vote for a budget that’ll take $7 million out of 
the pockets of our seniors in this province and he thinks this is 
good government. 
 
(16:00) 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it isn’t good government. It isn’t proper, it 
isn’t ethical, and it certainly doesn’t reflect the values of 
Saskatchewan people who say our seniors and the rewards of 
their hard toil over a lifetime should at least be respected and 
not used as some kind of a tax grab in order to balance a budget 
that is created because of the . . . (inaudible) . . . of that NDP 
government. 
 
And I’ll invite any one of those members to stand in their place 
later on today or this evening, and get into this debate and 
explain how they think it’s so wonderful that we are going to 
take, as a legislature, the fundamental decision to rob the piggy 
banks and the savings accounts of our seniors in order to make 
up for the misguided adventures of this NDP government. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it simply is not appropriate. It simply is not fair. 
It’s unacceptable, and certainly it was a fundamental reason in 
this last budget debate why I couldn’t even consider considering 
supporting that budget that was going to treat our citizens in 
such a shabby way. And particularly the people most vulnerable 
— the ill and the elderly — who have to depend on us now in 
their moment of need for the support that we as a province and 
a society should be providing. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP are quite happy to talk about the fact that 
this only affects a very few people who have lots of money. 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it doesn’t affect just a very few people; I 
think they quoted 120 rich folks. Mr. Speaker, it affects 
virtually everyone that is needing long-term care. 
 
Because what the government has done is they have said that 
we’re not just going to sock it to this 120 people who have a 
few bucks saved up. We’re going to virtually change the whole 
funding formula for how long-term care rates are applied. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, for anyone that makes more than 900-odd 
dollars, it’s going to affect them in some way. And it’s true that 
if you only make a little bit more than the $900, the effect is 
more minimal. If your monthly income is $1,000 a month, your 
new fees are only going to be $2.40 more than they were before 



762 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

— a very modest increase for sure. But what they’ve done is 
said look, at anything over this 900-odd dollars that you make, 
where we used to take 50 per cent of the money that you made 
over that amount and left you with 50 per cent for lots of other 
things that you have to spend — you have to provide for your 
own prescription drugs, and they’ve done away with the cap on 
that as well or raised it significantly. You have to provide for 
other miscellaneous services that you’re going to require in the 
long-term care home and many of those fees are 20 to $50 a 
month. People quite routinely say that they have 100 to $200 a 
month in prescription drug expenses. All of these things are 
potentially added on. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, indeed at the bottom end you’re not going 
to pay that much more. But you know what, Mr. Speaker, 
there’s all kinds of seniors in this province who are paying that 
minimal amount who do not have very much money left after 
that now. They are not sitting there with whole bunches of 
money going into their savings account because there are 
demands on those monies that they have left. 
 
If you’re on the minimum pension, you don’t have an awful lot 
of money left over after you pay the $833 that you need for 
your long-term care fees and these other auxiliary services. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, we have a group of people even starting at 
the very minimum of the fee schedule who are sitting there 
saying we don’t have very much money as it is, and they are 
sitting here being very gleeful about the fact that they are only 
increasing their fees by $2.40. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, what are these people left with, these seniors 
even at the minimum of the scale? I mean, what senior citizen is 
not also probably, in vast majorities, also a grandmother or 
grandfather? What senior citizen being a grandma or grandpa 
doesn’t want at Christmastime to have a present under the tree 
for their grandchildren? What grandparent would not want to 
have a few dollars on a grandchild’s birthday or their own son’s 
or daughter’s birthday? What senior citizen wouldn’t love that 
when the grandkids come and visit there’s some money to buy a 
bag of candies or some treats for the grandkids? 
 
There are issues that speak to the humanity of people and who 
they are, and you simply can’t look at it as a credit or a debit on 
a ledger sheet and say, oh there’s some more money we can get 
from these people. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is very clear to me that this government has 
been so desperate to make up for the shortfalls of their wild 
adventures in Australia and New Zealand and United States and 
all over the world, Mr. Speaker, they are so desperate for 
making up for those mistakes that they’ll turn to anything and 
anyone in order to try to grab some extra revenue to balance 
their so-called budget. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, when the argument is, is this doesn’t 
affect people at the bottom end of the scale, it’s simply not fair 
to say that, because so many people, so many people have other 
demands on their very modest income. And, Mr. Speaker, what 
the government is doing is saying, if you’ve got anything over 
that very minimal amount, we’re going to make sure that we get 
our hands into your pocket. 
 

Mr. Speaker, what this government did is not just the 120 rich 
people. What they did is they changed the formula for everyone 
over that 900-odd dollars. And they said to these people, lookit, 
what we’re going to do in the past, we took the basic amount 
and we’re going to take half of everything you have above that 
to a $1,541 cap limit. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, I remember the associated deputy minister 
about three years ago announced pretty significant increases in 
those amounts even, two or three years ago. Nothing related to 
inflation. Nothing related to what would be fair or reasonable. 
But significant increases that have gone forward two or three 
years ago. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, what they did is they said, we’re not going to 
leave you with 50 per cent of the money you have left to that 
capped amount. That wasn’t good enough. It wasn’t enough to 
say that we’ll leave you with 50 per cent of the money so you 
could buy a few presents for your grandchildren, so that you 
could buy a few presents on their birthdays or at Christmas, or 
you could help out with the family and have a little bit of pride 
in being a grandma or grandpa, and that you would have that 
independence and the satisfaction of being able to do those sorts 
of things. 
 
No, this group of people weren’t satisfied with leaving you with 
50 per cent. They said, we’re going to take 90 per cent. We’re 
going to leave you with 10 per cent — 10 cents on the dollar is 
what they said we’re going to leave you — to make sure . . . 
what we’re going to do is make sure that you have absolutely 
no pride and independence left. We’re going to make sure we 
take it all. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it’s interesting in this debate because I’ll be 
willing to venture that members opposite, instead of getting up 
and debating this issue tonight and having their turn to speak, 
the member from Regina South — who chirps from his seat and 
says, well what’s the big deal? — I hope that they’ll enter into 
the debate instead of adjourning it so that the discussion can’t 
happen. 
 
And I challenge them to stay here tonight and debate this issue 
and tell us why they can justify this atrocious Act and attack on 
our seniors. And I hope they’ll stay on this topic tonight and 
debate it till 10:30 tonight, because the people want to hear 
what these guys are going to say. 
 
I hope that happens, Mr. Speaker, but I’ll bet that there’s going 
to be an adjournment soon as it gets the chance. Because they 
don’t want to talk about this. How in the world can they talk 
about it and justify this assault on the seniors of this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, we’re talking about a fundamental attack on 
seniors of this province by attacking their right to have 
reasonable access to long-term care at fees that are not going to 
take every cent that they’ve made and earned and saved over 
the generation of working in this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I know exactly what’s going to happen . . . 
(inaudible interjection) . . . The member says, from the back 
says . . . and he says that they’re taking every bit of disposable 
income. The member says, oh we’re not touching the money 
that they’ve got in their bank account; they’re only talking of 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 763 

 

the returns on this investment. 
 
Well where do you think this money goes? It goes to the 
people’s expenses and to their families. They worked for this 
money and the NDP think that it’s their money. Well it’s not. 
It’s the money that was earned by the people of this province 
who forewent holidays and days off and other discretionary 
expenditures and tried to provide for their long-term care needs 
over time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, that’s the problem. The member yells from his 
seat and says, why should the taxpayers subsidize the rich? 
 
The Speaker: — Order, please. Just . . . Order, please. Order. 
All members will have their opportunity. Right now I request 
members to give the attention to the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, Mr. 
Speaker, the member is heckling from the other side. The 
member from Regina Qu’Appelle says, well, what’s wrong with 
taking the money from the rich? Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s 
exactly the attitude of this NDP government. 
 
This NDP government would rather turn to people who have 
worked hard and saved money and built up a little bit of an 
equity, and use those money to try to pay for the misadventures 
that they have created. Mr. Speaker, they sit there and they’ve 
got this great attitude about who these rich folks are. Mr. 
Speaker . . . 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, members. Order. Now the 
occasional heckle is quite welcome but this sort of insistent 
hollering is unwelcome. 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, you 
know the members opposite seem to be quite gleeful about the 
position that they’ve taken, is that what we’re going to do is 
we’re going to sock it to the rich. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’ll tell you something. It isn’t going to be 
something they can do very long because with their attitude, 
there won’t be any rich people left in this province. There’s 
darn few of them now. We’re talking about, by their own 
admission, they’re saying 120 people is all this is going to 
affect. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, it affects a lot more people than that because 
the whole system doesn’t start at the $3,800 that they’re talking 
about. The system starts at anything over 900-odd dollars. And 
so people that are currently paying $900, they’re going to have 
their fees go up $82 a month. Well certainly I would hope that 
someone making $1,200 a month . . . Is that their definition of 
rich? Is that what they’re talking about? Or someone making 
$1,800 a month is now going to go up by $322 a month. Is that 
their definition of rich? Someone that is making $2,000 is going 
to have their fees go up by $400 a month. Is that the rich people 
of this province? 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, these aren’t rich people. They’re our 
mothers and fathers and people who have went before us, and 
they may not realize it but it’s also their mothers and fathers, 
Mr. Speaker, who are going to have every dime picked from 

their pockets. 
 
This is what’s inherently fair . . . unfair about this situation, Mr. 
Speaker, is the attitude of the members opposite, of this NDP 
government, who seem to be quite delighted to say, we got $80 
million for a telco in Australia — no big deal — and yet they 
want to claw $7 million out of the long-term care residents of 
Saskatchewan. How can you square that, Mr. Speaker? 
 
They have lost more in the SPUDCO gamble than it would cost 
to make up this difference over four years for the senior 
citizens. 
 
And they sit there and the minister for CIC says . . . Well I think 
there’s been a couple of quotes. This was less than an 
acceptable return, was one of them. But he also said it was a 
success. Well how can you possibly measure that as a success 
as compared to what they’re doing to our senior citizens today, 
Mr. Speaker? It’s unconscionable and it’s not right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, we have said in this province, and the statistics 
bear it out, that we’re losing all kinds of our people. And we’ve 
lamented by the fact that we’re losing people at the beginning 
of their career and young people who should be staying to make 
a livelihood and a future here. 
 
But, Mr. Speaker, with the attitude of this government, we’re 
also going to lose our senior citizens — because they’re not 
foolish; they can go anywhere in this country to retire. They 
don’t have to also stay here. And these so-called rich seniors 
that this government categorizes as a significant portion of the 
total, they can leave as well. And, Mr. Speaker, why wouldn’t 
they? 
 
(16:15) 
 
You know, I had a look on the Internet. I had a look on the 
Internet and effective of November of 2001, the rates, the 
maximum rate — let’s forget about the minimum rates. But in 
British Columbia, the maximum rate was $1,500 a month. Well 
that was sort of in keeping with what Saskatchewan’s rate was 
prior to this outrageous tax grab, about $1,500 a month. In 
Alberta, where it’s just the worst part of the world, in the 
Internet it said that the maximum rate was $991 a month for a 
private room. Well, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a bad deal in our 
neighbour to one side. In Manitoba, on the other side, the 
maximum rate — the maximum rate was $1,806 a month. 
Hardly anything in comparison to the $3,875 that these tax 
grabbing NDP government individuals are considering. 
 
And so why wouldn’t people move? They don’t have to go far. 
People living in Yorkton can go to Brandon. People living in 
Lloydminster just have to cross the border. People in Saskatoon 
can go to Red Deer. People in Calgary can go to Medicine Hat. 
You know, why wouldn’t you leave? Why would you stay 
here? Because in a way, if you’re going to get it socked to you 
about the long-term care rates, you might as well go to Alberta 
where your children are probably anyway, Mr. Speaker. 
 
So these people, this government sits there and crassly sort of 
looks at this and crassly looks at it, Mr. Speaker, and says it 
don’t matter, all is we affect is a few rich people. Well, Mr. 
Speaker, I’m sorry, it doesn’t just affect rich people. It affects 



764 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

ordinary people. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — People who have saved their money for a 
long time. 
 
Mr. Speaker, you know, you can look at different kinds of 
instances and everybody assumes that all that this affects is 
seniors. It affects anybody who requires a long-term care 
facility. It could be a relatively young person who has had 
debilitating strokes or has had a trauma like a car accident that 
have left them incapacitated. 
 
They might have some savings. But they might also and quite 
often do, do not enter a long-term care facility as a couple. And 
so quite often, Mr. Speaker, we have a situation where a 
husband or a wife require the services of a long-term care 
facility and the other one has to live and try to make sure that 
they can meet the needs of a house and household expenses and 
all the rest of it out of these shared expenses. 
 
And the government does have a formula whereby you can split 
the income and that’s certainly better than what the alternative 
is. But there are sometimes very severe demands on a family to 
have one of the partners in the situation being placed in a 
long-term care home. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this doesn’t just affect 130 rich people. It affects 
lots of people in Saskatchewan and it also speaks to the rest of 
us who thankfully are not ready for a long-term care home yet. 
Because what it says to the rest of this province, Mr. Speaker, is 
we don’t value the sweat of your labour; we’re going to take it 
from you when we’ve got you in a position to do that. 
 
There’s no sense in you saving your money; there’s no sense in 
you being frugal. There’s no sense in trying to be responsible 
about the long-term needs that you’re going to require, because 
if you accumulate any money we’re going to make sure we 
bring you down to the lowest common denominator, Mr. 
Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — That’s what we’re going to do to you — 
that’s the message to people in Saskatchewan and it’s a wrong 
message, Mr. Speaker. This decision must be reversed. 
 
Mr. Speaker, as much as I am reluctant to quote Murray 
Mandryk — and I know the members opposite are also 
shuddering at the thought that I might do that — every now and 
again he actually understands some of the fundamentals about 
what’s going on. And, Mr. Speaker, he quotes in an article of 
Friday, April 5, a headline that says: “Boosting nursing home 
fees just doesn’t seem to be fair.” 
 
Well Murray’s right, Murray’s absolutely right. And he goes on 
to quote an individual who is an 84-year-old retired Canadian 
Air Force metal workshop superintendent who has been 
working on the whole issue surrounding seniors. And this 
individual’s name is Frank Draper. And it says that prior to his 
26-year military career ending in 1966 he helped found Moose 
Jaw air base’s credit union. He managed it for 10 years and it 

accumulated about $1.5 million in assets before merging with 
Moose Jaw’s credit union. 
 
So Mr. Draper is a very community-minded, very frugal kind of 
an individual. And then he worked . . . It says in this article by 
Murray, his 36-year status as a retiree would give him a little bit 
of experience about the issues facing retirees. And he said that 
he can’t understand how the NDP government can consider 
what they’re doing is anything fair at all. 
 
And he also notes something very interesting in this whole cash 
grab by the NDP. He says, you know what? He said in this 
whole package there is nothing in it, and I quote: 
 

First, Draper notes that the new policy doesn’t provide any 
help (at all) to the low-income seniors in nursing homes 
who will still be paying the . . . $1,581 a month charge that 
some of them can barely afford. 

 
And it’s right because when you add up all of these other costs, 
there is precious little left over for these people, as I’ve 
indicated earlier. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, most of us in the Assembly of a certain age 
are now young grandparents, very young grandparents. And 
most of us in this Assembly who have the pleasure and the 
blessing of that status, one of the great joys we have is to be 
able to buy things for our grandkids, to treat them on their 
birthday and at Christmas. And, Mr. Speaker, if we’re going to 
take all the money that any of us accumulate in terms of our 
cash flow, how are we going to continue to do that? 
 
And this government seems determined to do that and it’s 
wrong. 
 
Mr. Speaker, Murray also goes on to say, and I want to quote: 
 

There’s just something a little unsettling about gouging the 
life-savings of people who lived through two world wars 
and a Depression in the name of a measly extra $7 million 
— about one per cent of the provincial government’s 
annual expenditures. 

 
And you know what the NDP says? Oh it’s just these rich guys; 
it sort of don’t matter. But they also say that if you got a few 
bucks, you got the option about going into the private care 
system. Well, Mr. Speaker, for some people that’s maybe true. 
 
But you know there are 261 private nursing care facilities in this 
province and most of them do their very best to provide the 
services people need. But they only can provide services to a 
certain level of care. They provide services that more are for 
people that are much more independent than the people who are 
required to go into permanent long-term care homes. 
 
The way this has gone over the last decade — and I’m not 
arguing with the fundamental principle of it — that the people 
that go into long-term care are heavy care . . . people that need 
heavy care. They can’t live with a great deal of independence 
and they can’t work in a private care home. The level of service 
simply is not appropriate to their needs. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, the people that are going into these homes 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 765 

 

require that heavy care, and they simply are at a stage of their 
health and their age that they don’t have the option of a private 
home that might provide them with facilities. 
 
And so the argument that’s made is not one that makes any 
sense at all, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, this is simply a wrong, 
wrong idea and a wrong policy about this government. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, the members opposite say, well what are we 
going to do? What are we going to do? Well it’s obviously that 
they have no ideas in terms of what to do. What they turn to is 
saying okay, let’s find these few rich people — as they define it 
— people left, and say to them, here we’re going to charge you 
as much as we possibly can to wring 90 per cent of the income 
out of you to make sure that we got every cent from you and we 
can bring you down to the lowest common denominator. 
 
I had a call from an individual who said, you know, right now, 
right now, I’m a retired teacher and my wife is a retired teacher; 
she had a stroke so she wasn’t able to get the benefit of a full 
teacher’s pension. 

 
And, Mr. Speaker, I mean, there’s all kinds of retired teachers 
in this province and you and I both know that they don’t make a 
huge amount of money in their retirement. This isn’t exorbitant 
amounts of money, these so-called rich people. 
 
But this individual said to me, you know what, Rod, I went and 
I put aside money all my life for my old age; I made sure that 
when I had a few extra dollars, I thought about the time in our 
retirement when we were going to require long-term care and 
we’re going to require some extra money in terms of being able 
to have money to support ourselves in our old age and be able 
to give a few dollars for our grandchildren and our 
great-grandchildren. 
 
And he said, what was the incentive? Because right now, as a 
couple of two, his wife needs to go into a long-term care home. 
And he said, right now we qualify as being so-called rich 
people. But he said, in order to do that, I’m going to have to live 
independently at home and soon our savings and our assets are 
going to be slowly and surely and relentlessly depleted so by 
the time both of us are in the institution, we will quickly no 
longer be rich people, we will be people near the minimum of 
the income grid. 
 
And so they’ve taken people who have saved and were frugal 
and responsible for an entire lifetime and they’ve brought them 
down successfully to the lowest common denominator which is 
this government’s objective for all of us in this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — Mr. Speaker, it simply will not do. Mr. 
Speaker, when we talk about what we have to do in this 
province, and the members opposite chirp from their seat and 
say, what would you do? Well I’ll say what we’d do officially 
and for the record right now. A Sask Party government would 
roll back these exorbitant fees to the amount that was there prior 
to this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 

Mr. Gantefoer: — And, Mr. Speaker, that’s not a big 
wild-eyed promise, it’s one that we can and will make. And 
we’ll make it as a promise to the people of this province that are 
going to be gouged for the next year, until such time as that 
government hoists up the courage to face the people on their 
record for their priorities and their expenditures. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — And they will have to go before the people 
of this promise and explain why they should have been in 
Guyana, why they should have been in Australia, why they 
were in Georgia, why they were in New Zealand, why they 
were wasting money on SPUDCO. They will have to go explain 
not only to the seniors of this province, but to all of the people 
about what their priorities have been and how they’ve 
squandered opportunities. 
 
And instead of dealing with those issues, they decided to turn to 
the most vulnerable and . . . pioneers in our province that we are 
going to say, as the Saskatchewan Party, we respect and will 
protect, and we will roll back this exorbitant fee increase prior 
to this budget. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Mr. Gantefoer: — At least then, Mr. Speaker, once again 
Saskatchewan will have a set of fees that is comparable to our 
neighbouring provinces. 
 
Why in the world is this government determined to give us the 
worst record in almost every field. We’re sitting here between 
two provinces and our long-term care fees are more than double 
what they are in our neighbouring provinces. How is that seem 
fair or reasonable? It just isn’t, Mr. Speaker; it isn’t fair and 
reasonable. And this government is going to have to stand for 
that decision. Mr. Speaker, it simply is not right. 
 
Mr. Speaker, when we all talk and look about what are the 
appropriate ways that we should go in this province, we simply 
have to make sure that rather than trying to find sources of 
revenue by clawing back the last bits of nickels and dimes from 
our seniors and for people on things like prescription drug 
plans, we simply make alternative choices. 
 
The members opposite ask what would we do? Well I’ve said 
what we’d do, Mr. Speaker. But more fundamentally, if you’re 
going to provide for the services that our citizens require in 
long-term care, and in health care, and in essential services we 
need, we simply need to grow this economy, Mr. Speaker. 
 
We can’t sit here and continue to manage a decline; we’ve got 
to aspire to excellence. We’ve got to aspire to growth. We have 
to aspire to the ability to make sure we’re doing a good job and 
providing for our seniors and our citizens in an appropriate way. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is not something new. It’s not something that 
you could call evolutionary or revolutionary rocket science. It’s 
something that speaks to the fundamental values of our 
province and our country and our citizens. And it goes back to 
what I said when I started, Mr. Speaker — think about who we 
were and where we’ve come from. 
 



766 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

People looked after each other; they cared about one another; 
and when they were in a situation of need, we didn’t turn on 
them and pick their pockets. We said, how can we reasonably 
provide these services in a fair and a responsible way and leave 
you with a bit of your dignity and your independence that 
people need. 
 
(16:30) 
 
Mr. Speaker, it amazes me that the members opposite will chirp 
from their seat and say that this isn’t a good idea. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I certainly am going to be most interested to 
hear for the rest of the day and this evening about what the 
members opposite are going to say about this issue. And I 
certainly hope that when the members opposite get their turn, 
they’re not going to stand in their place and adjourn the debate. 
Because there’s a majority of them over there and they certainly 
can make sure that they bull that through. We can vote against it 
and it doesn’t matter because there’s a majority of members 
opposite. 
 
And, Mr. Speaker, we know that if that happens, we’re going to 
end up with a situation that they’re going to take the 
opportunity to adjourn this debate rather than talk about it. 
That’s what I think. I hope I’m wrong. I hope that the members 
opposite will allow this very debate to continue till 10:30 at 
adjournment tonight, uninterrupted, and let members on both 
sides of this House engage in this debate. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I want to make sure that I allow time for 
people to engage in this debate and I certainly challenge them 
not to take advantage of their first opportunity to speak, to 
adjourn it. And if they’ll do that, I think people in this province 
will see where these people are at and it’ll be a good exercise, 
Mr. Speaker. 
 
And so, Mr. Speaker, I would like to put forward a motion, 
seconded by my colleague, the member from Weyburn-Big 
Muddy: 
 

That this Assembly call on the provincial government to 
reconsider its decision (to reconsider its decision) to 
address its own fiscal problems on the backs of the sick and 
the elderly by significantly increasing long-term care home 
fees. 
 

Mr. Speaker, I so move. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. Mr. Speaker, I rise 
today and am very proud to second the motion put forward by 
the member from Melfort-Tisdale. 
 
It is time that the NDP quit making the sick and elderly pay for 
their own fiscal mismanagement. They have created disaster in 
this province and are looking for any possible way to find to fix 
it. 
 
They decided to cook the books, and they did this by taking 
$225 million out of the Fiscal Stabilization Fund. There was no 
money there, but they told the people of Saskatchewan that 

they’d take this money. They took 300 million from the 
Crowns, 90 million when they established the new Education 
Fund for capital expenditures. And they fudged the numbers 
when they did the sales tax and the potash revenue in the 
budget. 
 
But the lowest thing that they did, they’ve stooped to a new 
low, the NDP, when they decided that they would do a cash 
grab from the sick and the elderly in this province. How low 
can this government go? 
 
As one person said to me, this is about the NDP picking on the 
old people of this province. You know, Mr. Speaker, this issue 
has infuriated people of all ages, of all income levels, and in all 
walks of life. 
 
I was at the farm home and leisure show this weekend, Mr. 
Speaker, in Weyburn. And of the most issues that were . . . of 
all the issues that were brought to my attention, the one that 
most commonly was spoken about was the issue of the fees that 
are going to be charged for long-term care in this province. 
 
One lady stopped by with her husband in a wheelchair. And she 
said to me, I am keeping my husband at home as long as I can, 
but there’s only so much that I can do and when his care 
becomes such that I can’t look after him, I don’t know how I’m 
going to afford to put him in long-term care. 
 
Another man came along and said, why would I, why would I 
even consider giving my money to this government — $50,000 
a year — to look after me in long-term care? I might as well 
stay in my own home and pay for someone to come in and look 
after me in my own home. This is the kind of care that this 
government will give to me after I’ve worked all my life and I 
need long-term care. And they’re going to say to me, well for 
$50,000 we’ll look after you. 
 
It is just not acceptable, Mr. Speaker. Most of the concerns that 
were brought about long-term care were very general in nature. 
They were about the worry, the fear, and the concern about how 
they were going to cope and what they were going to do, either 
for themselves if they were elderly or if their spouse was 
reaching the point of where they had to go in long-term care. 
Many already have people in long-term care and they don’t 
know what’s going to happen when these fees go up. 
 
Mr. Speaker, it is a crime what the NDP are doing to our 
seniors. Many of the people that are seniors now immigrated to 
this country looking for a better way of life for themselves and 
for their families. And they spent a century building this 
country and building their communities. They built railroads, 
elevators; they built schools, churches, hospitals, rinks, town 
halls, the list goes on. And, Mr. Speaker, sadly to say, this 
government has set about destroying many of these things that 
they’ve built over the years. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Now they’ve paid taxes all their lives and they 
have strived to survive, and the NDP rewards them when 
they’re elderly and they require care. And how do they reward 
them? They’re going to tax them and take all their money away 
to pay for that care. 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 767 

 

Mr. Speaker, I’d like to quote from the Minister of Health from 
a Leader-Post article of March 28 of this year and the quote 
reads, “These decisions . . .” and he’s referring to the increase in 
long-term care fees, Mr. Speaker. And the Minister of Health 
states: 
 

These decisions were not taken lightly, as we recognize that 
no one likes to pay more . . . We feel these changes are the 
best and fairest way to sustain our publicly funded health 
care system in the midst of growing costs, while meeting 
the challenges of the future for Saskatchewan people. 

 
Mr. Speaker, what a disgrace to say this is how we are going to 
maintain . . . sustain our publicly funded health care system. 
Guess who gets to pay for their publicly funded health care 
system? The people of this province that have worked all their 
lives and saved so they can look after themselves in their 
retirement. They’re now going to pay for the publicly funded 
health care system. This government, Mr. Speaker, is desperate 
for cash and will get it no matter who they step on or run over. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the members opposite have been very quick this 
afternoon to put us down over here because we’re defending the 
elderly and the sick of this province. Well, Mr. Speaker, the 
people on this side of the House believe in our seniors. We 
respect them for what they’ve done and we believe that they 
should have the proper care when they’re old and they need it. 
We do not look at them and say we will gouge you and take 
away every dime you’ve made. 
 
And when it’s gone, what happens to these people? Who’s 
going to look after them then? 
 
Mr. Speaker, did you know that in seniors’ complexes that they 
must declare their income? This government makes them 
declare their income. And, Mr. Speaker, not only do they have 
to declare their income, their word is not good enough. I’ll tell 
you what they have to do, Mr. Speaker, and I’d like to quote 
from a directive from the Weyburn Housing Authority. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order. And I would like to hear the 
quote, members. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. And I’d like to quote 
from a directive from the Weyburn Housing Authority which it 
outlined how this government treats seniors and how they 
believe them and how they respect them. It is: 
 

Dear Tenant: 
 
It is the annual review time for your building. As you are 
aware, your rent is geared to the amount of income you 
receive. Therefore, as per your lease, we must review your 
income on an annual basis. 
 
Since your income determines the amount of rent, it is 
extremely important that we have your correct figures. It is 
a contravention of your lease when these figures are not as 
stated. Verification of your income is required to confirm 
figures on the form. Verification means photocopies of: 
your old-age pension security cheque, your Canada pension 
cheque, if cheques deposited at a bank then copy of the 
bank book or statement, any other income, and income 

pages from your income tax return. 
 
This is how we treat the people of this province. Our seniors 
have to go in and declare what they’ve made. But that isn’t 
good enough. The people in charge photocopy it to make sure 
that they are not telling anything that isn’t true. 
 
These people — the NDP — they do not respect the seniors of 
this province and they do not trust them to tell the truth. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Well, Mr. Speaker, the people that are not in 
long-term care presently today have a choice. And many of 
them will make that choice. They will choose to leave this 
province and go somewhere else. 
 
But sadly to say, Mr. Speaker, those people that are already in 
long-term care will not have that option. They will be stuck 
there, they will have to pay these fees whether they want to or 
not. They will not have a choice. 
 
Mr. Speaker, my colleague from Melfort-Tisdale has already 
quoted from Murray Mandryk’s column. But I’d just like to 
refer to it again. It’s a column called, “Boosting nursing home 
fees just doesn’t seem to be fair.” And, Mr. Speaker, I’d just 
like to quote one paragraph where it . . . and I quote: 
 

Of course, the NDP coalition government argues that 
better-off seniors, after all, do have the option of choosing 
to live in any of the province’s 261 private nursing home 
care facilities, where 2,341 elderly Saskatchewan residents 
currently reside. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this is very interesting statement by this 
government. People can choose private nursing homes. Or is the 
overall objective of this government to phase out publicly 
funded long-term care in this province? 
 
Mr. Speaker, there has been a directive given to personal care 
homes in this province showing that the 40-bed limit is being 
taken off. That will mean that, that facilities can be built above 
the 40-bed limit. Is it the intention of this government to allow 
big companies to come into this province to drive the personal 
care home operators out of business and to drive people by their 
exorbitant fees into . . . all into private care and do away with 
the publicly funded system. I would like this government to 
answer to the people of this province. The directive is, 
“Following the initiatives announced in our . . .” This directive 
comes from the Department of Health: 
 

Following the initiatives announced in our health plan, 
seniors and people with disabilities will have more care to 
choose from. One of these options includes allowing the 
development of more personal care homes. As you may 
know, Saskatchewan Health will be eliminating the current 
40-bed limit on personal care homes. 

 
Mr. Speaker, the NDP government never made this issue 
public. Why are they hiding and not telling the people of this 
province what they’re doing, that they’re taking away the 
40-bed limit. 
 



768 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

Mr. Speaker, private care homes in this province provide 
excellent service — excellent service. And they do it at a 
fraction of the cost of what publicly funded health care is. 
 
With the 40-bed . . . because this government closed beds all 
across Saskatchewan, the question is, what is their objective. In 
Weyburn, at Souris Valley Regional Care Centre, we used to 
have 300 beds. At the direction of the present government, the 
beds have been reduced to 135. If it wasn’t for personal care 
homes in this province, where would these people have gone 
that have not been able to get into publicly funded health care 
systems? 
 
This government has absolutely no regard for what happens to 
people. The directive goes out — reduce the beds, reduce the 
beds. We’re in a situation, Mr. Speaker, where we have more 
people that are requiring long-term care, not less, but the 
direction from this government is close beds in long-term care 
facilities. 
 
And they somehow say this as a positive issue. We will reduce 
the beds. We don’t know where the people are going to go, but 
we will reduce the beds. 
 
Mr. Speaker, what is this government really up to? It makes me 
really wonder when the members opposite are so concerned 
about what I’m saying here, and about that now their plan to lift 
the 40-bed cap is out in the open. 
 
So the question is, what really is this government up to. And I 
think it’s time they came clean with the people of this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, this brings up the whole issue of 
needs, and compassion and respect for the seniors of 
Saskatchewan. 
 
The member from Melfort-Tisdale spoke some very eloquent 
words about this, and truly expressed the feelings of the seniors 
in this province. How they are so concerned, and they’re so 
fearful that they’re not going to have enough money to look 
after their own care, they’re not even thinking about their other 
needs and themselves. They’re thinking can I, do I have enough 
money to provide for my care? 
 
(16:45) 
 
They’re not thinking about the impact that will come when the 
realization hits when they do not have the extra money to spend 
on personal needs, when they do not have the extra money that 
they would like to buy things for their family, as the member 
for Melfort-Tisdale said. 
 
This government has totally disregarded the personal needs of 
these people. They do not have regard for the quality of life that 
these people would like to enjoy in their retirement. These 
people have saved all their lives — they’ve been frugal — and 
this is the reward they get after all these years. 
 
This government says here’s an easy way to get $7 million and 
who is going to fight back? Are these people going to be able to 
fight us? They thought not. 

Well, Mr. Speaker, they thought wrong because these people 
and their families are fed up with this government and they’re 
not going to sit back any longer and take this and say we will 
pay, we won’t say anything. They have had it. 
 
This government has taxed them to death, they have 
downloaded on them, they have taken away services, they have 
pretty much destroyed what rural Saskatchewan had come to 
enjoy. And now this, now this. And they think people are going 
to sit back and accept it. They’re not going to accept it any 
more. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, the member from 
Melfort-Tisdale spoke about the exorbitant fee increases. And, 
Mr. Speaker, it’s almost unbelievable. I think many people have 
not even grasped what this really means; that this government 
can take up to 90 per cent of a senior’s income — leaving them 
very few dollars — and that is to pay for their drug costs, for 
other personal needs, and for anything else that they might 
want. 
 
This won’t even cover most of their drug costs. Where do they 
think these people are going to get the extra dollars to pay for 
their extra needs? Are they going to now have to dip into their 
assets? They’re going to have to get the money from other 
family members? 
 
How in the world, Mr. Speaker, is this an appropriate way to 
treat the elderly of our province? It is just not acceptable. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to read from the government’s directive 
about increasing long-term care fees, the fact sheet it’s called. 
And I quote: 
 

We recognize that no one likes to pay more, however given 
the rapidly rising costs of health care, government can no 
longer afford to heavily subsidize those who can better 
afford their own care. 

 
Mr. Speaker, this in light of the fact of the record of this 
government. Where in the world is their priorities? They have 
money to throw away on SPUDCO — $28 million that the 
minister said was a success story. They have $80 million to put 
into a land titles that does not work. They spent money in 
Australia. All over the world travelling and it’s fine, but we 
don’t have money to look after the seniors in this province. 
What are the priorities of this government? 
 
I think the people of this province have figured out long ago 
what their priorities are and they’re not very happy about that. 
 
Mr. Speaker, no one in this province . . . Now I’m referring 
back to this fact sheet that is the directive, the increase in 
long-term care fees, and how this government can no longer 
afford to heavily subsidize those who can better afford their 
own care. 
 
No one can pay for health care throughout their life in this 
province, Mr. Speaker. But when the people get old, this 
government, the NDP, choose and tell them how much they’re 
going to have to pay. This is absolutely despicable, it is just 



April 16, 2002 Saskatchewan Hansard 769 

 

inconscionable that they are doing and this government has 
finally shown their true face. 
 
Mr. Speaker, people have to pay taxes all their life. I think 
we’ve talked about that a lot and how people pay and pay and 
pay. And when they get old, they expect to be able to keep the 
dollars that they have scrimped and saved so that they can look 
after themselves. 
 
In Saskatchewan, that’s not the case, Mr. Speaker. They find 
out that they have . . . they do not have timely access to health 
care, and now they find out that they do not have access to 
long-term care. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many people in this province who are elderly — 
many that are not elderly — but today we’re speaking about the 
elderly in particular and the disabled, those people are waiting 
months, sometimes years, just for basic health care. We have 
people that need knee replacements, hip replacements and they 
are on two years or longer waiting lists. 
 
Mr. Speaker, there was a lady on the radio this morning and she 
was speaking about that she’s 75 years old and she’s waiting — 
I believe something to do with her back — she’s on a two-year 
waiting list. She gets about four hours sleep a day because of 
the pain that she’s in. And this government has money for 
everything else but they do not have money to help people that 
need this. 
 
If they cannot provide the care here, then they should provide it 
out of province. This lady should not have to wait two years, 
nor should all the other 10,000-plus people in this province that 
are on waiting lists have to wait while this government spends 
their money in every other way but on health care, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, in a submission to the Romanow 
commission on March 4, 2002, Premier Calvert stated that the 
government has, and I quote: 
 

. . . a responsibility to ensure that changes to the single 
most important social program in our country are 
understood by and acceptable to the people we serve. 

 
Well, Mr. Speaker, I’d like to know if Premier Calvert and the 
members of the NDP government . . . 
 
The Speaker: — I would just remind the member that she is to 
address members of the Legislature by their title or their 
constituency. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Thank you, Mr. Speaker. I would like to know, 
Mr. Speaker, if the Premier of the province and the members 
opposite actually talk to people and ask them if they would like 
the changes, if they understood, and if they were acceptable. 
The Premier of the province stated: 
 

. . . a responsibility to ensure that changes to the single 
most important social program (referring to health) in our 
country are understood by and acceptable to the people we 
serve. 

 

Well, Mr. Speaker, seniors are confused and they’re upset. They 
are not willing to accept these changes. They do not understand, 
nor do they accept why they are having to pay these exorbitant 
fees to pay for the mismanagement of this government. 
 
And this week and the Premier of Saskatchewan stated that he 
would confer with people about this important issue before, 
before he made changes. I daresay, Mr. Speaker, that this did 
not happen. And the people of this province, and especially 
seniors, are very upset that they were not consulted. They found 
out on budget day that this was happening. 
 
What happened during the bus tour, Mr. Speaker? Did the 
Premier of the province and his NDP colleagues, did they ask 
the people that they met with in rural Saskatchewan and across 
this province if they would be willing to pay $3,500 a month for 
health care in this province? 
 
I can tell you what happened in Bengough, Mr. Speaker. They 
drove into Bengough and turned around and drove back out and 
the people that were waiting at the RM (rural municipality) 
office never seen the people that came there on the bus tour — 
that’s what happened. That’s how they conferred with the 
seniors of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I’d like to give you another quote from the 
Premier at the Romanow Commission, and the Premier has 
stated many times that he does not believe in shifting the cost of 
health services to the sick. However I have heard from many 
seniors who have fallen ill. These are seniors that have other 
illness other than old age. They might have Parkinson’s disease 
or Alzheimer’s and now those people that are sick and elderly 
are going to have to pay for 90 per cent of their care. 
 
I believe, Mr. Speaker, that that is what the people of this 
province would call shifting the cost of health care services to 
the sick. Mr. Speaker, the NDP have not created . . . have not 
only created a two-tier approach, they have created a multi-level 
approach in this province because how it is determined that you 
pay is on your wealth. And I have to notice, Mr. Speaker, that 
the members opposite, when the member from Melfort-Tisdale 
was speaking, were hollering from their seats that, you know, 
what we were doing was subsidizing the rich and sock it to the 
rich. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the people of this province that have put away 
some dollars to look after themselves in their retirement should 
be applauded, not mocked, by this . . . 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — They did it because they believe in looking 
after themselves, and they believe that it’s the right thing to do, 
and they are proud of what they have done, Mr. Speaker. And 
so they should be. And now at this time in their life when 
they’ve taken this initiative and they’ve done the right thing and 
been frugal all their life, this government is going to take away 
those dollars. They’re going to use it because they’ve 
mismanaged this province. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — They don’t have enough money to balance 



770 Saskatchewan Hansard April 16, 2002 

 

their books. And they ran out of ideas of how they could cook 
the books, so then they decided to increase the fees to seniors. 
 
The Speaker: — Order. Order, please. I would just like to 
remind once again the member about language that’s been 
allowed in this Assembly and not to use any statements that are 
declared unparliamentary. 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Mr. Speaker, I apologize for that terminology. 
The members opposite have fudged the books — fudged the 
budget — and now the people of this province are having to pay 
for their mistakes and fill in the gaps, Mr. Speaker. 
 
The Premier has . . . now I’ve lost my place here. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I have had many seniors . . . and all my colleagues 
have, and I’m sure the members opposite are getting the same 
kind of phone calls where seniors are calling or writing letters 
daily telling us that they’re not happy with the changes that they 
have seen and that they might have to pay come October. 
 
Mr. Speaker, many seniors are fearful because they think these 
charges are in place already. I have had people coming to me 
that have family in Souris Valley Regional Care Centre in 
Weyburn and saying, well they’re going to have to pay $3,000 
next month. And thankfully I can say to them, this isn’t till 
October. 
 
But these people already know what the bill is going to be to 
them. So to say that there’s only 120 people in this province 
that this is going to affect, is absolutely not the fact, Mr. 
Speaker. It is misleading. The people of this province that are in 
long-term care, the majority are going to see some kind of an 
increase, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors that are calling and writing are not only 
concerned about the amount that they are going to have to pay 
for their actual fees. They are concerned about how they are 
going to be able to afford to pay for prescription drugs and for 
their other personal care needs. 
 
Mr. Speaker, seniors have seen the cost of long-term care 
increase from 10 per cent to a whopping 152 per cent of the fee 
that they are paying today. And this government somehow 
thinks that that is an appropriate way to treat the seniors of this 
province. 
 
Who else, Mr. Speaker, who else in this province would sit 
back and take a 152 per cent increase in a fee that they were 
charged and do nothing about it? No one. And yet this 
government thinks that they can impose these fees on the sick 
and the elderly because so many of them have no voice. They 
have no one to speak for them. 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
Ms. Bakken: — Many of the people that are long-term care in 
Weyburn in level 3 and 4 have no family, they have no one to 
advocate on their behalf, and this government thought that they 
could get away with this. 
 
Well, Mr. Speaker, they’re not going to get away with this. 
Because the people of this province are furious and they can 

hardly wait until there’s an election and they will show this 
government what they think of their behind-the-door tactics of 
trying to charge the sick and the elderly of this province. 
 
Mr. Speaker, this is just another example of the NDP using a 
progressive tax which shifts the burden over to the sick and the 
elderly. Mr. Speaker, it is shifting the burden of the health care 
onto certain individuals in our province. How can that be 
acceptable? 
 
Mr. Speaker, this government is bound and determined to take 
every cent these people have earned before they die. Mr. 
Speaker, the ones that can leave, will leave. But most are not 
able to because they have no means to leave and they will 
become wards of the state. 
 
Mr. Speaker, I received . . . or there was a letter actually in my 
local paper, and I’d like to quote from it. Actually, Mr. Speaker, 
it would be most appropriate if I read the whole letter. And so, 
Mr. Speaker, I would like to quote from this. It’s from a lady 
from Yorkton, Mr. Speaker. 
 
Mr. Speaker, the letter is headed: “It could happen to you.” 
 
Some Hon. Members: Hear, hear! 
 
The Speaker: — It now being slightly past the hour of 5 
o’clock, this House stands adjourned until 7 p.m. tonight. Or 
pardon me, stands recessed until 7 p.m. tonight. 
 
The Assembly recessed until 19:00. 
 


